Wednesday, 29 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. And as you can see, the Order Paper today is completely loaded. And we have to finish the business which is on the Order Paper today. So we will not be spending any more time in this communication; let us get to business.

LAYING OF PAPERS

I) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE INTERPARLIAMENTARY UNION GLOBAL CONFERENCE OF YOUNG PARLIAMENTARIANS IN TOKYO (JAPAN) 27-28 MAY, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are the papers here and ready for laying? So why are they on the Order Paper? If they were there, any member would lay them. Next item.

II) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE 132ND ASSEMBLY OF THE INTERPARLIAMENTARY UNION HELD IN HANOI (VIETNAM), MARCH 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US$325,000,000 FROM THE EXPORT – IMPORT BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE PHASE I OF THE UPGRADE AND EXPANSION OF ENTEBBE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT (EIA)

2.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the motion was moved on this Floor; we are chasing for the chairperson of the committee and in few minutes we will be able to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the motion was not moved; the request was laid and sent to the committee. Now you have to move the motion. And we are ready to listen.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to US$325,000,000 from the Export – Import Bank of China to finance Phase I of the upgrade and expansion of Entebbe International Airport.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Yes, it is seconded by West Budama South; Bufumbira East, Kyenjojo District and Igara East. That is okay; now speak to your motion.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This loan is very important to our nation because we intend to upgrade the Entebbe International Airport to allow for the expansion and also expand business as a hub of the East African Region.

Mr Speaker, the committee has visited this site and they are ready with the report and at an appropriate time, I will allow the committee to move the House to approve this loan. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, where is the committee?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, if you allow us five minutes, we will be able to get the chairperson of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: House suspended for 20 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 2.10 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.33 p.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we ready to proceed with the report of the committee?

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we are ready to receive the report of the committee which has been put on our system. A senior member of the committee, Capt. Lakot, is here to read the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this particular request was presented to the House and referred to the committee on 24 March 2015. The committee has examined the request and is now ready to report.

As the committee is readying to report, the motion which I now propose for your debate upon reading the report is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to US$325 million from the Export–Import Bank of China to finance Phase I of the upgrade and expansion of Entebbe International Airport.

That is the motion that I propose for your debate but let us receive the report from the committee. Mr Chairperson, please start with an apology to the House and then proceed. You have 10 minutes.

2.34
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I was caught up somewhere and would like to apologise for delaying. This was due to the jam in Kampala.

Mr Speaker, the report is by the Committee on National Economy on the government’s proposal to borrow US$325 million from the Export-Import Bank of China for the upgrade and expansion of Entebbe International Airport.

I have here with me the feasibility study report, the draft financing agreements, the design build works contract agreement Phase I, Civil Aviation Authority business plan for 2015/16 to 2019/20; a copy of the audited financial statements for Civil Aviation Authority for the Financial Year ended 30 June 2014. 

I also have a copy of Entebbe International Airport development plan and the Civil Aviation Authority Master Plan for 2020 to 2030. With your permission, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those documents.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the original report of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report.

MR KYOOMA: I would also like to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee on the same loan request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR KYOOMA: I would also like to lay on the Table the brief by the minister on the same loan request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to proceed and present the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR KYOOMA: The Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow US$325,000,000 from the Export – Import Bank of China, to finance the Upgrade and Expansion of Entebbe International Airport (EIA) in accordance with Rule 166 (2) (b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. 

This request was presented to this august House by the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 24 March, 2015 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration.

The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report. Mr Speaker, 2.0 is on methodology.

Background

Upgrading and expansion of aviation infrastructure in Africa is long overdue. Africa is home to 12 per cent of the world’s population yet accounts for less than one per cent of the aviation industry. 

There is urgent need for African countries to address infrastructural, safety and personnel bottlenecks that limit the capacity of airports to handle large volume of cargo and passengers. 

Majority of African airports are grappling with ageing infrastructure that is responsible for safety lapses, environmental pollution and flight disruptions.

Airports should adopt efficient technologies to handle the increasing number of passengers and cargo. The aviation sector in Africa has a promising future if governments upgrade airport facilities to lure major airlines and accommodate large aircrafts.

The efficiency of a transport system plays a significant role in the economic and social transformation of a country. The Uganda national transport systems comprises of road, air, rail and water transport modes. 

Uganda being a land locked country, air transport is critical for its economic security and prosperity. Due to Uganda’s over reliance on the traditional sea routes of Mombasa and Dar-es-salaam for international trade, air transport provides a mitigation measure for unforeseen economic and social international trade shocks that could arise from the existing traditional routes. Besides, air transport plays a cardinal role in the promotion of the country’s tourism and regional integration.

For many years there have been various discussions on the capacity and expansion of Entebbe International Airport, as air passenger and cargo traffic has continued to grow. 

In absolute terms international passengers grew from 781,428 in 2007 to 1,343,963 passengers in 2013. Commercial aircraft movements grew at an average annual rate of 5.6 per cent from 21,892 in 2007 to 30,364 movements in 2013. 

Currently, more than 20 airlines operate flights between Entebbe and other international airports of major cities in Africa, Europe and the Middle East.

Status of Entebbe International Airport

It was built in 1947 and has been expanded, rehabilitated and strengthened a number of times. The main run way was built in the mid-1970s and the last major rehabilitation and strengthening was done in 1996.  

The lighting system of Entebbe International Airport was upgraded and renovated in 1996. Notably, the second runway does not have a navigation aid lighting system.

The main Apron 1, of Entebbe International Airport has become inadequate at peak hours forcing some aircrafts to park on taxiways. 

Apron 2 received an asphalt concrete of 50mm thickness that was overlaid on the pavement of the apron during the CHOGM preparations in 2007, but cracks have emerged again.

Apron 4 and its associated taxiway were constructed in 2007 during the CHOGM preparations. The design aircraft for the pavement was gulfstream V and as such the structural strength of apron 4 is limited.

Upon arriving at the front area of the passenger terminal, the vehicles enter the public car park. Currently there is no embarking and disembarking area known as the cab area.

There is an ongoing project financed by the Civil Aviation Authority to increase the parking capacity for the long term parking by 200 parking slots. The passenger arrival terminal was expanded in 2007 during the CHOGM preparations. The expansion work also included installation of two big baggage claim areas and setting up of two new passenger boarding bridges.

Baggage sorting areas are not equipped with baggage screening facilities. Entebbe International Airport handles approximately 46,000 tonnes of goods annually, including 26,000 tonnes of export and 20,000 tonnes of imports.

Slippage, longitudinal and transverse cracks have started appearing on the main runway and these pose safety risks for Entebbe International Airport.

Mr Speaker, the whole project is linked to the country strategy as contained in 4.0 and with your permission I would like to proceed to the objectives of the project under 5.0 - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed chair.

MR KYOOMA: The overall objective of the project is to promote service excellence at Entebbe International Airport through provision of competitive infrastructure and facilities.

The expected outputs of the project is outlined under 5.1 

Project cost and financing arrangements

The total project cost is estimated at US$325 million. For affordability and sustainability of Civil Aviation Authority, the project will be implemented in a phased manner with phase 1 costing US$200 million and phase II amounting to US$125 million.  The proposal is to secure funding from the Export – Import Bank of China to finance 100 per cent of the project costs with Civil Aviation Authority budgeting and providing for counterpart funding within its budget to meet costs of office space, staff, taxes and supervision. 

Table 1 summaries all the information I have talked below giving a breakdown of the project cost:

Loan terms and conditions

The terms of the loan (Exim Bank) are as follows: Mr Speaker, the loan amount is USD US$325 million; loan period is 20 years including seven years of grace period. Interest charged is two per cent per annum, fixed.

The management fee is 0.25 per cent of the loan (One-off and payable in first year of grace period) and commitment fee of 0.25 per cent on undisbursed but available amount per annum.

Other conditions
Provision to Exim Bank of China with the legal opinion of the Attorney-General on the legal validity of the loan documents to the Republic of Uganda.

A signed agreement by the EXIM Bank of China (the lender) and Government of the Republic of Uganda (the borrower). In the event that the agreement fails to become effective within one year after signing by the parties, the lender shall have the right to re-evaluate the implementation conditions of the project and the utilization conditions of the facility to determine whether to continue the performance of the agreement or not.

The Repayment Reserve Account and the Sales Collection Account shall be opened and maintained with the Escrow Account Bank and be subject to the Escrow arrangement under the Escrow Account Agreement.

There shall be an on-lending agreement to be signed by the Government of Uganda and Civil Aviation Authority in the form and substance acceptable to China EXIM Bank.

Implications of financing conditionality are highlighted under 7.2. It is supposed to be table two; it shows the level of concessionality.

Mr Speaker 8.0 is economic and financial rate of return. The financial Internal Rate of Return is approximately six per cent which is higher than the borrowing cost. This implies that the project will generate revenue that will be used to repay back the debt. 

Under 9.0 are project institutional implementation   arrangements.
 
Observations and Recommendations

Loan Agreement 

The committee noted that Government is seeking parliamentary approval to borrow US$325,000,000 from the Export – Import Bank of China, to finance the Upgrade and Expansion of Entebbe International Airport (Entebbe International Airport), whereas the draft government concessional loan financing agreement will make available a loan facility of up to US$200 million for the first phase. The balance of US$125 million is required for the second phase upon completion of the first phase. The committee would have wished to consider all phases totalling to US$325,000,000 at once. However the financing agreement for US$125 million is not yet available.

The committee recommends that the House considers approval of US$200 million for the first phase of the upgrade for which the agreement exists.  This is also to avoid additional costs on debt for resources, which will not be utilised during the first phase. The committee will handle the US$125 million to cater for phase two of the expansion when the financing agreement is available.

Civil Aviation Authority Project Land Ownership

The committee notes that while the land for the project is partly secured, some areas are still encumbered by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, limiting future expansion. Failure to acquire these encumbered areas may necessitate re-location of the project.

The growth in the air traffic and technology advancement in the airline industry in the longer-term may entail more runways, terminals and aprons, taxiway among others as evidenced in the countries the committee visited.

The committee recommends that Civil Aviation Authority acquires all the land owned by MAAIF in the project area. 

Government on-lending agreement to Civil Aviation Authority The committee noted that one of the special covenants of the loan agreement attached to this loan is that this loan will be borrowed by Government of Uganda and Government will then lend to Civil Aviation Authority. Loan repayments will be made by Civil Aviation Authority through internal generation of revenue. However, the committee observed that government is the biggest debtor of the authority, impairing its balance sheet. 

The projected cash flow of Civil Aviation Authority indicates a deficit of Shs 52 billion from 2015/2016 - 2018/2019 in the event that government does not pay its debt to the authority.   The Auditor-General’s report as at end of June 2013 indicates that government owed the authority Shs 48 billion.

The committee recommends that in future, Civil Aviation Authority should be allowed to mobilise its own resources through debt and only receive government guarantees to avoid exerting high costs on its balance sheet from financial institutions sourced by government which may be unfavourable.

Government should clear its liabilities with the authority to enable it to increase its credit worthiness and access financial markets.

Project costs

The committee notes that the total project costs provided for Phase 1 is $200 million. However, other costs amounting to $42.5 million which include taxes of $20 million, supervision consultancy cost of $12 million, office block of $4.5 million and modification work on the existing passenger terminal of $6 million are excluded in the project costs; a departure from the usual practice of providing for counterpart funding.

The committee recommends that government makes a provision for counterpart funds for the project in a timely manner.

Proven Performance or Capacity of the Contractors

The committee was able to ascertain the technical capabilities of the procured contractor for this project when it visited some of the construction projects that were being undertaken by the contractor in China, Ethiopia and it is certain that China Communications Construction Company (CCCC) Ltd, has the competence to implement and deliver this project within the prescribed time which is five years all other factors remaining constant.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Works and Transport should ensure that the contractor delivers this project on time.

Parliament should further ensure the timely monitoring of the implementation of the project through its relevant parliamentary committees.

The Ministry of Works and Transport should ensure effective supervision of the contractor during project implementation.

Building an International Airline Hub

The committee noted that unlike Bole International Airport and Jomo Kenyatta International Airport that have strong home based hubbing airlines, that is Ethiopian Airlines and Kenya Airways, Entebbe International Airport is mainly an origin or destination airport without a strong base hubbing airline.

The committee recommends that Government should expedite efforts of equipping Entebbe International Airport with facilities that attract hubbing airlines as expansion and upgrading will not be sufficient in enabling Entebbe International Airport to operate hubbing operations in order to maximise airport revenues.

The need for a national Carrier

The committee observes that unlike Uganda, in most countries visited, the domestic traffic for both passenger and cargo dominated revenue sources for respective governments. This has been enhanced by existence of national carriers in those countries.

The committee however noted that Government of Uganda has lost out on revenue generation over the years and passengers have been faced with exorbitant travel fares even to nearby destinations due to lack of its own national carrier.

The committee therefore recommends that government should acquire a national carrier in order to increase the country’s competitiveness in the region to promote tourism, take attractive domestic routes, attract investment in rural areas and increase revenue generation opportunities.

Provision of an Integrated Transport Network for the Airport

The committee noted that all the countries visited had an interconnected transport system to make the movement of passengers convenient. This is also the practice in all modern airports worldwide.

The committee however noted that the scope of the project does not include the interconnection of road, railway and water transport.

The committee recommends that government should include the provision of interconnection of road, railway and water transport in the master plan of Entebbe International Airport.

Separate domestic and international terminals

Mr Speaker, the practice globally is to have separate domestic and international terminals to manage increasing airport traffic and streamline travel schedules.

The committee recommends that the future expansion of Entebbe International Airport should include the provision of separate domestic and international terminals to decongest and organise passenger traffic within the terminals.

Development of upcountry aerodromes 

The committee observed that aerodrome in the country are faced with a number of challenges as indicated in the sample taken below. 

While aerodromes like Kisoro, Mbarara, Jinja, Kidepo, Gulu and Arua lack adequate land for expansion and upgrade the aerodrome in Kasese has enough land but lies in a very poor state. 

Further, most of the aerodromes are faced with a challenge of land compensation. This is evident in Arua, Gulu, Jinja and Tororo. 

The surfaces of the runways also vary, for example, there is grass in Kasese, murram in Mbarara and Kidepo, tarmac in Kisoro and cracked tarmac in Jinja, Gulu and Soroti.

The committee recommends that government should avail funding and prioritise renovation and upgrade of all the aerodromes in the country in order to make them economically viable as a matter of urgency.

The aerodrome in Arua should be developed into an International Airport considering that it serves as a hub for passengers from South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo.

The aerodrome in Kidepo should be relocated outside the national park in order to conserve the animal species in the area.

The process of land compensation should be expedited in order to cater for future expansion of the affected aerodromes.

Debt sustainability

The committee observed that while external debt indicators remain stable over the medium strong term, they are dependent upon realised export, domestic revenue and GDP growth rate above the current levels.

The committee recommends that government should ensure the broad resources to generate high rates of both economic and financial returns to repay with minimal difficulty when debt falls due.

Government must also ensure that the revenue stream from the operations of the project is separated from other transactions in order to guarantee commercial viability of the project in the medium strong terms.

Conclusions

The committee recommends that Parliament approves the request by government to borrow $200 million from the Export-Import Bank of China to finance Phase 1 of the upgrade and expansion of Entebbe International Airport subject to the recommendations above. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and members of the committee for handling this matter within the time frame and reporting accordingly.

Honourable members, before we commence debate on this matter, whose debate would take three minutes for each member, we have a situation that we need to resolve. The request that has been presented to Parliament is for borrowing $325 million. The committee has examined this and it is proposing and has actually recommended that this House only approves $200 million to finance Phase 1 and not the whole of the request by government.

I would like the minister to speak on this and if he agrees with the committee, he amends this motion so that the figure we will be debating will not be $325 million but $200 million. 

Honourable members, can we clear this because the original motion is for $325 million; the committee has said the $125 million is not necessary for this Parliament to approve now and it saying Parliament should approve $200 million. 

I wanted us to clarify on that issue. If the minister can amend the motion so that we deal with the $200 million but if he has any disagreement he can also record it now then we see how to handle this particular matter before we go to debate.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This loan request has further strange aspects. For instance, on top of the final approval of the $200 million out of the $325 original request, I am seeing a situation where this loan is undertaken by Government of the Republic of Uganda and now in the report, the same government disburses the same to Civil Aviation Authority and Civil Aviation Authority shall be responsible for the repayment of this loan. This is strange! I do not know if government has realigned it from the normal procedures. Is it under the auspices of Civil Aviation Authority like we have been doing to other entities? You are making Parliament to authorise borrowing by Government of the Republic of Uganda and money will be transferred to Civil Aviation Authority and Civil Aviation Authority is to be the one to repay the loan not government!

Government appears to be running away from its responsibilities. Government undertakes to borrow, but at the same time the payment is from another agency, yet ultimately it is the Government of the Republic of Uganda that is responsible for this.

With your permission, Mr Speaker, I thought this needed further clarification by the minister. It is strange and it is causing complications and I am failing to understand how this loan is being acquired and how at the end of the day Ugandans shall be able to discharge this loan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is a point for debate. My issue was, can we resolve on this first important matter so that we do not debate $325 million, but $200 million as the committee has recommended? If we can resolve that, then we can go to the next level. Is that okay?

DR EPETAIT: I just wanted to say this before the minister comes in. In the report we are not told about what phase I entails. We do not know what is involved in Phase II. More so, I am aware that Phase I would feed into Phase II. If Phase I does not get completed adequately, we miss Phase II and we will not have achieved the intended objective of the loan. 

As the minister comes on board, I would like to caution that circumstances change. It would be dangerous for us to borrow something for Phase I and get stuck. You never know what can happen. I would rather we get what is required to complete the entire job rather than risking ourselves to get in a piecemeal manner – get something for Phase I and then we miss out on the entire objective when we get stuck mid-way.

I would like to caution the minister to take charge and we get the entire money if possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the learned Attorney-General help us with this issue then we have the minister?

3.05
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The concern by the honourable member that it is Civil Aviation that is in effect borrowing and paying to government and that it should not be government to borrow on its behalf is not properly focused. This is because Civil Aviation Authority is an agency of government. For all agencies of government, it is government which does the borrowing. The lender knows the Government of Uganda and the commitment to the lender ought to be by the Government of Uganda.

However, there is a methodology of the agency paying through the Government of Uganda. This is not the first time. That is how all government agencies borrow. This agency cannot borrow on its own. It borrows through the Government of Uganda.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, from the report the agency we are talking about has a projected cash flow in the medium-term in deficit of up to Shs 52 billion. This is mainly because of debts incurred by government to Civil Aviation Authority. Therefore, what kind of assurance are you giving to the country? That the agency is borrowing, but government owes this agency money, its cash flows are in deficit and you are telling us to allow all this kind of situation? I need some clarification.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The learned Attorney-General has submitted that the Civil Aviation Authority is an agency of Government. I think the Attorney-General should be reminded that Civil Aviation Authority is not a department of government. It is a statutory institution, which has a corporate personality. What that means is that it can sue and be sued in its own capacity. It is an artificial person, which has a right to contract. 

Therefore, he is not actually correct to say that it cannot borrow, except through Government. That is not founded in law. If it were so, I would like the Attorney-General to remind me what law forbids statutory institutions with a corporate personality to borrow in their own names.

Secondly, at the risk of going into the substance of this argument, the reason why most of these institutions become reckless in their spending is because they do not have that responsibility. They imagine there is money which has come from government and, therefore, their expenditure is never frugal. 

However, if they know they have borrowed this money and they have got a duty to pay this money back and actually to answer to the taxpayer including government institutions as to how they utilised the money they borrowed, they act better. They act with a little bit of prudence and consciously.

Therefore, there is a reason and we would like to know it. Unfortunately, the Minister of Finance is not here. Why does government want to borrow on behalf of an institution which has its own right to contract, sue, raise money and actually pay back its loan obligation?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to use institutional memory. I think in the Eighth or Seventh Parliament, Civil Aviation and National Water came here with loans we had guaranteed as Government of Uganda. We had to write them off so that we were able to pay. One of the excuses they gave was that they are government departments - in that context we erred! 

That is why, as hon. Katuntu was saying, if civil aviation is a legal entity, it should borrow money in its own right. The Government of Uganda can only do an undertaking that in case they fail, we can handle. It is not them to come and say the Minister of Finance wants to borrow $325 million and civil aviation will pay. I think we are making a mistake. Who borrowed? It will be Government of Uganda, not civil aviation.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Attorney-General; why is he not allowing the civil aviation to borrow money itself? We can guarantee that instead of you saying we borrow and ask them to pay.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, with the greatest respect to both my colleagues, hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Katuntu, Civil Aviation Authority is a corporate body. It can sue and be sued, but it is 100 per cent government owned –(Interjection) – IE  I am coming; it is 100 per cent government owned. The lender is Export-Import Bank of China. This is a national institution. This agency cannot, on its own, go and borrow from a national institution of another country.

Whereas I agree that it is a body corporate which has a legal personality and it can borrow from another commercial bank or somewhere else, but when dealing with a national institution, it cannot go on its own. It has to be Government to Government.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, this is now the problem. EXIM Bank is not government, but it is a Government Bank. Civil Aviation Authority, as the Attorney-General says, is 100 per cent owned by the government. Why is it therefore correct for the Attorney-General to say as a country, we are subjecting our Government to deal with an institution of Government the other side? Why is Chinese Government not lending directly to Government of Uganda? 

You are saying Civil Aviation Authority is wholly owned by Government, but we are not going to deal with the Chinese Government; we are dealing with an institution of the Chinese Government. It does not make common or legal sense.

However, the point I raised and which the Attorney-General has not answered is: you said that the law does not allow government bodies. You used “Government bodies” which is not anywhere in law; it is not there. There is nothing called a government body. Civil Aviation Authority is a statutory corporation much as it is owned wholly by government. Which law bars it from borrowing in its name? I would like you to tell me that. If there is a law, then you would be right.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, what is being proposed by hon. Katuntu could be one of the ways for doing it, but for this particular borrowing, it was found prudent for Government to borrow in this fashion, considering that this bank is a national bank. I said earlier and I want to repeat that CAA has the capacity to borrow on its own; it could borrow commercially from a bank in Uganda or wherever, but that does not preclude the government, which is a 100 per cent shareholder, from borrowing on its behalf –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, the Attorney-General, for giving way. Hon. Attorney General, I seek clarification from you on whether the latest passed Public Finance and Accountability Act is not helpful to you in answering hon. Katuntu. We know that all borrowings of aligned institutions like Civil Aviation Authority are covered under Article 159 which provides that government can borrow on behalf of any other public institution with the permission of the minister. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I caught your eyes much as you were looking at the book. I would like to assist - Hon. Oboth Oboth is trying to assist the minister but I am not so sure whether he is helping his case. The law actually requires that these public institutions - first of all, the word “aligned”, which he is using is not anywhere in the law. It is purely English, or maybe Lusoga in Jopadhola - (Laughter)

Having said that, what the Public Finance and Accountability Act provides is that these institutions need to seek the consent of the minister and that is perfectly okay. If Civil Aviation Authority wants to borrow a loan, it can seek the consent of the minister. 

However, to use the learned Attorney-General’s words that “we found it prudent” can you give us the prudence to justify your argument? That is what we are asking. It is not founded in law, so you have decided to hide in prudence. Therefore, give us the prudence.

MR OBOTH: Well, I would like to put it clear for the record that I did not speak any Jopadhola here and neither did I speak Lusoga. I qualified my statement when I said “aligned institution”; that was an ordinary English word –(Laughter)– institutions that are aligned to government and then I added that Article 159 states that any other public institutions - 

However, hon. Katuntu and all of us know that the law does not prohibit, it allows. If hon. Katuntu is challenging the government side, we should also challenge ourselves that which other law prohibits government from borrowing on behalf of institutions. That is quite a good challenge for all of us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, you have a right of reply - (Laughter)

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, as the lawyers consult the volume, I can answer the other question.  First, I would like to thank the Committee of National Economy for being prudent. I used to sit on that committee before I was deployed at the treasury building and the work that they have done in assessing and analysing the loan request from government is commendable.

Mr Speaker, at the time of the submission of the loan request, the loan agreement and the other documents for Phase II, which is equivalent to $125,000,000 was not available to the committee. The committee was prudent to approve only $200,000,000. 

Therefore, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is agreeable to the request and the recommendation of the committee for this House to approve only US$200,000,000 for Phase I and then as we finalise the agreement document with EXIM Bank of China, we will be able to come back for $125 million, which will actually be needed in the Financial Year 2018/2019. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable minister, for allowing me to seek for this clarification. 

Honourable minister, you have said that if the documents were available and the committee had submitted them for government to borrow the entire amount, we would have no problem with that except that the documents that are available were only for $ 200 million.

You have rightly said that Phase II will be required in 2018. Would it be prudent for us to borrow the entire amount covering Phase II and pay interest during this time when that money is needed in 2018? I heard some members say that it would have been better for us to borrow the entire amount.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. The minister has said they would want to do with only $ 200 million. That is not an issue anymore, honourable member.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think the Minister of Finance seems to indicate that he would accept the committee report to agree to $200 million for financing Phase I. Then another request will be made later on for Phase II. 

However, Mr Speaker, when we are dealing with borrowing and financing from an external source, we need to be very explicit as to what amount we are talking about. What is the agreement attached to the $200 million? We now have the agreement attached to the $ 300 million but we do not have the agreement attached to the $200 million. There must be a specific agreement for that particular figure and the time period must be attached to it.  

Therefore, I would wish to implore the House not to make things complicated for Parliament. The ministry of finance should withdraw this request. They should go back and renegotiate it now that the committee has made its recommendation; it is the ministry of finance that negotiated this loan; they signed the agreement. They are the ones who have the details as far as the conditions are concerned. Let them go and renegotiate it. Then they can come back and tell us what Phase I and II and with all its details spelt out and we want to know how we can now move. Right now, we cannot just give $200 million within an agreement of $300 million. How do we monitor it? 

Mr Speaker, it is high time the ministry of finance moved conscious of the fact that this Parliament wants to leave a clean record. In future, we do not want to be suspected for doing one thing, yet we meant another. Come back to Parliament with a clear definition of what you want; the amount and the phase. Then we will be able to help you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question is clear. What amount is the financial agreement for? 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with the hon. Cecilia Ogwal that this House wants to leave a clean record. Indeed, that is what the committee has done. The financing agreement available now is for $200 million not $ 325 million. Phase I is very clear; it totals to $200 million. It is on page 6 of 15. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I was asking the minister to amend the motion. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to thank the minister of finance for accepting this clarification. Mr Speaker, in the ministry of finance, we have all the best economists, statisticians, accountants and lawyers. 

When the minister brought the motion of $325 million, were you testing Parliament to see if it has the capacity to analyse these documents? This was on 24 March 2015; today is 29 July 2015. We are about to go into the election period. Were you trying to say you will get them while they are thinking about elections? Did you think that they would pass everything –(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are about to cross the line of imputation of improper motive.
 
MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is not the first time this Parliament has adjusted the requests by the Executive. You recall that during the debate on the loan request by the Public Service, which actually put up the Civil Service College in Jinja, Government requested $73 million. Parliament approved only $23 million. 

It is, therefore, possible for government to make a request and then Parliament adjusts it. For purposes of this loan, the documents, which were clear were for only $200 million. We agree with the committee report that we approve only $200 million and then Phase II will be submitted to the House when all the necessary requirements by the committee are available. It is normal; it is very clear, smarter and I think Parliament is doing its job. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to move an amendment to your motion? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, first I want to apologise for the hiccup that we have gone through. (Laughter) I would now like to propose that government do borrow $200 million from the Export-Import Bank of China for the upgrade and expansion of Entebbe International Airport. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, go by title No. 4 and then do the amendment in item 4. You are amending the motion for resolution. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. I beg to amend the motion for the resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $ 200 million from the Export-Import Bank of China to finance Phase I of the upgrade and expansion of Entebbe International Airport instead of the original Government request of $ 325 million. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded for amendment? It is seconded by the learned Attorney-General, the member for Mukono, the member for Bushenyi Municipality and the member for West Budama South. Would you like to speak to your motion or it does not require any speech? 

Honourable members, I think the issues are clear. The motion has been moved to make that amendment. Can we agree that the original figure of $325 million is struck down and in its place we substitute $ 200 million. Can I put the question to that?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion now is for $ 200 million for Phase I. Are we ready to proceed with the debate on the motion now? And there was another issue. Can we handle that in the course of the debate; the issue of whether CAA can borrow on its own or government can borrow in the circumstances? Can we handle it in the debate for the learned Attorney-General? Let us clear these issues, honourable members.

3.33
MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA (NRM, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, under the Civil Aviation Authority Act, CAA can borrow on its own. There is section 43, which provides for borrowing powers of CAA.

However, that section does not preclude the government if it deems it fit to borrow for CAA. When we look at section 20 of the CAA Act, which provides for the funds of the Authority, sub-section (4) – first of all, let me begin with sub-section (19) which says “the government shall be the sole shareholder of the Authority.”

Section 20 (4) provides that “Government may provide appropriations to meet operating deficits and capital funding.” This clearly shows that if Government deems it fit, it can borrow to make the requisite appropriations for the Authority to meet operating deficits and capital funding.

The two can go together; there is no contradiction whatsoever. It is a matter of what Government intends to do and how it intends to do it as the only shareholder.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this point – I think if we are satisfied with the explanation from the Attorney-General, we can now proceed with the debate and the debate starts now, each Member taking three minutes. We will have a limited debate.

3.35
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had wanted to support this particular loan request but I have two matters I would like clarified, either by the minister or the chairperson of the committee for they do not appear to me to be very clear.

One appears on page 2 of the report, which clearly shows that this is a design and building works contract. Already the contractor has already been identified; famously Chinese. I am not sure whether it is the same company that carried out the feasibility study. I would, therefore, like to know who did the study; two, whether actually the building works contracts tallies with the feasibility study. 

The second concern shows this particular contractor has done works in China and Ethiopia. On page 2 in 2.3, the committee report says “the project for Uganda for Entebbe is based on the South African model.” Putting that into consideration, which contractor is doing the South African model and why didn’t we look for that particular contractor?

The other issue of concern to me is the problem statement. On page 2 of the report, the problems identified are: the theft lapses, environmental pollution, flight disruption and when you go down to page 3, there is a list of them; poor lighting system, inadequate parking, among others.

In the actual fact, on page 3, bullets 1, 2, 3, 4, 8 and 10 coupled with page 5 on land ownership, clearly indicate the problems. When you look at those problems and the value of works to be done, which are on page 6, you see a big chunk of money in Phase 1 going to the construction of a new cargo centre complex and construction of new passenger terminal complex. How does this huge expenditure go to solve the problems identified above? Once that is clarified, I will support the motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not support the motion because I would like to know where we put the profits we get from this airport.
We have Entebbe Handling Services; it is alleged that it is managed by a minister in this Parliament and all the profits accrued simply disappear.

Secondly, a number of companies are closing business. British Airways which has been carrying most of our agricultural products has closed. Here we are continuing to get loans. I would like to know from the minister how the profits from this airport are monitored. We have seen countries like Rwanda beginning to construct a new airport and they are running with the funds they are getting from Kanombe, their old airport.

I was at this airport when I was still a young man and I saw how the airport was running. We had the airlines; everything collapsed. How do we entrust our business with one man, who gets money and uses it?

Mr Speaker, we need to know how make profits – when we get these loans, it is Ssewungu and his people of Kalungu and other parts of Uganda that pay the loan. Yet, it is one person who benefits from the airport.

How do we give out the major source of money; that is Handling Services, which handles all the goods to one individual, making profits?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Ssewungu for giving way. The information we have is that the main activity with the airport is ground handling. This is worldwide. It is not only in Uganda. However, in this particular case, the contract to run the ground handling of Entebbe International Airport expired in 2014 and ENHAS, which then and up to now, collects revenue on behalf of Government has no valid contract. Money is being picked and pocketed. We are here borrowing on behalf of Ugandans but it is going to one person. (Laughter) 

MR SSEWUNGU: As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I am very hesitant to support this motion when this money is going to one hand and we continue suffering.I, therefore, would like to ask the Members of Government side, please, refuse this loan.

3.41
MR FOX OYWELOWO_ODOI (Independent, West Budama North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is asking what I would do – I think it is sometimes a wonderful thing to be predictable.

An international airport to a country is a gate-way to the world. It is the first impression you give to people who come to visit your country. You cannot afford to have an international airport that looks like Entebbe International Airport.

Entebbe International Airport compares probably with a small regional airport like the one in Arusha. Remember that is our only international and the only airport in Uganda. We are progressing, investing in infrastructure and tourism yet, every time visitors land at Entebbe, they basically look at backwardness and primitivity. As Members of Parliament, we owe the country a duty to make a small contribution to the development of our international gate way. If it is not for any other reason, for that single reason, I support this motion.

Secondly, once we invest in that airport, it will be an asset for generations to come. The committee report indicates that it will improve on safety. Kenya, is struggling to be the regional hub for airlines. It will also make us sufficiently competitive with Kenya and other countries in the region.

We have also noted increase in air traffic. Where do you expect the airline to land if you have a small facility with four small gates? If you increase the number of air travelers, you will have nowhere to – (Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, hon. Odoi, for giving way. While I am tempted to be persuaded by the arguments of hon. Odoi, the clarification I would like to seek from him; where is it written in the Bible, Quran or our Constitution that for every major undertaking we carry out in this country, we must mortgage the country and borrow money?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Sseggona, I am being tempted to teach you some bit of economics. When you are looking for finances for investment, you take them from your savings - and we do not have much - or you borrow or you use your inheritance. Now that we do not much inheritance, we only have one option to borrow. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  (Laughter)

3.45
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Women Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. All parliamentarians travel and whenever we travel, deep down in our hearts, we feel ashamed when we land onto other airports because of the conditions, which are very different. In fact, our condition is about 30 percent. I am now going to talk about figures since this is money that we are borrowing.

Looking at the percentage of the loan whose interest is two percent, I think that is bearable because if it was 10 percent, it will imply that in 20 twenty years, 20 percent impacts a lot on the economy. However, two percent is manageable.

In addition to that, the grace period; we are not just talking about figurative language of this loan. However, we must diagnose the aspects of the levels of payment, duration of payment and the impact of the loan. That is what I have been looking at here and that is what makes me support this loan because when we travel - I have travelled to several countries where are different flights, for instance, Bangkok Airport handles around 120 flights per hour. We are not saying Entebbe will move to that level but I would also interest Members of Parliament that take some time to travel and observe what takes place on the other side of the world. However, before that, we would like to also intensify – I do not want to be happy when I travel to other countries and feel small when I come home. 

Looking at the business aspect in the report; the report talks about cargo handling area, domestic flights and the international flights. It is very unfortunate that if I am travelling to Nigeria, I must land to Nairobi before I proceed to Nigeria or Ghana. I, therefore, feel that this loan is timely for us to do something which people will remember us for and which we will also appreciate. (Applause) I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

3.48
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start from what hon. Kwagala started with. In this House, many times we have felt uncomfortable with the status and performance of Entebbe Airport. I would have felt that this loan is an opportunity for us to make a face lift and general improvement. However, surprisingly, some of us want to shoot it down. I heard my good friend hon. SSewungu advancing an argument of ENHAS, supported by hon. Ssekikubo. I would think these are administrative challenges that can be addressed and they should not submerge the wider picture. 

Interestingly enough, I was even told that some of this money is being pocketed in Sembabule. (Laughter) I do not know in whose pockets in Sembabule but before Sembabule takes everything, I believe that we should improve the performance especially the infrastructural level of Entebbe Airport as we also address those administrative challenges. 

In that light, I therefore, thank the committee for the scrutiny and for reducing the loan from $ 325 million to $ 200 million. That is a very good job done and I support the motion. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.50
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The need for a good modern airport is beyond question. There is no doubt that we need to compete and to be proud of what we have at home. However, sometimes I wonder; what comes first? Is it a beautiful airport that will accommodate Kenya Airways, Ethiopian Airlines or is it a national carrier that will help CAA to generate revenue? (Interjections)

I have listened to the reports of the chairperson and he says, “The loan repayment will be from the internally generated revenues of CAA.” I mentioned it earlier that the projected cash flow is in deficit of about Shs 52 billion over the period up to 2019. To me, it is true we need that airport but why don’t we invest first in having a national a carrier with domestic and international flights of our own so that we make CAA more efficient to generate the revenue and then, we shall certainly expand. However, if we are sitting here to have a beautiful and wonderful airport for Kenya Airways, South African Airways, we are starting from the wrong end –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I need protection. This is my view.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable member. Can we have some order?

MR MAGYEZI: Unless we do not give serious consideration to the report of the committee - they are saying, Government of Uganda is borrowing and money will be repaid through the internal generated revenue of CAA. They show us that at the moment, CAA is making loses. Now, how shall we repay the loan? Unless we put in place a system where we have our own national carrier, a strong CAA and strong internal handling services, I think this loan should be reviewed. I would rather invest in our own national carrier, domestic aerodromes and strengthening systems of our own institutions here. Surely, with the revenues generated, we shall no doubt reach where we want to go with a beautiful airport. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 
 
3.52
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I support the motion, the issue  - in the Eighth Parliament, I personally brought an investor under build, operate and transfer without Government investing.The Eight Parliament put up a probe to investigate that. Till today, there is no report. I would like to ask that this Parliament asks the minister to bring that report because most of the investors are scared of Entebbe. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, NSSF has a lot of money. Why are we borrowing from China, so that China owns Entebbe Airport? Why don’t we borrow from NSSF, which has trillions?

If the banks do not have money, let us borrow from NSSF - and they are investing in infrastructure, such that all the Ugandans can have a stake in Entebbe International Airport instead of going to the Chinese?

If China runs bankrupt, they will be banking on Entebbe but if NSSF has a stake in Entebbe Airport, they will even be monitoring. These days monitoring is very important because $ 200 million for an expansion, to me, raises an eyebrow. That should be construction of a new airport.

That airport we have is a cubicle with one gate; the rest are doors, they are not gates. If we are to compare and compete in the region, it is important that we have the artistic impressions to show how Entebbe will look like.

However, this issue of saying Phase 1, $200 million; last phase $ 125 million. Let us have a comprehensive plan; it is for Entebbe, why in phases. The parking has taken years; every time, they are updating the parking. What about reconstruction and expansion? We just need a new airport.

For the issue of an airline, airlines do not make profits but these days, they make partnerships and the flag flies high. There is no airline, which is not in partnership with another airline but because we do not have economic planners in CAA, we have only people who are interested in making petty cash.

We need to have serious planners in Entebbe who are planning for the country. Even National Planning Authority has a plan for that but for us we do not follow the plans. If we are going to approve this motion, which I support, it should be for the right cause. (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2007, we hosted CHOGM and the same arguments Members are raising here were raised then but money was given. I would like to give information to this House; whereas CHOGM was here in 2007, in early 2008, we went to look at the airport.

At that time, among the reports we had received, was buying of the aerobridges, amongst other investments. Colleagues who were with me on that committee can remember - hon. Nandala-Mafabi was one of them. When we reached there, even the two aerobridges that were acquired had gathered dust; they could not be used on the airlines that were flying in because you allow them to use the Government aerobridges, that is when it rains. You could easily go through the airport and enter the plane. The ground handlers were getting paid for the ladders they put on the aeroplanes. (Laughter) These aerobridges were left unused and were in total disuse. I even would like to challenges Members who are here, that at that time, there was a huge bill for air conditioning of the airport but now, you go there. The challenge remain that money is being put to wrong use.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it still information, honourable member?

MR SSEKIKUBO: The information I would like to give to the House and hon. Balyeku is, you are right. As long we are making complementary and incremental provisions for the airport, we shall never have a modern airport. It needs a thorough overhauling and a comprehensive airport plans that will serve as regional hub.

However, $200 million is quite enough to construct a new airfield and a new airport that we can have as ours but not this one.

MR BALYEKU: Thank you, hon. Ssekikuubo. Mr Speaker, I would like to wind up by saying, let us borrow locally. Let us make our country more loving by borrowing internally.We have this money; we can borrow from NSSF and we can have a comprehensive plan for either an expansion, which is major or a totally new airport. We actually need a new airport. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.58
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. We need to have two points of conversation. The first one, which I do not think is an issue, is whether we need a better airport. I do not think any of us here is reasoning that we do not need a better airport than what we have today. Even small countries- I have to be forgiven if I call them small- like Rwanda have a better airport than Entebbe.

You go to Kenya, they have a better airport; it is a regional hub as we talk now. Years back, Entebbe was the regional hub in the airline industry in East Africa.


However, the point being made, we are seeking $200 million to do what and how to do it? You just have to read the report itself. It has identified the problematic areas ably yet, the big chunk of the money is not being applied to the problematic areas. That raises questions about the loan itself. What is it being negotiated for?

Two, honourable colleagues, every other month, two months, we are borrowing but only from one source. EXIM bank of China; we need to open up our eyes now. Why is it that the big infrastructure projects in this country - talk of roads, dams, railway, now airport, is from one source and all of them are loans.

Can the Minister of Finance, therefore, convince us that actually, this is the cheapest source of funding and that there is no other available cheaper source than EXIM bank of China?

Just imagine, it is not an accident, honourable colleagues, that all the dams in this country are financed by EXIM bank. Including the mega railway project that now they are talking about. It is basically that bank, all the major roads, EXIM Bank of China, now the airport. You need to spread your risks and that is purely elementary economics.

Let us not argue like those people I represent from Bugweri. We need to analyse some of these issues in a more sophisticated way. This country is mortgaging itself to one source. (Member timed out.)

4.02
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the Sixth Parliament, I was privileged to be the chairperson of the Committee on Works, then. We did make a recommendation then to do something about Entebbe airport.  It is now 14 years since then; we have not done much on that airport.

As one of my colleagues has just said, we all travel. If you go around our region, Kenya has now rehabilitated their airport after it had got burnt; Tanzania and Rwanda are constructing new terminals. We really need to do something about our airport. That is not in argument.

The shortcomings and inefficiencies of CAA notwithstanding, that should not be a reason for us as a country not to plan to do something about our airport. It is our pride; somebody was suggesting that maybe, we invest in an airline first but you see, inviting an airline where you do not have the appropriate infrastructure, even where other airlines line like British Airways have decided to go away. Therefore, if you do not have the appropriate infrastructure, even the airlines coming here and giving us business as of now  - It will be a problem if we do not do the infrastructure now to be able to attract other airlines to have that business even before we think of buying our own planes. 

I would be persuaded by those who are saying that once we give this loan, we should make sure that we have got the appropriate management skills in place in CAA. I am a little bit uncomfortable – (Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been prompted to raise a point of order because if you look at the committee report, it clear saves us; “the sources of income where we shall generate from to clear up the loan…” - The honourable member is telling this House that we should not mind about that even if the airport still has those management issues and challenges, it should not stop us from borrowing to put money.

Therefore, is he in order to mislead the House more so, knowing that the source to raise money to clear that loan is the airport itself?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you first rose on a point of clarification, I think you should have stuck to that. (Laughter)

MR KATWIREMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker for the wise ruling. I was just about to say that once we have borrowed this money, we should make sure that we put appropriate management skills; we train the CAA and that should not be a reason for not borrowing for this country. It is about managing our institutions, parastatals; it is within our capacity and hands to do that. (Member timed out.)

4.06
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have three points to make. One is the aviation capacity. We have borrowed in the past and we have not been able to use the loans in time, which is punishing the tax payer. I would like to get the assurance that when we get the money, we shall start work straight away. An example is the report, which was presented four months ago; four months for consideration of a report is too much time.

Secondly, I did not hear the explanation of the details of the phases. I, therefore, would like to hear the report explaining in detail what is going to be entailed in the first phase so that we can agree to something which is clearer.

Mr Speaker, my third point is that there was talk, hon. Ssekikubo remembers this; that Entebbe Airport was being sold. This was during the time of hon. Semakula Kiwanuka as our Ambassador in the United Arab Emirates; we squeezed Government and they dropped the idea. We would like to know now, whether there is any feelings coming back to visit Ugandans again, that we are going to sell this Airport. (Laughter). Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.07
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to be on record as having opposed this loan for two reasons. One, I am an accountant by profession and secondly, I am an aviation person. Therefore, I give my points from those views.

First, as an accountant, anybody - if you go to borrow money, you have to be assessed and evaluated and they see whether you have the capacity to pay back the loan. As CAA, have they been evaluated and seen that they can pay back this loan? We have been told in the report that the loan will be paid back from the internally generated revenue. In aviation, if you do not have handling services and parking fees, you are just wasting your time. 

When H.E Idi Amin left this country in 1979, we had a fleet of 12 aircrafts bought by H.E Idi Amin. We have two airports at Entebbe; we have the old airport where the presidential jet is parked and the new airport. That new airport was constructed by H.E Idi Amin. (Interjections) Since then, I can tell you, you have only renovated. I can see hon. Byabagambi shaking his head. I would like you to tell me which terminal has been constructed since the time of H.E Idi Amin. 

Mr Speaker, any aircraft that lands in Entebbe is charged what we call landing fees. Today, the reason British Airways has given notice of terminating their services here is that they have increased from $ 1000 to $ 1200 and they think that is very expensive. However, each aircraft has to pay landing, parking fees and air navigation charges. All these must go to CAA. However, is CAA receiving this? It is an individual.

Secondly, I would like to support hon. Magyezi; you cannot construct an airport just for other airlines. You should have an airline first as a country and then attract other airlines that will give you revenue – (Interjections) - you cannot say - I tell you, in the case of Rwanda- President Kagame left here in 1994 but today, he has a fleet of 10 aircrafts and he is constructing an airport that is going to be one of the best other than South Africa and Ethiopia. Why?

Therefore, Mr Speaker, given those reasons, I do not support this motion. In China, where I have been more than three times; these companies like Exim Bank and other construction companies are 100 per cent Government owned. However, they are assessed and evaluated, if they make losses but are they assessed? Nobody can borrow money - Chinese Government cannot just give them money. I think we should only give CAA a guarantee if they are going to take a loan after they have been assessed as having the capacity to repay the loan. 

This question of giving money to companies without them being assessed; what is their profitability plan? Can they give us that plan? Mr Speaker, I still say that I do not support this motion the way it is. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.12
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion for borrowing this money to expand Entebbe Airport and to make it modern. The benefits of modernising Entebbe 	Airport are self-explanatory and my fellow Members of Parliament have talked about it but my concern is one; where Entebbe Airport is, somewhere in the corner there is private land and in this era where there terrorism, our airport is under threat. I urge Government to acquire that land of Kigunga so that when we are expanding our airport, it is secured other than some unknown people passing near the airport, to go and hide behind there.
I urge Government to acquire that land so that we have a safe, modern airport.

Secondly, we highly support the issue of having a national carrier. In this era, we should not live without a national carrier and yet, we would like to promote our tourism and gather more money.

Thirdly, Government should solve the problem of ground handling, without which CAA will remain begging and they may not manage even to pay this loan. So, Minister of Finance, Government should handle that and make sure that CAA regains its power and rights to handle ground handling. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.14
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do recall that it is again Parliament that pushed Ministry of Works where CAA falls to have Ministry of Agriculture release the land that is next to the airport in order for the expansion. We pushed it in the Seventh, Eighth and we succeeded after nine years of struggle. Ministry of Agriculture is moving out of that place and the reason for that was that we want to expand and it was unanimously agreed by this Parliament that we expand Entebbe International Airport. (Applause) It is from that background that I support the government that a loan be acquired to enable the expansion of Entebbe International Airport. (Applause) 

If we want to be competitive, a number of speakers who have spoken have talked of Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania are expanding airports and adding terminals. Why should Uganda be an exception? 

If there are some people who have eaten and mismanaged the money, then we must deal with those. Have we stopped giving UNRA money because there was a mess? There was Katosi and Railway Standard Gauge; we have had our colleague just arrested. Did we stop giving them the money? We must deal with the thieves and people who are mismanaging the money.

There is the issue of handling services at Entebbe. I know very well from the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth and to this Ninth Parliament, that CAA can take back the business of handling services and we should be pushing for that and not thinking of doing things in isolation. I remember in the last financial year, we did put it to the government that we read in the papers that we want to revive the national airline. Coming from Kasilo, I do not think I would buy a bicycle when I do not have where to park that bicycle.

We would like to be competitive in the region and we have had international airlines come here more than they exist; we have only had British Airways because they were beaten because they were expensive and the way they were charged. That is why they are left here, they failed to manage business. You members who fly compare the services of Emirates and British Airways or KLF or HI or Qatar Airways, you will know the difference and you will not buy the reason British Airways gave for exiting Uganda. (Interjections)  

Having been in the Committee on Physical Infrastructure since I joined this Parliament and this is something we have been pushing for, the government needs to restructure the CAA as well in order for us to achieve better service delivery. If we want to attract Airbus A380 in Uganda can it be accommodated here? It cannot be. (Interjections) an honourable member here is saying we can accommodate Airbus A380 here. Unless you do not know what airbus 380 is –(Laughter)- It cannot be accommodated.

Honourable colleagues, as we ask for money for –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue; first, we have agreed that it is okay to borrow and build an airport but hon. Nsubuga raised a pertinent issue that when you look at the report, it shows the source of money and the source of money is being managed not by Government but an individual. 

Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, that we would proceed to pass a loans relying on the source of funds, which Government has no control over before we proceed to support the loan? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is for the House to decide not for the Speaker to rule on. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought the procedure was on my deliberation but thank you, hon. Mwiru. That is the matter that we need to deal with  - the issue of having - (Member timed out.)

4.19 
MR ODOO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this motion. (Applause) There is a difference between management and development, as an economist. If we would like to develop this nation, it is high time we expanded Entebbe International Airport. We have travelled and some of us have been embarrassed by the state of Entebbe Airport and if someone is saying that it was constructed by H.E Amin long time ago; this time it should be constructed by us, especially those who are coming in Government soon. (Laughter)

 Therefore, this motion should be supported and for us who are coming to Government, we build on this motion that would have been supported. The issue of management is quite different. After expanding our International Airport, we shall sit and see how we can manage this airport better. Otherwise, we should expand this Entebbe International Airport and develop this country, since it is our vision of 2040 to develop infrastructures. Thank you very much.

4.21
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I wonder why hon. Byabagambi is clapping so much but I know that he is laughing because I have an issue with him. Much as this loan has good intentions, I have two technical problems that I would like to be cleared. 

First, we are approving this loan based on $ 200 million but the structuring of the agreements is based on $ 325 million and I would like to this- and I am just pleading with the Minister of Finance – to be put in a correct perspective so that we can track the loan. 
Second, Mr Speaker, I do not think anybody in this House needs to be persuaded that Uganda needs a modern airport; nobody in this House needs to be persuaded, including myself. We definitely need a modern airport; we definitely need capacity; and we definitely need this modern technology we are talking about.

The problem we have is that the driver of this loan needs to be looked at seriously. We have had issues with the Ministry of Works because, as a member of the Physical Infrastructure Committee, Ministry of Works has deliberately ignored that particular sector. We do not know why; it is never reflected in their policy and never provided for. Now you are giving the civil aviation lots of money when structurally it is crippled; it is heavily indebted –(Interruption)

MR GEOFREY EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the Opposition Chief Whip. In fact I want to invoke Section 43 of the Public Finance Management Act. The fact that you have said that this loan should have been based on the policy of civil aviation and Ministry of Works – it reads: “All expenditures to be incurred by Government on projects which are externally financed in a financial year shall be appropriated by Parliament.”This simply means – I have looked at the loan – that this loan should have been reflected in the policy documents of the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority and appropriated.So technically and legally it is not proper for us to engage in this discussion because it is outside the Public Finance Management Act. (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, that is exactly what I would want the House to be conscious of. We should not rush – we are all interested. In fact I am more interested than anybody else because I have been very concerned when the airlines pulled out of Entebbe just because the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority failed to manage the regulatory role of the sector. You know very well; we have a well-documented report and the pulling out of most of those airlines was because the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority was not competent enough to supervise and regulate the airlines, that one you know.

So, Mr Speaker, the rules are clear - we had problems with the Budget Framework – we had problems with them. Now we hope that we have reached a point where we have now understood that we need to move forward. But you are coming up with this project - Mr Speaker, I have told you that even when you look at the ministerial policy, it is not there –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition.

4.26
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Ogutu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairman for the report. Mr Speaker, there is no doubt that we need to improve our air and water transport in this country. We see the Speaker driving to Kisoro or Moroto when he should not be doing that; he should be flying to those areas. We see highly priced tourists coming to our country to see mountain gorillas but driving all the way to Kisoro instead of flying there, thereby easing their transport. So it is clear we want improvement on our airport. 


First, our airport should be a national hub, meaning it should collect people from domestic airports and take them to international airlines at our airport.

Mr Speaker, we are borrowing a lot of money, how much of this money will help us to achieve that? What is Government’s plan to have that achieved? We should have at least three other airports in this country to feed into Entebbe Airport. 

We borrow a lot of money to do roads and what is transported on those roads – the benefit goes mostly to foreigners. We transport the goods but the vehicles are for foreigners. Now, even with the airport, we are going to build it but it is simply to carry us as Ugandans but the beneficiaries are foreigners – foreign investors and foreign airlines. And domestically – in terms of business, one person and one family is the one benefiting from Entebbe Airport. This is because we have handed over to that business to one family for the last 15 or 20 years. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, our rules are very clear that when anyone gets on the Floor of this House and makes allegations, we are under obligation, as a House, to be informed the specific details of the allegations. 

So, through you, Mr Speaker, could the Leader of the Opposition tell us which particular family is specifically benefitting from the national airport so that it stays on our record according to our rules? So, is he in order to make wild allegations without stating the exact person? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition, would like to substantiate?

MR OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The family that owns ENHAS – that company is owned by the family of hon. Sam Kutesa; at least he is a big shareholder in that company.
So whatever we are investing will benefit, first and foremost, him. The rest of us will benefit by getting the transport service not by way of business.

Mr Speaker, civil aviation is a business, how much money does civil aviation pay Uganda Government per year since it is our business in form of dividends? It is on that basis that we can approve this loan because the committee has recommended that this loan should be paid from internally-generated revenue.

Therefore, civil aviation should be able to generate funds and pay back this loan. We would like to know that and if without handling aircrafts, civil aviation is incapable of making money to pay this loan –(Interruption) 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you. I also wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. The information that I would like to give him and the House is that Government is the biggest debtor to the Civil Aviation Authority. For many years with no end, the Civil Aviation Authority has continued to demand billions of shillings from the Government of Uganda.

What I am saying, in other words, I am saying that the government has a responsibility to pay the Civil Aviation Authority. A few years back, the civil aviation had to engage a firm, Kampala Associated Advocates, to recover money from Government. And so, if Government continues doing business this way – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I rarely make points of order to my ‘amuran’ hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi but on this one, I had to get up.

Mr Speaker, a cheque was raised in the finance ministry and was ready for collection but because of the crooks in Uganda, they called Kampala Associated Advocates to pick that cheque worth Shs 50 billion and were paid 10 per cent, which was Shs 5 billion just going to pick a cheque. 

In light of this, is my brother, hon. Patrick Amuriat in order to say that Kampala Associated Advocates did work and yet they just went to pick a cheque and took Shs 5 billion and the Ugandans lost? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was a clarification. The honourable member for Budadiri West, you are going to stick to the rules because that was not a point of order.

MR AMURIAT: What I was trying to labour on –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable, you rose on information.

MR AMURIAT: Yes, I am about to finish.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is information and you have informed and that is enough. The member holding the Floor is the Leader of the Opposition.

MR AMURIAT: There is an aspect that I would like to bring as a point of information in relation to that and Mr Speaker, I will beg for you indulgence. 

The fact that a lot of money was lost in legal costs to Kampala Associated Advocates for doing no work - I think that Government needs to put its act together and while giving this money to the Civil Aviation Authority, we should be sure on how this money will be paid back to the Chinese.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much for the information, hon. Patrick Amuriat. We really think that we should not make this loan partisan because it is a loan for development, which we all need. However, there are many things that should be done. 

First, we would want an assurance from the minister that he is going to restructure our civil aviation. We want the handling services returned to the Civil Aviation Authority. The current contract should not be renewed at all otherwise we are borrowing this money for that family. If the contract expired, they should renew it. We need a comprehensive report on that.

We also need to be assured that the government is going to look for funds to develop three airports in the regions to feed into Entebbe. We have talked about this, Mr Speaker, over and over and we have been singing this song for a long time. We should now be serious and Government should help us on that.

Three, Mr Speaker, we are getting worried about mortgaging our country to China. We have borrowed too much money from China and we have continued to borrow too much money from one source - China. As it was raised before, what is it that we are doing with China? Why are we borrowing so much money? Besides that, we are not even given updates on performance of these loans. 

We are worried about the extent of borrowing, by Government, from one source and on the performance of these same loans; we don’t have updates and don’t know why we are borrowing. 

There is also the issue of corruption, as hon. Patrick Amuriat and hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, is a big issue in the Ministry of Works. The other day we read in the newspapers that engineers at the Ministry of Works have been “eating” layers of roads and are now “eating” distance in terms of kilometres. 

On the Kaisotonya Road in Hoima, which was built for oil exploration, they “ate” nine kilometres of the road yet we are still borrowing under the same ministry and not concerned about this bottomless pit in which we are putting our money. The minister should clarify on some of these things.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will have the chairperson and then the minister. Does the chairperson have some issue on the financing agreements?

4.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues I want to clarify on are in line with the motion moved by the minister because as a committee, mandatorily, we must report on terms and conditions of the loan, when we come to Parliament.

When we received the brief from the minister, it was for $325 million but like we are mandated to review, scrutinise and consider, in the process of scrutinising, we established that the $325 million was spilt into two - $200 million was for the first phase and $125 million for the second phase. 

The documents for the $200 million were all availed including the financing agreements and therefore, we were able to report to this Parliament including terms and conditions of the loan. But for the $125 million, we could not proceed because the financing agreement was not available and therefore, we had no terms and conditions that we would report about.

And accordingly the brief had two resolutions. One resolution was for $200 million and separate one for $125 million, Mr Speaker. That is why we could proceed with $125 but we proceeded with $200.

And in any case, when we scrutinised, we established that actually $125 million was not needed now but in the financial year 2018/19. As a Committee on National Economy, there is no way we could commit Government for monies today but needed in 2018/19. That is how we handled it but we first consulted the ministers on whether they could provide the draft financing agreement –(Interjection)- I will take clarification from my senior.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my chairperson, also my young brother. 

The clarification that I would like to seek is: if I lend you money and I tell you that if you want to buy anything, you must buy from me because I must make a profit on everything I am giving – the clarification I am seeking, as a committee - we have borrowed from the Exim Bank of China and they are telling us that we should get Chinese contractors, which means that on top of paying 2 per cent, we are also paying a 0.25 per cent commitment fee and another 0.2 per cent for undisbursed funds, if we do not utilise them and now we are using the Chinese company. Did you carry out a feasibility study or compare rates and confirm that these Chinese companies are not going to cheat us, my young brother?

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to state that the question posed to me is basically for the minister because as the chairperson of the committee, I am not responsible for soliciting for the lenders; that should be a question to the minister. As a committee, what is important is for us to scrutinise and establish whether the costs involved are actually concessional or non-concessional. On that, he has mentioned two per cent, interest rate and a commitment fee of 0.25 per cent, which is charged by all lending banks, and a one-off of 0.25 per cent.

There are other sources of borrowing but comparatively, you will not get any World Bank group to give money of that magnitude to undertake such a project. They will always give you $20 million, or $30 up to $100 million, just in piecemeal, and it will even take long. However, if you want a magnificent project, you may be forced to borrow from there. I think the minister will add because that is a question for him and not for the committee.

4.44
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will clarify on a few issues, which Members have raised.

Number one is on the exit of British Airways. They wrote me a letter saying that they are no longer competitive and they are not making money on that route. That is the reason, which is stated in the letter. They have been out competed by Emirates. Recently, Etihad introduced new planes at Entebbe Airport. There is also a new airline called Fly Dubai, which comes to Entebbe Airport three times a day. All these have kicked out British Airways. British Airways have even failed to modernise their aircraft to Entebbe Airport, so all Ugandans have decided to take that direction. (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is making wild allegations against an international company. I think it is not proper for us as Parliament to start condemning a company at the level of British Airways in Parliament here. Is the minister in order to come here and start making wild allegations about British Airways, a company that has served Ugandans for so many years and most likely at one time or another would wish to come back to this country to trade? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought I heard the minister saying British Airways wrote to him. If they wrote to him and you heard, then that is what he said. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, thank you for giving the right ruling. Another question was about land at Entebbe Airport. It is true – (Interruption)

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I am compelled to stand and raise a point of order. I have been working with British Airways as an exporter for the last 20 years. In terms of passengers, they even offload our cargo because of passengers. There is no single occasion when British Airways has ever left Entebbe with empty seats. Even our cargo is always offloaded because of – (Interjections) – wait. So, is the minister in order to say that British Airways is closing because of lack of business due to competition?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, first of all, by stating that further point of order you are commenting on the Speaker’s ruling. By saying, “further point of order”, it means you are commenting on the Speaker’s ruling. You are out of order.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, the letter I have stated clearly that they have reviewed their business on London-Entebbe route and found that it is not profitable therefore they have wound up. That is the only letter I have.

About the land, yes we have acquired the land from CAA and it was a directive from this Parliament - the Seventh Parliament. When you read the Hansard, it is clearly stated that we must acquire that land for the expansion of CAA. I think we have implemented that directive of Parliament and acquired that land.

On ground handling, I agree that this is an agreement that needs to be looked into. Though they are paying fees to CAA –(Interjections)– well, it was renewed but sometime back. Therefore, I agree with Parliament that actually this agreement needs to be looked into and we need to see how we can proceed. I will follow it up, Mr Speaker. 

Mr Speaker, it is true Entebbe Airport – (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I am at a loss because we have land belonging to the old airport, which unfortunately is being rented by the UN, and then the minister makes a very serious statement that they got another piece of land for CAA. Would it not be procedurally right to give us accountability on the status of that land being rented out to the UN before he proceeds to tell us that he has used taxpayers’ money to acquire another piece of land?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to be relevant to the debate. That would be irrelevant. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, thank you for the ruling. I have not used any taxpayers’ money to acquire agricultural land because that is government land. Government cannot buy from Government.

Mr Speaker, it is true our airport has not been competitive. As was rightly said, an Airbus 380 cannot land at Entebbe Airport; if it does, it can be emergency landing and before it takes off it will have to offload all the passengers. Secondly, the runway at Entebbe Airport is only 70 metres wide and yet one wing of the Airbus 380 is actually 75 metres and the other wing is 75 metres too. So we need to have a modern airport; we have to modernise our airport. 

Mr Speaker, the traffic volume at Entebbe International Airport has increased by almost 10 fold since 2006. There are so many airlines that are plying the Entebbe International Airport route that we have got nowhere to park the aircrafts, especially at the new terminals, during rush hours. Not only that, if anybody has tried to travel on Wednesdays and Saturdays at midday, you will realise even the passenger terminal cannot handle that number of passengers. So, we are doing some adjustments even within the same small building so as to handle those passengers.

On the new airports, I agree with you that we have to modernise our internal airports and I think we are progressing well. We have just finished Gulu Airport. We have resurfaced it and we are now procuring lights so that it can be used as an international airport. As you all know, that runway is sufficient to handle even Boeing 737s because it is a three-kilometre runway. 

Mr Speaker, we have also resurfaced Nakasongola Airport. As we talk, we have finished the runway and it is long enough to even accommodate bigger aircrafts. We are also going ahead to look for money to get lights for it and navigational aids so that it can also accommodate international airlines – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification. I would like to find out from the minister why the expansion, widening and strengthening of the runway 17/35 is going to be done in phases? As far as I understand, this is just one runway. So, to me it sounds illogical to think about doing it in bits, if you want to achieve the purpose of accommodating bigger aircrafts on that single runway. 

I ask this question while having in mind what is contained in the report of the committee on page 6, specifically referring to that table where you are asking to phase the work on this runway. That is going to affect the amount of money that we will pass today for borrowing. I want that clarification. I do not know whether I am clear. What I am saying is that this is a single runway that you are working on but you are choosing to do it in phases; what works are going to suffer as a result of this? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to wind up. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: I am winding up. To answer my colleague, the hon. Patrick Amuriat, we are actually doing the first phase and it is the expansion of that runway. There is also the construction of the cold room or the stores. These will be situated at the end of the runway. So, we are not doing it in either phase I or II but in the first phase. There is also the strengthening of the old runway. These are in the first phase. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, we should not run away from this; it is true the Government of Uganda owes money to CAA. However, first and foremost, CAA is owned by the Government of Uganda 100 per cent. Therefore, on its own it is like almost the way you see UNRA for which we borrow money to construct roads. However, CAA collects some fees and it gives a service, which should be paid for. That is why I am saying that it is true the Government owes CAA some money. (Mr Birekeraawo rose) Civil Aviation Authority is not heavily indebted as some people have said; CAA has got no loans. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is a prerogative of the Member speaking; it is not a must. Accepting points of clarification and information are a prerogative of the Member speaking. You cannot change the rules, honourable member for Bukoto South. The rules are that if a Member is holding the Floor, it is his or her prerogative to accept points of clarification or information. You cannot force it. It is indecent for you to continue behaving like that. 

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank colleagues for this wonderful debate. Honestly speaking, I am very optimistic about the future of this country. When I listened to the debate this afternoon, Members were asking, “Where is our national carrier? Can we make Entebbe International Airport a hub for East Africa? Can we look at other airports across the country?” I think these are serious questions that can shape the future of this country. So I want to thank you, Members, for this contribution. 

With this good spirit in the House, I would like to answer only three questions which were raised by Members. The first one was: why should we go out to borrow money from the World Bank, African Development Bank and EXIM Bank when we have money here with NSSF? Colleagues, you recall we passed here a law that restricts us from borrowing from NSSF. We are reviewing this law so that we can allow the NSSF money to be accessed by Government, at least for infrastructure development in this country. We will be coming back here for that debate. 

The second question was: why go to one source, the EXIM Bank? That is not true. We are borrowing from the World Bank and the African Development Bank. We have brought here loan requests from different sources. This particular Bank has some special terms and it has capacity. It takes little time to access money from EXIM compared to the World Bank and other lending institutions. However, the most important thing is: have you really analysed the risks of getting money from one source? Yes, we have and we are secure. 

The last point was about the issue of handling services by different companies – ENHAS, DAS handling and so on. Today we are handling the issue of approving the loan to improve the infrastructure of the airport. I think when that time comes, we can debate whether we should take back the handling of these services to Civil Aviation Authority or not. 

Lastly, the debts by –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I am constrained to rise on a point of order especially when my brother, the hon. David Bahati, is holding the Floor, obviously I being a friendly force to him. 

The reason why I am really disturbed is that after the honourable minister recognising the importance of the questions raised by the Members with respect to handling, a portion of which has crippled the operations of CAA, then he says when the time comes for handling those things we shall debate and without telling us when. Is he in order to simply brush off those very core and fundamental issues that have been raised in a bid to secure - By the way, he is seeking the consent of the Members whose points he is now brushing off and washing under his feet. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That definitely is a very serious concern. Unfortunately, I do not see any violation of that order. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. The last point is about the –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I am raising a point of procedure. Section 43 of the Public Finance Management Act - a law which was tabled by the Minister of Finance - gives us the responsibility to do oversight work. My responsibility as a shadow minister is to open the eyes of Government and this country. 

According to Section 43, any project which is supposed to be externally financed should have been approved by this Parliament in the budget. I have a copy of the policy statement here and I have looked through it, but that item on Civil Aviation Authority is not there. Can the minister table the items that this House approved upon which it will enable us to comply with Section 43 of the Public Finance and Management Act? This is a procedural issue, Mr Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge –(Interjections)- Sorry -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was a clarification and it changed to procedure. Proceed.

MR BAHATI: To best of my knowledge, under vote 106, Ministry of Works, and I have been informed by the Minister of Works, it is there. However, the most important thing, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, is to note that we came here on the Floor of the House and laid before you Government’s commitment for now and for the future. This loan was part of that commitment. You remember you are the one who requested this several times and I actually shared a copy with you. I think we can revisit that document; it was there.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the issue of the debts – (interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think we are raising a very important point for this institution. This is Parliament and we are about to approve a loan request, so we have to make sure that when we approve this request it is anchored on what is already provided for. We have laboured to tell this House and the ministry that there are certain things which are lacking.

Is it, therefore, in order for the minister to insist that this loan is provided for in the programme as required by the law, yet we have an official book which is published by the Ministry of Finance? We are trying to guide them to understand so that you do not disgrace the image of this institution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have this document?

MR BAHATI: I have much respect for hon. Cecilia Ogwal and every time she speaks I listen. However, I would like to inform hon. Cecilia Ogwal that it is captured in the policy statement by the Ministry of Works and Transport under that vote. This is the policy statement, which was laid before this House and it was scrutinised by the Committee on Works and Transport. 

At page 23, we indicated that we shall rehabilitate Entebbe Airport. We actually provided that the donor funding for this project would be $252 million. So, I think Mr Speaker –(Interjection)– Yes, it is here! Mr Speaker, I wish to re-lay this document on the Table. (Laughter)

Thank you very much, honourable colleagues, for supporting this loan request. Thank you for the debate. I thank you very much.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, with all due respect to hon. David Bahati, that policy statement is my copy, which I passed to him. (Laughter) 

Secondly, I wanted us to co-operate and ensure that whatever we do is in line with the law. He is talking of about $200 million. Mr Speaker, you are aware that we approve our budget in shillings and as a result, every figure there is in shillings. So, my brother, let us try to be neat; it is not in dollars. I am seeking clarification as to whether we have now shifted our budget to dollars from shillings or to Chinese currency. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, it is true that according to the Act this must be appropriated by Parliament. At the same time, it is also true that the project implementation time of this project is three years. It is also true that we run a cash economy. Therefore, the money that they have indicated here is for this financial year. For the subsequent year, it is also indicated how much will be appropriated. Therefore, it is captured. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will put the question to this motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $200 from the Export-Import Bank of China to finance phase I of the upgrade and expansion of Entebbe International Airport.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 179 (4) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF UGANDA PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF NEW COUNTIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this motion was brought to the House by the Minister of Local Government and was referred to the committee responsible for this sector. The committee has examined this motion and is ready to report. I now ask the chairperson to come forward and report.

5.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to report on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to create new counties. However, before I do that, I would like to lay the minutes – (Interruption)

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. Three weeks ago, the Minister for Local Government committed himself to come and report to the House on the creation of urgent districts. The three weeks expired yesterday. He has jumped, before concluding the old matter and come up with new constituencies. Whereas we do not disagree with the creation of new counties, how can we proceed on a new matter when actually we have not disposed of the old the matter and yet they are related?

Mr Speaker, I would like your guidance on this. He has not even kept the House abreast on what happened to his earlier commitment to this House. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is true that when that report on the creation of districts was brought back to the House, you made a commitment before the House that you would go back to Cabinet and come back to report in three weeks. The Member is saying the three weeks actually expired yesterday. Do you have something to say before I rule?

5.13
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I had not anticipated that question to come because the motion before the House is for creation of counties and I did not expect a misjoinder of motions. However, since you have raised it, I would like to say that Cabinet today looked at that very issue and I will communicate to the House the position of Cabinet after today. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have an idea when you can make this communication to the House?

MR MWESIGE: I suggest that you give me time, Mr Speaker. I was not in the Cabinet meeting today; I was on another assignment. Therefore, I have got to go and look at the minutes, make further consultations and come back to this House on Tuesday next week.

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, and also thank the minister for the information, in whichever form we have received it.

Mr Speaker, this is the time for us to put our feet down and ask Government to take us seriously. The minister made an undertaking three weeks ago and he knew that this issue would come up in the Cabinet meeting today but he skipped the meeting. The same minister is bringing an inter-related matter on the Floor of the House and he is not ready to give us the information because he did not seek this information from whichever source he intended to get the information from. He is also telling us, among others things, that he will consult. He is going to consult on whether to tell us the information he undertook to brief this House about.

Is it therefore not procedurally correct that we persuade you, Mr Speaker, as the custodian of our Order Paper, to suspend this business –(Interjections)– In my understanding - I must apologise to my colleagues - I was brought up in a way that I should only react after understanding the point. (Laughter)

Is it not procedurally correct that we persuade you, Mr Speaker, to suspend this particular item on the agenda until we receive the information that the minister undertook to give this House? It is because the two move together. If you are talking about a district and a county in terms of local administration, they move together because we are supposed to review –(Interjections)– We certainly do think differently. That is my proposal for your procedural guidance. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that the report of the committee on the creation of districts was actually read last year and the member for Mukono Municipality, hon. Nambooze, was even able to write a minority report three months after the main report had been written because of the delay in consultations here. The reason was that after the motion was brought to Parliament, Cabinet announced a moratorium on the creation of districts and that was part of what was considered by the committee. Therefore, when the committee reported, its recommendation was that the moratorium be reviewed. 

If the committee had been reluctant to proceed in the presence of the moratorium, we would have just got a report saying there is no more creation of districts. However, the committee came and reported that much as Government had halted the creation of districts, they had examined it and found that there was need in some instances, and they had provided guidelines on what should lead to the creation of districts. 

They were therefore recommending the ban to be reviewed. However, the minister stood up and said the only institution that can review that is Cabinet and he asked to be allowed to consult Cabinet and come back in three weeks. Therefore, the issue is not as straightforward as the one we are looking at right now because it was already here. The report was not even debated but the minister requested and we shelved it. We allowed him to consult Cabinet and come back to us and he had undertaken to return in three weeks. Now, in the middle, another motion was brought to this House. 

Let us treat them on their own merit and see whether they stand or fall. Let us proceed that way, but with the undertaking from the minister that the motion on the creation of districts is coming back on Tuesday. He is coming to brief the House.  

What we are waiting for from the minister is - We have not debated that motion. When the report was presented, the minister requested that we allow him consult Cabinet on the recommendation that the ban be reviewed by the institution responsible and he comes back to us. If it is reviewed, then we have a good debate. If it is not reviewed, there might be no debate. That is why we need to wait for the minister to come back on Tuesday, 30 July next week and advise us on what position the Cabinet has taken upon the recommendation of the committee. For now, let us deal with the motion that is substantial before us.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I go into the details of the report, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes on the motion for the creation of new counties.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KWIYUCWINY: As a way of introduction, Mr Speaker and honourable members, on 15th July this year, the Minister for Local Government laid on the Table a motion for a resolution of Parliament to approve the creation of counties under Article 179(4) of the Constitution and Section 7(7) of the Local Government Act. The motion was referred to the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government and now we report as follows:

Background 

I would like to read Article 179(4) of the Constitution; it states thus: “Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries of or the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people, and it may take into account the means of communication, geographical features, density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned.”

Section 7(7) of the Local Governments Act states, “A district or city council may, within its area of jurisdiction with the approval of Parliament and in consultation with or at the request of the relevant county council or city division council, alter the boundaries of or create a new county or a city division.” 

The minister proposed 39 counties as you can see from page 1 up to page 6.  The methodology is also there. I would like to go straight to the findings, observations and recommendations.

Criteria for Creation of New Counties

The minister reported that the decision to create new counties was based on the following reasons in addition to the constitutional provisions as in Article 179 (4): 

i) One-county Districts

The one-county districts make administration and governance complicated and, therefore, the decision to split them into two or more counties using the yardstick of at least 80,000 people. 

ii) Cultural Diversity

Due to cultural diversity, there is need to empower and emancipate the people of small cultural groups in an area. 

iii) The Local Economic Diversity

There are administrative units or counties which encompass different economic activities, which are sometimes mutually exclusive. Planning for diverse areas is very difficult, therefore the need to create different units. 

iv) Wishes of the People 

The wishes of the people are expressed in the resolutions of the district council. 

The committee observed that there are 65 one-county districts in Uganda. These have presented an administrative challenge and sometimes leadership limitations as a result of monopoly of few advantaged groups and inadequate representation. The Minister for Local Government however only presented 39 counties for approval by Parliament leaving other one-county districts without hope for consideration even in the future. 

The committee also observed that some counties proposed by the Minister of Local Government consisted of only one sub-county as in the case of Kachumbala County consisting of Kachumbala Sub County; Bulamogi North West County consisting of Nawaikoke Sub County; and Ik County consisting of Kamion Sub County. The minister explained that the cultural and linguistic diversity as presented by the Pokot of Amudat, the Labwor of Kotido, the Tepeth of Mount Moroto and the Ik of Morulongele needed to be considered if these people are to be emancipated for effective representation in Parliament. 

The committee also observed that many sub counties are very large in size and population making administration difficult. The committee notes that one of the conditions for creating counties was that there would be no sub county units created. The committee expresses concern over this especially where a county comprises of only one sub-county for instance Nawaikoke Sub County in Bulamogi North West with a population of 113,082 people. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that:
    a) All the one-county districts should be studied and considered for creation of new counties, town councils and sub counties. 
    b) New sub counties should be created out of the large ones for ease of administration and effective service delivery. These new sub counties should be effective by 1 July 2016. 
    c) The Electoral Commission should carry out elections in the new sub counties in the Financial Year 2016/2017 in order to provide effective political leadership. 

We made observations on the legal provisions and I already read Section 7 (7) of the Local Governments Act. The committee observes that the county councils were abolished as per the Local Governments (Amendment) Act, 2013. Therefore, there should have been a consequential amendment to the section to this effect. 

The Local Government (Amendment) Act of 2013 should have been reconciled with Cap 243 specifically in section 45 subsections (1) and (2) and section 7 (7). This is because while section 45 subsection (1) (a) (i) repealed the administrative unit based on the county, section 45 (2) of the Local Government (Amendment) Act, 2013 states that there shall be a council at each level of the administrative units except for the county. The long title of the 2013 Local Government (Amendment) Act as passed clearly states in part that it is “an act to repeal county councils.” 

Further quoting the Minister for Local Government while debating during the Local Government (Amendment) Bill in February 2013, he said, “…the amendment that we are making does not abolish the county as a unit. What we are proposing to abolish are the councils because the county is still relevant in the Constitution as a basis for creating a constituency.” Consequently, he further added, “Counties are also relevant in some areas of Uganda where they have kingdoms and other traditional institutions.” Therefore, the requirement for the district to consult with or for the county councils to request for creation of counties is redundant and irrelevant after the repeal of the county councils. 

Importance of the County as an Administrative Unit

The committee observed that the county is a level of the administrative unit in the law and Government practice, albeit without a council, and is used for the following: 

Under Article - there was disorganisation after printing. The correct report starts from (b) because we are justifying the importance of counties. 

b) 	As a supervisory jurisdiction to ensure effective programme implementation and service delivery to the people. In this respect, an Assistant Chief Administrative Officer and technical persons like the inspector of schools are assigned supervisory and monitoring duties at county level. 

c) 	As a unit for allocation - I do not know whether I am being listened to, Mr Speaker. The county is also being used as a unit for allocation of service to the people, for instance, the government policy on health requires each county to have a health centre IV. It is a unit to ensure fair allocation and a balanced distribution of services and resources. 

d) 	The county is also used for local and traditional activities of areas which have kingdoms or other cultural institutions. 

Disparity among Members of Parliament

The committee observes that the creation of the counties as proposed by the minister has created a disparity between the Members of Parliament in regards to the area of coverage and the population they represent. For instance, some Members of Parliament represent one, two, three or five sub counties while others represent between nine and 25 sub counties. This is unfair because there is more pressure and burden of work on some Members of Parliament than on others. 

The committee recommends that area of coverage and population becomes additional criteria for facilitating Members of Parliament. 

Findings

The committee observed that there are complaints and unresolved conflicts from some of the counties presented by the Minister for Local Government for approval. The committee established that there were issues for correction and updates that were supported by the leadership in the respective areas. 
The committee came up with recommendations accordingly after analysing the issue. These are:

Namutumba

The committee was informed that due to the disagreements, the matter of creating a new county of Busiki in Namutumba was put on hold by the ministry until an agreement is reached. 

The committee received a petition from residents of Busiki County who disagree with the decision by the district council. The following were the reasons fronted: the proposal by then district council of having Bukono County with Ivukula and Kibale sub counties with only 77,368 people while Busiki County will have a population of 175,892, comprising of Bulange Sub-County, Magada Sub-county, Kibale Sub-County, Namutumba Town Council and Namutumba Sub-County, Nsinze Sub-County will divide the two counties unevenly. Meanwhile, the petitioners argue that the best demarcation on the basis on necessity for effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people should ensure that numbers in the two counties are divided as evenly as possible.

The most desirous way supported by the people, the sub-county leaders and traditional leaders would be to divide the counties in such a way that Busiki County would comprise of Nsinze Sub-County, Namutumba Town Council, Namutumba Sub-County and Bulange with a population of 126,902; and the other county, Busiki North, comprising of Magada, Kibale and Ivukula sub-counties with a population of 126,358.

The committee recommends that Busiki County North be included for approval among the proposed counties. Busiki County North would comprise of Magada, Kibale and Ivukula sub-counties and Busiki South would comprise of Nsinze, Namutumba Town Council, Namutumba Sub-County and Bulange.

Mitooma District

There is a conflict between those who support the district resolution and those who oppose it. The committee learnt that the district council has been advocating for the creation of two new counties out of Ruhinda County since 2010. On 26 June 2012 under minute 34/2012 (b), Mitooma District Council resolved that two new counties be created out of Ruhinda County. However, the motion from the Minister for Local Government has proposed only one county and that is Ruhinda North, which contains only three sub-counties of Kanyabwanga, Kiyanga and Bitereko out of Ruhinda County. The opposition is on the basis of whether Kashenshero Sub-County and Kashenshero Town Council should be in Ruhinda North as the new county or remain in Ruhinda County.

Secondly, the people of Kanyabwanga Sub-County were against being part of Ruhinda North because the three counties of Bitereko, Kanyabwanga and Kiyanga share a common history. However, Kashenshero Town Council and Kashenshero Sub-County were not originally part of the history. The petitioners therefore prayed that Kashenshero Town Council and Kashenshero Sub-County be left out.

While the residents of Kashenshero Sub-County and Kashenshero Town Council prefer to remain in Ruhinda County, one group of petitioners have complained that this division is not balanced because it leaves Ruhinda North with only three counties while nine sub-counties have remained in Ruhinda County. Another group of petitioners complained that the creation of only Ruhinda North was instigated for political motive and selfish interests and that the purpose of bringing services nearer to the people will not be met because creation of two counties will cause disunity due to tribal and religious differences.

The committee recommends that the two counties be created in Mitooma as per the district resolution of 2012 in order to resolve the apparent conflict. This means that Ruhinda Central comprising of Kashenshero Sub-County, Kashenshero Town Council, Mitooma Sub-County and Mitooma Town Council should be created in addition to Ruhinda North County. The following would be the counties in Mitooma District; Ruhinda North comprising of those sub-counties, Ruhinda Central and Ruhinda South.

Pader District

The committee discovered a discrepancy between the motion and the district council resolution. While the district council resolution proposal was to create a new county called Aruu South compromising of Puranga, Awere, Pader, Ogom and Pader Town Council, the motion proposed creation of Aruu North. The sub-counties proposed to form Aruu South are hence interchanged with those to be retained in the old Aruu County. 

The recommendation is that the above error should be corrected to read as Aruu County South comprising of Puranga, Awere, Pader Sub-County, Ogom, Pader Town Council while Aruu County, the old one, remains with Angagura, Atanga, Laaguti, Lapuli, Latanya, Pajule and Acholibur sub-counties.

Kaabong District

The committee observed that each county comprises of only one sub-county called Kamion with a population of 6,225. Kamion County has a minority community that has been marginalised and has a difficult mountainous terrain. The committee recommends that Ik County be considered for a county because of its unique characteristics and features. 

Zombo District

There was a proposal to change the name of the new county from Ora County as proposed in the motion to Okoro Mamalo County. The name Okoro Mamalo is best understood and appreciated by local people and the change of name has been supported by the leaders and inhabitants of the proposed county. The committee recommends that Ora County in Zombo District be named Okoro Mamalo County.

Kaliro District

The name for the new county should be Bulamogi West. It gives a bearing and sense of belonging to the people.

Kyenjojo District

The minister’s motion does not reflect Rugomba Town Council in the new proposed county of Mwenge Central. We recommend that Rugomba Town Council should be included as part of the administrative units in Mwenge Central County. 

The summary of the recommendations is as follows:
    1. Agago County North in Agago District;
    2. Orungo out of Amuria County in Amuria District;
    3. Lutseshe out of Manjiya County in Bududa District;
    4. Kachumbala out of Bukedea County, Bukedea District;
    5. Bukomansimbi South County out of Bukomansimbi District;
    6. Elgon County out of Bulambuli County, Bulambuli District;
    7. Dokolo South County out of Dokolo County, Dokolo District; 
    8. Gomba West County out of Gomba County, Gomba District;
    9. Kilak North County out of Kilak County, Amuru District;
    10. Ik County out of Dodoth East County, Kaabong District;
    11. Bulamogi North West County out of Bulamogi County, Kaliro District; 
    12. Kabweri County out of Kibuku County, Kibuku District;
    13. Kashongi County out of Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura District;
    14. Kibanda North County out of Kibanda County, Kiryandongo District; 
    15. Chua East County out of Chua County, Kitgum District;
    16. Kole North County out of Kole County, Kole District;
    17. Kanyum County out of Kumi County, Kumi District;
    18. Butemba County out of Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi District; 
    19. Kyaka South County out of Kyaka County, Kyegegwa District; 
    20. Mwenge Central County out of Mwenge North County, Kyenjojo District;
    21. Luuka South County out of Luuka County, Luuka District;
    22. Maracha East County out of Maracha County, Maracha District; 
    23. Kashari South County out of Kashari County, Mbarara District; 
    24. Ruhinda North County out of Ruhinda County, Mitooma District; 
    25. Tepeth County out of Matheniko County, Moroto District;
    26. Aruu South County out of Aruu County, Pader 	District;
    27. Buyamba County out of Kooki County, Rakai District;
    28. Mawogola North County out of Mawogola County, Sembabule District; 
    29. Dakabela County out of Soroti County, Soroti District;
    30. Okoro MaMalo County out of Okoro County, Zombo District;
    31. Kibale County out of Butebo County, Pallisa District;
    32. Tororo North County out of Tororo County, Tororo District;
    33. Kibale East County out of Kibale County, Kamwenge District;
    34. Aringa North County out of Aringa County, Yumbe District;
    35. Aringa South County out of Aringa County, Yumbe District;
    36. Kigorobya County out of Bugahya County, Hoima District;
    37. Koboko North County out of Koboko County, Koboko District;
    38. Bukuya County out of Kasanda County, Mubende District; and
    39. Adjumani East County out of East Moyo County, Adjumani District.

The committee further proposes that the following counties also be created for reasons already explained in the report above:
    1. In Mitooma, Ruhinda Central County out of Ruhinda County; and 
    2. In Namutumba District, Busiki County North out of Busiki County.

The committee further recommends that: 
1. 	These proposed counties as scrutinised by the committee be approved by Parliament and should be effective by 1 July 2015. 
2. 	The proposed and old counties should comprise of the sub counties and town councils as mentioned in the motion.
3. 	New sub counties, especially in the one-sub county counties, should be created out of the large ones for ease of administration and effective service delivery. 

4. 	The new sub counties should be effective by 1 July 2016.

Creation of Constituencies

The committee observed that while the county councils were abolished as per the Local Government (Amendment) Act 2013, the county has remained as one of the units in the local government and as a basis for creation of constituencies. Article 63(1) and (2) of the 1995 Constitution provides that constituencies shall be demarcated by the Electoral Commission on the basis of counties as approved by Parliament.

Article 61 (1) (c) of the Constitution states the function of the Electoral Commission is “to demarcate constituencies in accordance with the provision of this Constitution”. Article 63(2) states, “When demarcating constituencies for the purposes of clause (1) of this article, the Electoral Commission shall ensure that each county, as approved by Parliament, has at least one Member of Parliament; except that no constituency shall fall within more than one county.”

The committee was informed by the Chairman of the Electoral Commission that there would be no gross financial implication if the counties being created became constituencies and elections were held in them in 2016 except for the cost of printing ballot papers. 

The committee observed that the number of Members of Parliament would rise from 384 to 425. Therefore, the current sitting space would not accommodate these large numbers but also there would be a considerable cost of administration and facilitation of Members of Parliament in the subsequent financial years.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Members, can we have some order!

MS KWIYUCWINY: I will go to the recommendations:

a) 	The committee recommends that the Electoral Commission should immediately confirm the counties as constituencies after approval by Parliament and plan to carry out elections of Members of Parliament in them as required in 2016. 

b) 	The Ministry of Finance should urgently provide resources to Parliament to enable it construct a bigger parliamentary chamber that is able to accommodate the large numbers of Members of Parliament.

c) 	Members of Parliament and district leadership should enforce and strengthen regional cooperation, collaboration, lobbying, advocacy and unity as a pre-requisite for effective development and social transformation.

The committee also received petitions in relation to this motion. The committee observed that the Minister for Local Government only presented 39 counties from 38 districts, leaving 27 district resolutions unattended to. During the public hearing conducted by the committee, districts and petitioners in the public presented their petition showing requests made to the Minister for Local Government dating as far back as 2005 and 2010. The petitioners provided various reasons as for the need to be considered as elaborated here below.

The committee observed that many districts had requested their areas to be considered for new counties but have been left out in this motion. 

We have category A that we have looked at and have considered are for immediate consideration. We have also seen the Certificate of Financial Implication only for the 39 proposed counties. However, we think that these are also very critical:

Oyam District

The petitioners prayed for creation for a new county called Oyam Central. Oyam is the biggest district in Lango sub region with a current population of 33,811 people. Oyam County South has a population 199,022 while Oyam North has a population of 188,989. 

The district council meeting held on 29 April 2011 under minute COU 05/04/2011 resolved that a new county to be called Oyam Central be created out of Oyam North. The new county will comprise of Iceme, Acaba and Oyam Town Council. There was a follow up on this matter by the district in June 2015. However, this was not included in the motion.

Tororo District 

The committee received a petition seeking to create a new county out of West Budama County. The motion tabled by the honourable minister excluded West Budama County yet the district council meeting held on 23 April 2015 under minute 35 resolved to create new counties out of Tororo County and West Budama. The committee was informed that it would be unfair to subdivide Tororo County and not to do the same for West Budama County, which was part of the resolution of the district council. 

The committee received a proposal for a creation of a new county out of West Budama called West Budama Central with a population of 88,629. It will comprise of Sop Sop Sub County, Petta Sub County, Kisoko Sub County, Magola Sub County and Rubongi Sub County. West Budama County North will remain with Kirewa Sub County, Nagongera Sub County, Nagongera Town Council and Paya Sub County; and West Budama South will remain with Mulanda Sub County, Nabuyoga Sub County, Lyolwa Sub County and Magola Sub County.

Kasese District 

The committee received a petition to create a new county in Kasese District because Kasese District is one of the largest districts in the country, a condition which exerts pressure on service delivery. Kasese District Council under minute 168 GoU/KDLG/2011 resolved that Kasese District split to create a new county called Kilembe County which will consist of Kilembe, Mahango, Rukoki sub counties with a population of 81,100 people. Busongora County South will remain and consist of Katwe Kabatoro Town Council, Lake Katwe Sub County, Nyakatonzi Sub County, Muhokya Sub County and Karusandara Sub County with 98,995 people. 

Buhweju

The committee received a request for creation of a second county in Buhweju. The proposed counties will be as follows: Buhweju East county comprising of Karungu Sub County, Butya Sub County, Rwengwe Sub County and Nsiika Town Council; and Buhweju West County to comprise of Bihanga Sub County, Burere Sub County, Nyakishana Sub County and Engaju Sub County.

The justification is that this was a district council resolution under Minute 33 of 2012, held on 18 June 2012. Also Buhweju is a one-constituency district with a population of 130,000 people. It covers an area of 700 square kilometres with a hilly and difficult terrain and that the county was a presidential pledge in July 2013.

Manafwa District 

The committee received a request for creation of two new counties in Manafwa because earlier requests to the ministry were not put into consideration. Since 2009, Manafwa has been requesting for creation of two counties as follows: A new county called Namisindwa comprising of Bupoto, Namabya, Bukhaweka, Buwabwala, Mukoto, Bukhabusi, Tsekululu sub-counties to be created out of Bubulo County East, which has a population of 240,008 people. This was according to the population census of 2002.

Another county called Bukusu County with a population of 62,999 comprising of Bukusu Sub-County, Sesuni Sub-County, Butiru Sub-County, Bunabwana Sub-County, Bukhofu Sub-County, Bugobero Sub-County be created out of Bubulo County West, which has a population of 192,000 people.

The reason for this is that Manafwa has a large population of 432,008 people that demands services to be brought closer to the people and the difficult terrain making the area hard to reach.

Buhaguzi in Hoima District

The people of Buhaguzi petitioned the committee requesting for a new county called Buhaguzi East, which will comprise of Kabwoya and Kyangwali sub-counties with a population of 165,000 people.

The old Buhaguzi County will comprise of Buhimba, Bugambe and Kiziranfumbi with a population of 100,228. This is because Buhaguzi County currently is over populated with about 265,228 people. It covers an area of 1,897 square kilometres, which makes it difficult for effective representation and streamlining of administration.

Omoro

The people of Omoro County petitioned the committee to consider splitting the county into two, namely Tochito and Omoro County.

Before I go to category B, I would like to say that we put those I have just talked about in category A because we think they are very critical and urgent to consider.

The second category is Buyende District, which also brought a petition and Buyende West brought the petition to be split to create Budiope Central comprising of Buyende Town Council and Buyende Sub-County and Budiope West County comprising of Kidera Sub-County and Nkondo Sub-County.

Bugangaizi South County also brought a petition and they were requesting to split Bugangaizi West County into two to create Bugangaizi West County and Bugangaizi South County.

Ngora brought a petition seeking to create a new county out of Ngora called Kapir, consisting of Mukura, Agirigiroi, Adul, Mukura Town Council. 

Mubende District was complaining, when Mubende was already considered that the Kitenga Sub-County was excluded from the petition.

Soi in Kween District

We received a petition from Soi that the proposed county will consist of two sub-counties - Kiriki and Ngenge - with 15 parishes and a population of 16,192 and this is because of the difficult terrain especially. I have already mentioned Ngora.

Pallisa had requested for two counties but at the moment, Kibale County has been given leaving out Gogonyo County which they had also requested for.

Bungokho in Mbale District

Following the council resolution, they had requested for Bungokho East County, Bungokho North County and Bungokho Central County.

Namayingo District

They had a council resolution and they had requested a new county to be curved out of Bukhooli South County.

Amolatar District had requested that another county be curved out of Kyoga North County. 

We have made a general recommendation that we confirm the petition from the 17 districts that are requesting for these counties as presented to the committee and as captured above, also fulfil the constitutional requirements as the minister used for creation of the 39 counties.

The Ministry for Local Government should therefore subject these proposed counties in these petitions to further analysis, and follow the required procedures and ultimately create new counties as proposed in the near future for the approval of Parliament.

Before I conclude, we have been working together and this morning as we were finalising our report, hon. Nambooze indicated she had a minority report. Mr Speaker, I would like to report that there is a minority report.

I also would like to report that after we had signed our report, the petitioners from Ruhinda, Mitooma District withdrew their petition and they said they would go with what is in the motion.

I also would like to say that in the case of Namutumba, we received petitioners and because the minister brought an amended version of his motion later on, we did not carefully consider the main motion he had presented. I would also like to say that what we have presented for Namutumba District is what we took from the petitioners.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the members of Parliament who came to our committee and I thank the members of my committee. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think this committee deserves bigger applause because the time we gave them was quite tight. (Applause) They were given one week and they have only extended by three days, which is commendable. I thank the committee for that. 

Honourable members, it is 6 O’clock but I am informed and I have seen the copy of a minority report. I do not know whether we can receive it now or we deal with it tomorrow. [HON. MEMBERS: “Now”] Should we receive the minority report now? 

6.02
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am moving under rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure, which states that, “A Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of a Committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the Committee.”

Mr Speaker, the Minister for Local Government presented a motion to create new counties and urged that there is need for effective representation and streamlining administration, internal emancipation, reduction of marginalisation and bringing services to the people.

The minister, in his motion, did not show, with evidence, the kind of administration he is intending to streamline in the counties that are not addressed today. I note strongly that the county administration was abolished by the Local Government (Amendment) Act, 2013. It is therefore wrong, in my opinion, that the minister wants to front this as an argument.

Further, the minister asserts that there is marginalisation in some parts of Uganda. He did not show which constituency is facing complaints of marginalisation, from whom, for what purpose and whether there is no other mechanism to address the marginalisation other than by creating new counties.

Instead, the honourable minister’s motion is likely to create conflicts as in the case of Mitooma District where the minister seeks to create a county for Bakiga against Banyankole. This is dangerous for this country, Mr Speaker.

The minister further argues that the creation of counties is necessitated by challenges in the means of communication, geographical features, the destiny of the population and the wishes of the people. There is no evidence, which was adduced to show how a county, void of administration, will address the challenges of communication and geographic features.

Whereas Article 173 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, allows the local council to alter boundaries of local government units and create new local governments within their districts and whereas the Minister for Local Government tabled a motion to approve 39 counties, may I remind this House that on 26 February 2013, the Minister of Local Government tabled a Bill entitled the “Local Government (Amendment), Bill No. 2 of 2013”, which was adopted by Parliament and abolished counties.

It is my conviction that the Local Government (Amendment) Act, 2013, which amended section 45 of the Local Government Act Cap. 243 repealing section 45(1)(a)(i) relating to the county and repealing section 46(1)(a) and (2)(a) of the Act is still a good law and is yet to be amended. We are still convinced with what hon. Adolf Mwesige, Minister for Local Government told Parliament on 26 February 2013, in regard to the repeal of sections 45 and 46 in the 2013 Act that counties are no longer functional and that their functions are being dispensed by districts.

I am further convinced by the reasoning and persuasion of the Minister of Local Government that those counties will only be relevant for creating constituencies and where kingdoms and other traditional institutions exist, for the purpose of traditional institutional structures as he convinced Parliament to repeal section 45.

According to the Hansard of 26 February 2013, page 17, the minister moved that, “We propose that the local council IV at the level be abolished. The reason for this proposal is that at the moment, we have 169 counties and 111 of those counties have already become districts. We have a balance of 58 counties, which are not districts. We have also proposals for districts, which are already before this House. If those are adopted, the number of counties, which are not districts, will reduce.

Therefore, our view is that the current local councils IV are first of all redundant because we have district councils at the county level in the districts where counties are also districts. We also think that they do not have any more useful purpose to serve. Therefore, our proposal is that we wind them up.” I was quoting the minister.

Mr Speaker, it is my opinion that counties make no sense because when we were abolishing them, the minister laboured here to explain that the counties no longer make sense. To make that explanation, he was moved by the Member of Parliament for Tororo County, hon. Ekanya who wanted to retain Tororo County and this is what he told this House: 

“West Budama County is a constituency and Tororo County is a constituency, so it has a purpose to serve. The members of Tororo district council come from sub-counties; they are elected by sub-counties. So if you want coordination of affairs of Tororo County and West Budama County, that coordination can effectively be done by the district council. So really, to have redundant structures, which no longer serve any purpose, just because they must be there, would not make sense at all.” Those are not my words but the words of hon. Adolf Mwesige.

The committee, in the main report, argues that counties are necessary for allocation of services to the people giving an example of the provision of health centres IV as being one of the reasons they are supporting the creation of these counties.

Parliament must note that government departments have zoned this country into service units without following the local government structure. For example, the Uganda Police Force districts are different from the local government districts.  

Secondly, it should be noted that health centres IV is just a level in the provision of health care services and not where it is located. In being a health centre IV, the Ministry of Health is only describing the type, nature and classes of health services offered at that facility. It therefore follows that if we are to have enough funds, and putting into consideration the population in that catchment area, we would have as many health centres IV as possible, even if it means having them at the village level. The position of the committee is therefore misleading.

Again, the committee’s argument that counties are still relevant for supervision and effective implementation of Government programmes was properly dismissed by the Minister of Local Government. In his submissions to the House during debate on the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2013, while commenting on staff placement under page 38, the minister said:

“The distinguished Member for Serere has been a chairman LC V, so he knows how administration in the district works. An assistant chief administrative officer is not a county chief. He is an assistant chief administrative officer. There is a deputy but there are still assistants who can be assigned various tasks at the headquarters or in the field. So, you can have an assistant chief administrative officer even in a one-county district because assistant chief administrative officers assist the CAO in the performance of his duties.”

Therefore, it is not true that we are creating these counties so that we can send staff to the counties because the minister said that they work from the district headquarters. 

Still under page 40, the minister dismissed arguments that suggested that counties are important for representation of the people when he clarified that, “The position has been that when executive committees of sub-counties are formed, executives and not councillors merge up a county and elect from amongst themselves two people; the chairperson and the vice chairperson. That is the position now.” 

We are now saying that these councils have not been working and that the reason is because many of the counties, anyway, have become districts. Actually, the districts now occupy the premises of the former counties and they sit in the same premises. There is a district council drawn from all parts of the old county. Therefore, if you are talking about representation, the entire old county, which has now become a district, is really represented.

Additionally, it is erroneous to suggest that representation of any group of people for political participation, emancipation and enfranchisement of such marginalised groups can only be achieved at parliamentary level, as the minister would wish to justify in his motion. In fact, the reason why our local government structure includes other representatives in the form of councillors is to ensure that every person is represented at a policy making body of Government. Therefore, the 6,225 residents of Iki-Iki County can effectively be represented by a councillor at their relevant districts for a start.

I do not think that it is the intention of the minister and this honourable House to transform the National Assembly into a local council by creating seats in this House for councillors. (Laughter)  

It was upon this background, Mr Speaker, that Parliament granted the prayers of the minister and abolished counties in Uganda. In the wisdom of Parliament then, after abolishing the council, Parliament went ahead and repealed section 45(1)(a)(i), which provides for the existence of counties as administrative units. 

The Local Government (Amendment) Act, 2013 section 1 reads: “Amendment of the Local Government Act. The Local Government Act in this Act referred to as the principal Act is amended in section 45 by repealing the word “county” appearing in paragraph (a)(i) of sub-section 1.” I invite the honourable members to appreciate that the word used in this Act is “repealing”.

Mr Speaker, on page 8 paragraph two, the committee makes a futile attempt to run away from the law and attempts to justify the motion for creation of new counties basing on a quotation from the Hansard where the minister said that counties will exist as cultural bodies or constituencies. It would be absurd to suggest that Parliament abandons her own law and substitutes it with an argument made on the Floor while making the law.

Mr Speaker, I am a paralegal and not a lawyer like you but in the case of Hess v. The State (1895), the judge observed, “I have no doubt as to the intention of the Legislature” –(Interruption) 

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I rise up on a point of procedure. The honourable member is venturing into a matter, which is constitutional. Under Article 63 of our Constitution, the county has not been abolished. Rather, it is given as the basis for creation of constituencies. 

The honourable member is telling this House that the county is useless and is abolished. Mr Speaker, procedurally, are we correct to continue listening to an honourable member – is the honourable member correct to mislead the House and to venture into a matter that is constitutional and to try to undermine the Constitution, which we swore to uphold?

Mr Speaker, this matter has never been abolished. The county is in our Constitution and it is very clear that the Electoral Commission shall create constituencies on the basis of counties, as approved by Parliament. What was amended in the Local Government Act were county councils not the counties. Mr Speaker, procedurally, should we continue to entertain the honourable member?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that by an amendment Act of 2013, certain provisions of the Local Government Act were altered and among the alterations was the removal of county councils and also, the deletion of the word “County” in some provisions of the principal Act, which is the Local Government Act. 

Section 7(7) of the Local Government Act, which is being quoted, is to the effect that, “The district or city council may within its area of jurisdiction with the approval of Parliament and in consultation with or at the request of the relevant county council or city division council alter the boundaries or create a new county or a city division.”

The creation of a new county in section 7(7) was not deleted in the Local Government Act, 2013. It begs a question therefore that by removing county councils, was the process of creating new counties therefore - was there now no procedure for creating counties at all? The implication of removing the word “county” and deleting “county council” in the Local Government Act still leaves section 7(7) of the Local Government Act active. The only thing it does is to take away the necessity to consult a county council or for the county council to initiate anything because it cannot. 

However, it still leaves the responsibility for creating a county with a district or a city council under that same Act. Therefore, are we proceeding properly by examining the motion presented by the minister? I think we are because the counties, which are a creature of the Constitution, are not abolished and any Act purporting to amend the Constitution by infection would be invalid to that extent. (Applause) 

If an Act purported to abolish a creature that exists in the Constitution, that would be in error and certainly, on reading the Local Government (Amendment) Act of 2013, that particular Act was not carefully thought through and there was some stumbling and gambling in its enactment but that cannot amount to amending the Constitution. Are we proceeding correctly? I think so. Thank you. Please make your objections and we see how to proceed.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was saying that the judge said, “I have no doubt as to the intention of the Legislature. That which was intended by the Legislature was not said in the statute. The Legislature’s intent must appear from the word actually used and not from what the Legislature intended to say but did not say.”

Mr Speaker, in any case, how else can we tell the intention of the law other than reading its provisions? It might be true that the objective of the Local Government Act was to abolish county councils but in the wisdom of Parliament, in my opinion, we could not retain an administrative unit without a council. Parliament accordingly abolished the whole administrative unit by repealing the law as shown above.

In addition, Mr Speaker, one of the outstanding teachers of local governments in Uganda is the fact that local government organisation is a council and not an individual. It is out of this feature that the responsibility in local governments and administrative units, for example deciding the rights, wrongs and priorities of society and programmes is shared between countrymen sitting on the council and implemented by civil servants at that level. The action of Parliament of repealing the whole unit therefore was in order, in my opinion, because under the local government policy, we cannot have any unit without a council.

Mr Speaker, the minister moved the motion under Article 179(3), which provides that, “Parliament shall by law empower district councils to alter the boundaries of lower local government units and to create new local government units within their districts.” It is my opinion that this particular Article talks about empowering district councils by law. District councils were empowered by law and the law we gave them is the Local Government Act, Cap. 243 together with the amendment Act of 2013. That should guide the counties.

Mr Speaker, you have touched on the issue of section 7(7) but it is my opinion that the section talks about consultations starting at county councils or city divisions to alter boundaries or create a new county or city division.

Mr Speaker, in the current legal regime and indeed for all the resolutions that the minister presented to the committee, none of those resolutions was made by either a county council or a city division council as the law that the minister quoted requires.

Without prejudice to the above, I want to contend that even under the abolished law, this motion fails to meet the required qualifications because the law talks about consulting. However, what was presented to the committee as having been the source of the consultations that formed the district resolutions was a letter dated 14 April 2015 from the minister to selected districts. 

In that letter, the minister wrote, “The ministry would like to consult you on the creation of new counties/constituencies. This will entail your district preparing a short briefing outlining the following information… The purpose of this letter, therefore, is to invite you to a one-day consultative meeting at 10:00 a.m. on 27 April 2015 at Imperial Royale Hotel, Kampala”.  

Mr Speaker, I have attached that letter to my minority report. Considering the letter as showed above, the minister initiated and solicited for the resolutions from those few selected districts, contrary to the law. While considering the resolutions from those district councils, it is interesting to note that all the districts referred to the minister’s directives on creation of counties/constituencies. It was the minister’s initiative that they should create constituencies not the need to create administrative units. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, allow me to read to this Parliament one of the letters that came from Kamwenge. From this, Members might judge the spirit in which the districts moved these motions. This is a letter from Kamwenge dated 26 June 2014 written to the Minister of Local Government, P. O. Box – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which year?

MS NAMBOOZE: 2014. It is written to the Minister of Local Government and says, “I refer to your communication to me dated 11 March over the captioned matter where you were being directed by the President in the letter dated 24 June 2014 that you plan to implement the creation of the county from Kibaale County. 

In your communication, you requested me to:
    (i) Cause the technical people to study and determine the boundaries of the new county.
    (ii) Table the motion for the creation of a new county before the district council for its consideration and approval in accordance with section 7(7) of the Local Government Act.

Please allow me to inform you that we have determined the boundaries leading to the creation of another county in conformity with section 7(7) through our council both at the county council and the district.”

Mr Speaker, that is one of them.

Mr Speaker, allow me also – (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, I seek for your protection.

Allow me to read the extracts of the minutes of Kaabong District that formed the basis for the creation of the county and let honourable members listen. It reads thus, “The district chairperson, in his communication to the council under minute 705/25, informed the council that the meeting was convened by the Minister of Local Government to discuss or consult on the creation of counties. 

He also informed the council that the Minister of Local Government read the letter of the President to the participants. The letter was a directive to have the counties created from the districts that were invited. The letter also indicated that for purposes of internal emancipation and empowerment of the minority group of Iki-Iki of Morungole, the Napole of Kaabong and the Tepeth of Moroto, we were to be considered and the purpose of the council meeting was therefore to endorse the creation of Iki-Iki County.”

Quoting hon. Kahinda Otafiire when he appeared before our committee, he said, “The units were created without consultation and the councils sat with due influence with political interests only.”

The district chairpersons were requested to come to Imperial Royale Hotel by the minister and it is very unfortunate that the minister chose and selected a few districts over others. I think that this is very unfair and we should not allow it. If there is need to create constituencies in this country, everybody should be informed of this opportunity and all deserving areas considered. (Applause)

Stampeding Parliament 

Mr Speaker, even if this Parliament finds out that we are moving on well in processing this –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, even if you rule that this Parliament has the mandate to handle this particular motion, it is full of loopholes. More petitions are still coming with some demanding for completely new counties while for those that the minister proposed, there are petitions either for or against in relation to names, boundaries, location and other things. This proves that indeed the minister selectively sat down with a few district leaders without putting into consideration the needs of the rest of the country. 

The committee found it imperative that it needed more time to meet all stakeholders such as the civil society, political parties, area Members of Parliament and constituents from the affected areas. By 29 July 2015 (today), various stakeholders were still making fresh requests to appear before the committee and be heard. 

The committee had planned to conduct a fact-finding trip and reasonable time to write a report. Unfortunately, due to pressure, the committee decided to write a report so quickly that it is even by God’s grace that I have this minority report with me because the committee concluded writing the report at 1.30 p.m.

Parliament should be informed that the creation of counties has created divisions and conflicts propagated by politicians. For instance, the people of Ruhinda have lived in harmony since time immemorial. However, due to selfishness and conflict of interests by area politicians, they opted to divide the Bakiga and Banyankole. 

The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, while appearing before the committee, stated that, “We the Banyankole have been marginalised. Let the Bakiga go.” It is imperative to note that in Kashenshero Sub-County, in parishes such as Bukari, Kyanzire and Kashenshero Town Council, more than 60 per cent of the people who live there are Bakiga. If the basis of creating a new county is to let the Bakiga have their own county or constituency – (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to hon. Nambooze and I have heard her make statements that are sectarian and tantamount to inciting violence in the country without presenting a report from those people she is quoting claiming they are the ones she is speaking for. I am expressing discomfort - is she, therefore, in order to incite violence by making sectarian statements without laying on the Table statements from the people of Ruhinda whom she is talking about? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that at the opening of the presentation of the minority report, the statement to the effect that the purpose of dividing that was putting the Banyankole against the Bakiga. I expected the point to be raised at that stage but it was not. Now it is being repeated as being assigned to a Member of this House who is also a minister and substantiation to that effect has not been given. 

It may be necessary for you, hon. Nambooze to confirm that such a statement was made by a minister of this House.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, on that day, I sat with hon. Nandala-Mafabi in the committee. We had gone to present the views of the Opposition and the minutes have been laid on the Table. It is true that hon. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire, while appearing before the committee, did say that, “The Bakiga have been marginalising us. Let them go.” On saying that, he was insisting on why he wants a constituency of three sub-counties.

Mr Speaker, if you may recall the reasons that were given for the creation of counties – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have the chairperson of the committee to confirm this?

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Speaker, what is in my report here is about –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, was a statement similar to what is being stated by hon. Nambooze said by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs in the committee meeting?

MS KWIYUCWINY: No, he did not say that. However, a petitioner who appeared the previous day before hon. Nandala-Mafabi came to our meeting was the one alleging that this division would marginalise those tribes. It was not the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, assigning a statement like that to a minister and a Member of this House – if it is not true, it would be a serious matter and I may have to ask for further inquiry into this matter. Yes, the Member for Mitooma.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I thank you and the honourable members. I am the woman Member of Parliament for Mitooma District and the original proposal by the district council was for three counties. One of those counties would be the one that has now been proposed by Cabinet, which is Kanyabwanga, Bitereko and Kiyanga. The others would be the original Ruhinda, which is Katenga, Mitooma and Kashenshero and then what we normally call the greater Kabira consisting of Mutara, Mayanga, Kabira and Rurehe. 

What I wanted to say here is that the original proposal from the district was that Bitereko, Kiyanga and Kanyabwanga be a county. Therefore, this cannot be the creation of the minister.

The Banyankole and the Bakiga have lived in harmony and so I do not think that it is true that the minister could have said that. The subject matter is that the current new county that has been created was proposed by the district council in 2010. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The chairperson of the committee is right. When the minister appeared, it was not the same time that I appeared. I was sent by the Leader of the Opposition and on that day, we found one of the gentle persons, a petitioner, who was raising issues and one of the things that was raised was, how can the minister say that he wants to divide a constituency so that the Bakiga and the Banyankole are separated?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did the minister say those words in your hearing? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what I am trying to say is that when the minister stated that, I was not there. But what I am saying -   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Listen to me. What I am saying –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please let us sit and remain calm. The hon. Nambooze stated here that she was sitting with you when the minister made the statement.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, on that day I came in late and even the committee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So the honourable –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me make my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, please –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I came in and found the other gentleman, who I think was a captain or something in the Army, making his statement that “How can a minister say that he wanted to divide the district into constituencies so that they can separate the Banyankole and Bakiga.” That is what I got.

When I arrived, I said that if that was the case – the gentleman even went and called the press –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point that has been raised is that hon. Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and also Member of Parliament for Ruhinda County stated in the committee, while hon. Nambooze was sitting with you, that, “Let the Bakiga go. They have marginalised us.” Were you there? That is the issue. If you were not there – that is what he stated that he was not there.

Hon. Nambooze, who was there to confirm what you have just said? (Laughter) Hon. Nandala-Mafabi says that he was not there. When you make statements like that, you see – Please, hon. Mwiru! These are not simple matters and so leave your procedural point alone, please.

When matters like these are raised, they are serious matters. Minutes are not recordings of words of mouth and hon. Nambooze has stated on the record of this House that the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs said, “Let the Bakiga go.” Such a statement from a minister of a national Government is not a simple matter. So let us not gloss over it. She has said that she was sitting with hon. Nandala Mafabi who has said he was not there. It is not a simple matter, honourable members.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I think we have a dire situation here. First of all, even the report of the committee and the letter, which was read here from the President, seems to indicate that we are creating units to take care of tribes. The report of the committee says so and the President’s letter says so. Therefore, we are bound to have this dire situation whereby we are separating Bakiga from Banyankole who have been living in harmony as the honourable from Mitooma said and that is what hon. Nambooze said. We have decided to balkanise our country into tribal units – (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the issue we are considering now was whether the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs uttered the words attributed to him by hon. Nambooze. That was the point in consideration by the time the “Leader of Government Business” took to the floor. Is he in order now to deviate from the issue at hand and go into other irrelevancies before that factual issue is concluded?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, first of all, the hon. Wafula Oguttu, MP for Bukhooli Central, is not the Leader of Government Business. That is to correct the record. Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I think this is a point that we need to clear because I think it is important. Then go to it instead of making your own statement.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I thought I should make that point because we are going to have physical fights in this country because of what we are doing.

Indeed, I was given a report that on that day, people came from Mitooma and fought physically in the committee. As regards to the statement by hon. Nambooze, I read that quotation and asked her, before it came here, whether the minister had said this. She told me that there was somebody in the committee; a captain, who told the committee that hon. Otafire had said this. Yes, first listen – (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to hon. Nambooze, the gravity of the statement she is attributing to the minister - if it was ever raised before the committee, ordinarily I know that the chairperson is a sane person and she should have raised an objection. If she did not then the members present in the committee should have raised it then because those words are definitely objectionable to say, “Let the Bakiga go.” 

Given that the record does not show that there was such an objection and even the honourable member whom hon. Nambooze has attributed to have been present has denied it, I think hon. Nambooze is raising sentiments that she could have overheard but cannot necessarily be directly attributed to the minister. 

May I therefore propose that in order for the House to make a breakthrough and proceed and given that hon. Nambooze does not have that evidence, she withdraws that statement and we proceed? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we are dealing with a very serious issue and I expect, firstly, that the committee keeps a record of the proceedings and my colleague, the chairperson, laid on the Table the minutes. 

Secondly, there are recordings in these committees. If that was not done –(Interjections)- in the committees where I have been sitting, we have been recording. That is why the gravity of this matter calls for patience and this patience calls for listening as a key tenet.

Mr Speaker, a Member who does not have custody of the file; a Member who does not take charge of the recording cannot be told to withdraw before you look at that particular recording. She has insisted and we have procedures in this House. We have the minister that is being referred to. I think we also need to hear from the minister because this is serious and it touches him and his integrity. 

Is it not procedurally correct therefore that since the Member is insisting on the statement, we hear from the minister other than simply asking, who was there? This is because we have direct evidence from hon. Nambooze. We have corroborative evidence. Is it not procedurally correct therefore that we examine the record rather than stampeding a Member to withdraw when in her conscience, she is insisting? (Hon. Odoi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what point do you rise, honourable member, because the person who rose last rose on a procedural point? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. May you permit me to give a brief background to my procedural point?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it a procedural point?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: It is a procedural point. Mr Speaker, I attended the committee meeting that the hon. Kahinda Otafiire attended. I got to the committee before him and the chairperson of the committee requested me to allow the hon. Kahinda Otafiire to make his submission before mine and I conceded on account of his seniority. 

I sat between the hon. Kahinda Otafiire and a captain from his constituency and I was there throughout the submissions of the hon. Kahinda Otafiire. At no time did he ever make any statement attributed to him by the hon. Nambooze. 

I have never taken alcohol, I am sober all the time and I can confirm that I am sane. I have no interest in the politics of Mitooma but the problem is that evil will always triumph when good people choose to keep quiet.

The entire committee will confirm that the hon. Kahinda Otafiire never uttered the statements attributed to him. Isn’t it procedurally right therefore, Mr Speaker, that we prevail on hon. Nambooze to stop maligning a colleague and withdraw this statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am just going to appeal to the good sense of the hon. Nambooze to either come and confirm that the minister made those statements or not. That is all.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I do not have any personal issues with hon. Kahinda Otafiire. In fact when he came to the committee, he joked with me and he was laughing with me –(Interjections) – Yes, it is true. 

Mr Speaker, it is so sad that things that happened on camera where hon. Kahinda Otafiire continuously referred to the captain who was before the committee as a filibuster - I have checked what the word ‘filibuster’ means in the dictionary and it means a person waging war in a foreign land. We had no foreigners we were all Ugandans in the committee. He continued referring to these people as foreigners. This was captured and written even in The New Vision -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze -

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I insist that I have told this Parliament the truth.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That?

MS NAMBOOZE: Honourable colleagues can decide to tell a lie that this never happened but hon. Kahinda Otafiire said, “The Bakiga should go, they have marginalising us.” He said that and I am ready to stand by my words, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I think this particular matter is of a serious nature and I would look at the correct procedure to refer this matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I will make a formal reference of this particular matter to the committee so that an inquiry is conducted and a report is given to this House as to the statement that has been attributed to hon. Kahinda Otafiire because I think it is a serious statement. If it is attributed to a Member of this House, it is serious and if it is said in the committee, it is even more serious. Now that it is said in the Whole House, it is gravely serious that we have it on the Hansard of this House.

Therefore, an inquiry will be commissioned. The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline will have a formal communication from the Speaker to handle this matter and the terms of reference will be specific on what has appeared on the Hansard. Thank you. Conclude, honourable member.

MS NAMBOOZE: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I want to say that if it is true that we are creating constituencies as we are indeed doing, the provisions that call for the creation of constituencies are properly laid down under Article 63 of the Constitution of Uganda that provides that, “Uganda shall be divided into as many constituencies for the purpose of election of members of Parliament as Parliament may prescribe; and each constituency shall be represented by one member of Parliament. 

(2) When demarcating constituencies for the purpose of clause (1) of this Article, the Electoral Commission shall ensure that each county, as approved by Parliament, has at least one member of Parliament.” 

However, for the purpose of this debate and in the interest of time, I want to say that the Constitution provides that once we have a national census, the Electoral Commission is supposed to look at the results of the national census and consider altering the boundaries of the constituencies.

Mr Speaker, this is the procedure for creation of constituencies; that the Electoral Commission looks at the results of the national census and bases on that to create constituencies.

I therefore wish to propose:
That the Ministry of Local Government has no locus to move this motion as the local government units, which can be created under the Ministry of Local Government in section 45, as amended, do not include counties. 

That hidden motive of this obvious legal breach by the minister is usurping the powers of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs through whom the Electoral Commission can access Parliament for such purposes as to create counties as constituencies under Article 63.

That the minister’s motion to create new constituencies is in breach of the Local Government Act, as amended, and the motion is directly intended to create new constituencies under Article 63 of the Constitution - All counties where kingdoms and traditional institutions exist and not administrative units of local governments.

Mr Speaker, I therefore propose:
i) 	That Parliament directs the minister to withdraw this motion.
ii) 	That Parliament tasks the Electoral Commission to execute its mandate under Article 63 to cater for those areas that deserve to have boundaries of their constituencies changed as a result of the 2014 national census.

Mr Speaker, in this we would cater for all those constituencies that are deserving. For example, the constituency of Nakawa has over 300,000 people but you see that it has not been considered for creation of a constituency but they are considering areas with 60,000 people. 

The constituency of Busiro East has 462,000 people. It has not been considered for a new constituency while we are considering one sub-county of 50,000 people.

Mr Speaker, I think that this is not fair. Let the opportunity be opened for the whole country and we look at the results of the national census with a view of creating new constituencies in this county. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nambooze, for articulating those points in your minority report or your departure from the main report of the committee.

Honourable members, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow, 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 30 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)

