Tuesday, 8 July 2014


Parliament met at 3.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR


THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I do hope that you have had time to settle down in your new committees and to craft your work plans for the fourth Session. I also want to report that the Business Committee convened on Friday and proposals for the parliamentary calendar will be presented during the course of this sitting.

Hon. Members, I wanted to touch a bit on the issue of security. On 2 July 2014, a sub-committee of the Parliamentary Commission resolved on the following interim measures as the Commission sorts out the security issues finally within the precincts of Parliament. I had indicated, before we went on recess, that the solutions being proposed were anticipated by the Parliamentary Commission and that is why we had resolved to procure an integrated and comprehensive security system that will not require humans to support the security of this institution. Of course, the delay has been because it was not funded but I do hope that once it is done, all these inconveniences that you are suffering would be minimised.

In the meantime, we are proposing that all the vehicles entering Parliament should be subjected to a thorough check and all the occupants in those vehicles shall be required to get out and go through the walk way except for the Members of Parliament who can remain in their cars but everybody else, if there are other occupants, will have to be subjected to security checks.

I want to appeal to the Members to appreciate that we are not living in very normal times. There is a real threat of security in the country and I have been informed that even now, there are Members who resist being checked. Hon. Members, I want to appeal to you for your cooperation. 

All firearms will be deposited at the armoury, which is located at the South Wing entrance. All persons shall be thoroughly checked also at the second point leading to the two foyers of Parliament, both in the North and the South wing.

Hon. Members of Parliament and senior staff - that is the deputy clerks, directors and assistant directors - shall strictly use the South Wing entrance and parking while all the other staff, interns and visitors shall use the North Wing entrance and parking. Hon. Members, I know that I have dispatched many of you to different parliaments and there is no parliament that has not got designated entrances. Visitors have their gate, staff have their gate and MPs have their gate. I know that because I have gone with some of you and that has happened to us. You are told where to pass as a Member of Parliament. 

So these messages running around that suppose I am going to the other place - Hon. Members, you have been to the UK, India and many other parliaments and that is the position. Entrances are designated for particular people. So we want to appeal to you not to object to this.

Hon. Members, I would like to request the Minister of Internal Affairs, when he comes to report on the national identification project, to explain to the country how our staff in the missions abroad will be registered because up to now, there is no indication that they will be registered. I think the time is expiring and they are wondering what is going to happen because they are Ugandans and they are there on official duty. Also, the Ugandans in the diaspora would want to know how they fit into this arrangement.

Hon. Members, the other matter I wish to raise on behalf of Parliament is the implementation of the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Act. As you remember, we did, in the first Session of this Parliament, enact that law. It was a Bill brought by the Government as far back as 2007. I would want to believe that the government had intentions of implementing it. Therefore, it is extremely sad that on 23 June 2013, two Ugandans were executed in the Peoples’ Republic of China after being found guilty of trafficking in illegal drugs and convicted to suffer death by the highest court of that country.

Hon. Members, many countries have got arrangements for transfer of offenders, for instance Ghana, Nigeria, Namibia, Tanzania, Mauritius, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Swaziland, Madagascar, Malawi all have legislation for the transfer of convicted offenders. There are also countries, which enter into transfer arrangements with other African countries. Others have entered into bi-lateral arrangements including outside Africa. Nigeria has entered arrangements with Thailand, Mauritius and India. The UK has entered arrangements with Rwanda, with us Uganda by the way, with Libya, Morocco and Ghana.

So we want to know what has happened to that law because - (Interjections) – do not worry, there is a minister here. We have got a Hansard and there is a minister there. Order, hon. Members! Hon. Members, the Speaker shall be heard in silence.

Hon. Members, the Minister of Justice has power to apply that law outside the Commonwealth because I would wonder, suppose 1,000 Ugandans were executed, what signal would that give to us as a country? So, I want to call upon the government to come here with a statement and explain to us why they are not implementing that law, which they brought to this House.

Hon. Members, I just want to announce that in the Public Gallery, we have students of Kakungulu Memorial School in Makindye East constituency represented by hon. Ssimbwa and hon. Naggayi. Stand up if you are the ones. They are there. “Asalaam alaikum”. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. Thank you very much.

Hon. Members, because we have been out of circulation for some days, I will allow a few Members to raise a few matters and I ask the minister to take charge since you are now the acting Prime Minister. (Laughter) 

3.19
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are a bit concerned that the Frontbench is without anybody apart from one –(Interjections)– the Frontbench has got only one minister and a junior one at that and we are discussing matters that are very serious and urgent. We would wish to know where the Government people are. [HON. MEMBERS: “We are here.”] You are not the Government. [HON. MEMBERS: “What are we?”] We want to know where the Executive is. Where are they?

THE SPEAKER: First, hon. Members, I want to confirm that there isn’t anybody. There is a minister who is a human being and also Minister of State for Environment who is sitting there. So, maybe I should ask her to give us an explanation about where the Government is.

3.20 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaaba): Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that there was a special Cabinet meeting at State House Entebbe but the other ministers are on the way. I came ahead. (Applause) [HON. MEMBERS: “Are you designated?”]

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you taking notes on behalf of the Government?   

MS MUNAABA: Madam Speaker, I am authorised to take notes on behalf of the Government. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Katoto, two minutes.

3.21
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please. There are important issues that Members wish to raise. 

MR KATOTO: Whereas all of us want development of our areas and want roads to go to our areas, it is a pity that some developments are not pro-people. For example, in my constituency of Katerera County, there is one place called Mukabanyankole; The Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Plan (CAIIP) officials went and sat with people and asked them to give them roads but again on signing the papers, they did not indicate that they were going to demolish houses. It was unfortunate that several houses were demolished under the guise of the document that was binding. People are sleeping outside and CAIIP is saying that people signed –(Interjections)– the CAIIP I and CAIIP II – these are roads that are being taken to the local council in our district –(Interjections)– if you do not know CAIIP, then you are not a Member of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR KATOTO: If you do not know CIAAP, you are not supposed to be a Member of Parliament and you are not on the ground. So, we would like the Minister for Local Government to come here and explain to us whether these people are going to continue losing their homes and houses without getting any compensation. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay it has been noted. Hon. Anifa Kawooya, two minutes. 

3.23
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise an issue about the misuse of parliamentary privileges. I raise on this point taking note that while I do appreciate the good intention of the Parliamentary Commission and your good intention to avail Members of Parliament with iPads in line with the Parliamentary Commission’s dot.com era, the rate at which some colleagues are misusing their iPads, posting unwarranted and sometimes insulting messages to colleagues - it is high time that this august House moves a motion to guide Members on the usage of the iPads.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MS KAWOOYA: Without going to a particular case or issue, I know that there is a policy on communication. However, I suggest that it is prudent enough for Parliament to come up with its own policy in order to avoid the temptation by some Members to “stoop too low” – to put it in hon. Jacob Opolot’s own words - and this is in line with colleagues trying to learn to manipulate the privilege that is offered by the parliamentary privileges and posting unnecessary posts to Members who do not want to be in receipt of this.

Madam Speaker, I am not against the spirit and principle of continuous learning but scandalous learning is very dangerous especially using our iPads. Honourable colleagues, emails say a lot about one’s personality especially if you look at the wording, spelling and the grammatical semantics regarding that email. Your conclusion is as good as mine; that the email is not worth responding to.

My humble prayer is that if this Parliament can come up with a policy on the usage of parliamentary iPads –(Interjections)– I said iPads. Madam Speaker, is it in order for the male MPs to misuse the word iPad and to insult or make demeaning jokes under the parliamentary privileges? 

Honourable colleagues, it is my humble prayer that we respect the views of all members of Parliament here and I call upon you to support me that this Parliament passes a policy in regulation of the usage of our iPads. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have noted the concerns about insulting messages that are also unsolicited, being sent to members. The Commission will investigate it and we shall update you on how we shall move. Hon. Amongi and hon. Okumu.

3.27
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter that has a been in the press in respect to the transfer of female police officers who, according to the reasons advanced, were transferred from the parliamentary service and the Parliamentary Commission because some of them were pregnant and some of them had just given birth and were finishing their leave to come back to work. The four are Mirembe Rosette, Aliase Namubiru, Christine Nakirya and Peace Mary. 

Madam Speaker, while the Commission made a quick decision and wrote a letter for these women to be brought back, nothing has been so far done by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Subsequently, it also came to our notice that there is an alleged regulation by the Police indicating that female officers who have been recruited are not allowed to get pregnant within the first four years. 

Madam Speaker, in relation to that, I note that this is in total contradiction of the Constitution and I want to refer to Article 33 of our Constitution, “Rights of Women: 
    1) Women shall be accorded full and equal dignity of the person with men. 
    2) The State shall provide the facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women to enable them to realise their full potential and advancement. 
    3) The State shall protect women and their rights taking into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in society”. 

With that, Madam Speaker, I plead with you as the chairperson to ensure that this matter is investigated either through the Committee on Internal Affairs, or through the minister making a statement because already, we have one of them who had finished her leave and the reasons being given by the Police is that they were being given lighter jobs because of their pregnancy. That reason does not hold because the one who had just finished her leave could come back to work because she is no longer pregnant. 

So, I beg to ask for your ruling, Madam Speaker, for further investigation and answer. Thank you. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am giving further information that according to the Constitution, any law that is inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution as you have highlighted is null and void. So they cannot be quoting the Police Act when it is inconsistent with the Constitution. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just want to remind the House that in the Seventh Parliament, we had a battle over the UPDF Act. They had brought that provision; we battled for seven months until we removed it. So we shall ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to bring a statement this week.

3.31
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Reprehensive, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I think it is becoming a habit for employers to underrate women. As I speak right now, I have received information from the workers of Mweya Safari Lodge that beginning tomorrow, the female employees of Mweya Safari Lodge who have children who are over one year old should remove their children from the staff quarters of the hotel. A circular has been circulated by the administration of the hotel that they will only allow their female staff to keep their children in the premises of the hotel until the age of 12 months. Everybody is aware that a child is supposed to breastfeed for at least two years. 

So when an investor orders female workers to part ways with their children at the age of 12 months, then such investors should also be investigated. They want our children to be malnourished and we think it is a regulation targeting women to ensure that women do not work but stay at home and breast feed. 

Madam Speaker, the female workers of Mweya Safari Lodge are asking this House to intervene in this matter to ensure that the dignity of women is restored. So what happened in Parliament here could spill over to the whole country and the employers can say, “If it happened in Parliament, why can’t we also do the same?” So, urgent action needs to be taken to arrest the situation in Mweya Safari Lodge. 

THE SPEAKER: That also is a violation of the rights of both the children and the mothers because they are being forcefully separated. Can we ask the Minister for Tourism to come and explain that matter to us here so that we can debate it and see where they are getting the authority from. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am getting a little bit uncomfortable with the way we are proceeding on the previous issue. I wonder whether it was not procedurally right for the Parliamentary Commission to interrogate the matter and come up with a report because the way facts were coming out looks as if there was unfairness in the way the matter was conducted. So, I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker, whether it was not procedurally right for us to come out more clearly. It seems as if Parliament is going to start taking decisions of such nature but if there was a report of the Commission, then we would base on that to pronounce ourselves on the matter. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall give you a response tomorrow on that.

3.35
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. About a week ago, the Government of South Sudan expelled all Ugandan taxi drivers, allegedly that those jobs are meant for South Sudanese. Some time back, all our boda-boda riders who had ventured into South Sudan were also chased away on such excuses. I am concerned that foreign policy matters and involvement of other countries always take the interest of their people. In South Sudan, we have our whole Army protecting the Government of South Sudan to remain in power. We have continued to give them everything at our own cost - at the cost of Ugandan taxpayers. It is sad that when such a thing takes place, when ordinary Ugandans are being expelled, the Government just keeps quiet and looks on. 

If the South Sudan Government had also expelled the UPDF from their country, then we would know that they do not want any Ugandans to work in South Sudan. On this note, therefore, Madam Speaker, I am requesting the Ministry of Foreign Affairs –(Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Reagan Okumu. Madam Speaker, it did not start with the taxi drivers. Some time back, I think it was around April or May when even the boda-boda riders were chased. You now see many CE number plates on our roads. Those were plying the roads in South Sudan. 

Not only that, even teachers from Lwemiyaga - we had three teachers who were expelled. It has become a consistent pattern that whenever the people want to expel someone, they expel Ugandans yet it is Ugandans that do the donkey work for them. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, there is a lot of concern in South Sudan; even Ugandan traders continue to suffer in South Sudan. I am sad to note that our Government is dead silent on the suffering of Ugandans in South Sudan. I therefore ask, through you, Madam Speaker, that Government comes out and explains to this Parliament and the country at large why its good relationship with the Government of South Sudan would end up in Ugandans being expelled from participating in trade, business and employment in that country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you may recall, when in December we received information about the UPDF deployment, one of the reasons that Government gave was that that deployment had been necessary to ensure stability in South Sudan because Ugandans do business there. So, Government should live up to their word and let us know how Ugandans will do business, big or small, if they cannot even ride a small boda-boda or taxi; we need a statement from the Minister of Defence.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, in addition to what you have just stated about our presence in Sudan vis-à-vis our rights as Ugandans working there, progressively and this is in the European countries – even when you look at what is happening in the USA – you notice that there is a fight between the residents and the immigrants because of competition for resources and employment. Whereas we ask what our businessmen should be entitled to when they go to South Sudan, we need Government to tell us what our local people are entitled to. This is important because we have so many small scale businesses that are being done by foreigners when actually such business would only qualify for the local people; they are now getting outcompeted. So, when the minister brings that response, it is an issue that we must address so that we get clarification about it. Thank you very much.

3.41
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of South Sudan is not coming here for the first time. I recall some time back I raised an issue here that a number of people were being killed in South Sudan. I have got so many people from Mbale who are running markets; who are feeding South Sudanese and they went to the extent of killing some of them. For example, they killed a son to a one John Kisukye but the government did not do anything. The government is keeping quiet on some of these issues.

Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come here and to lay treaties that this Government has signed with other countries on repatriation of offenders. But most importantly, I would like to suggest that Government of Uganda negotiates with the Government of China – we have got 52 people waiting on the death roll. Can’t our Government negotiate for their dear lives?

On a number of times, I have raised here that our mission –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you weren’t here when I communicated something about that issue; I said that already.

3.42
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Recently, Uganda acquired a prestigious position at the UN and indeed that was a result of fronting one candidate for that position. Our mission in Geneva was requested to nominate a Judge to represent us at the World Trade Organisation Court. This Judge was nominated in the names of Francis Ssekandi and everything was done. After some time, our mission in Kampala nominated another candidate in the name of Richard Karegyesa. Now we have two Ugandans contesting for that one post yet there are other countries that are fronting candidates too.

As far as our mission there is concerned, they have gone a long way in marketing Justice Francis Ssekandi. My question, Madam Speaker is: Are we really strategic as a country to have two people being nominated by the same government to contest for the same international position? Are we not likely to lose that chance?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that is a very serious matter. We direct the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come here and explain to this House – do we have two or one candidate and why?

3.44
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. About a month ago, it started like a rumour in the corridors of power that one of the key media houses in this country had been banned from covering the President and the Presidency by extension. The media house I am talking about is NTV. Madam Speaker, the Constitution, in particular Articles 98 and 99 duly explain the character and nature of the President and by extension, the Presidency.

The media is the heart of building democracy and at this moment, when we are still struggling to bring out the image of a budding democracy in the heart of Africa, we have a situation on our hands where certain sections of the Presidency – and I am not talking about the President but the Presidency - are coming out to ban sections of the media from covering the President. 

On one such occasion, on Monday last week, NTV was banned from covering the President while he launched the African Entrepreneurship Initiative in the precincts of Parliament at an occasion held in the Parliament Conference Hall here. Madam Speaker, I would like to believe that Parliament was not part of this act; that is not only arbitrary but also undemocratic. 

So, I would like the Minister for the Presidency to explain the cause and occasion of this unlawful and arbitrary conduct, which does not auger well with the rule of law and respect for media freedoms and people’s expression. This particular matter – let me take the information, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEMUJU NGANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Mathias Mpuuga, for giving way. The information I want to give is that this punishment was not localised only on NTV; actually, journalists from UBC were also suspended for broadcasting images of the President sleeping at that function.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I thank the member for giving us that good information. But the gist of my issue is that I demand from the Presidency, an explanation on the nature of powers that allow the Presidency to select who covers functions of the President. I am saying this because the President and the Presidency is not a private matter or about the President going about private business. His job, just like our job, is to act in the public domain and therefore under daily public scrutiny.

If there is a matter pertaining to their own professional conduct – I can inform the House, Madam Speaker, that no complaint has been logged against them - not even to their regulator that occasioned their suspension, meaning that the suspension is emotional and arbitrary. This House cannot look on when issues of rights and freedom of expression are being trampled on by sections of our own politicians in this country in particular the presidency that is supposed to be the vanguard of freedom of expression and the fountain of honour. Madam Speaker, may the Presidency explain to this country whether they have now chosen who covers what they do and why.

THE SPEAKER: Of course, in what you are saying, you are making some conclusions but I think we shall ask the Minister for the Presidency to come and explain whether it is true and what happened when the President came here.

3.49
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, here is a statement on the attacks in the Rwenzori region which I am moving under rule 45 of our rules –

THE SPEAKER: You are not doing what we agreed.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, on the days of 6th and 7th July 2014, a major tragedy befell the people of the Rwenzori region particularly in the districts of Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko. Some rowdy young men attacked the state security installations particularly the police station in Bundibugyo for reasons that are not yet clear. The person commanding the operations in Bundibugyo is actually an army officer known by the name of Col. Bazaaki and as per early this morning, the death toll had reached over 90 and as I speak, tears are rolling in the districts of Kasese and Bundibugyo. People are being humiliated and tortured. Over 126 are now in cells and very many scores of people have disappeared.

Articles 209 and 212 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda clearly provide for the establishment and functions of the Army and the Police. Unfortunately, the said forces have acted contrary to those provisions. The murders, violence and attacks and means of cruel treatment of Ugandans by the security forces clearly show how the purported achievement of the NRM is turning its head on Ugandans. 

The NRM instrument of security is now the ultimate instrument of insecurity to Ugandans. By the time –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we agreed with you that you ask the Government to explain what is happening in Bundibugyo, Kasese and Ntoroko.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I was just giving the background and then I give –

THE SPEAKER: But do not make conclusions.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, there are certain issues which require to be explained. If it is true that issue is about tribal clashes: 

i.) 	Why didn’t the attackers go for the Bamba community directly instead of attacking the Army and the Police installations? 
ii) 	Why didn’t the UPDF arrest the purported attackers as was done in Buganda during the Buganda riots when the Kabaka was restrained from visiting his subjects in Bugerere in Kayunga District?
iii) 	Why is Government deploying its security operatives in a selective and tribal manner? As for the case of Kasese and Bundibugyo, the Bakonzo who are in the Army and in the Police have not been deployed and yet other tribes which are there especially the Bamba and the Basongora have been deployed to actually extend their torture to the Bakonzo.
iv) 	Why has Government armed the Basongora and Bamba in the districts of Kasese and Bundibugyo leaving out the Bakonzo –(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, the situation in Kasese and Bundibugyo is painful to all Ugandans. Right now if you asked the Member to tell us the people who are doing this, he may not be in position to do it and that is speculation. This speculation is now sending signals to the whole of Western Uganda and it can bring more bloodshed. Is it in order for the hon. Member to incite violence in this country? You man, there is a problem.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, just ask the Government to explain what is happening in Kasese and close. Ask Government to explain to the country what is happening in Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko then when the statement comes you can bring your part.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to read the following prayers:
    1. That Parliament considers this matter as an urgent matter to constitute a select committee to investigate the actions of the RDCs, DPCs and Col. Bazaaki in Bundibugyo operations.
    2. Government must compensate families of the youths who were massacred by live bullets by the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces and the Police.
    3. Government should as a matter of urgency transfer the RDCs, DPCs and Col. Bazaaki from the district of Kasese -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please take your seat. Let me direct that Government – I do not know whether it is the Minister of Defence or Internal Affairs to come and explain to the country what is happening in Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko then we shall have a debate and then you can bring your prayers.

3.55
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Some time back, this Parliament raised an issue regarding the salaries of public servants. We thought the Government was going to handle this matter. For the last two or three months - that is May and June, the teachers of Serere and Kiboga districts, to name but a few, have not received their salaries. Even those who have got salary have received Shs 10,000 or Shs 15,000. Can we know from the Government what is happening? Can we know when these teachers will receive their salaries? It is a very grave matter and it will affect the performance of the pupils in those areas –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, to add to that, it is not only teachers; it is in the whole country. Two weeks ago, I was going around the health centres III in Soroti District and the same situation pertains. Some of them are receiving payslips but when they go to the bank, there is no money in the bank and it is being said that they have got the money because they have the payslips.

Others are getting money that they are not supposed to get at their level. Some are being underpaid while others are overpaid and some are not getting at all. Yet the minister stated here that it was settled.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, over the weekend, I did visit all the primary and secondary schools in my constituency and with no exception, there is no school that I went to and they said that all the teachers are on the payroll and they have received their salaries. Some are appearing on the payroll in turns. One month they are on and the next they are off. These are 38 primary schools and four government secondary schools. Yesterday, the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Finance, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, issued a press statement saying that the accounting officers should submit the lists of those who have not got salaries with serious explanation. That previously they submitted but without serious explanations. If I have not received my salary as a teacher, what serious explanation does the PS need? This is a serious issue and that is the information I wanted to give. It is countrywide. 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, hon. Okupa. Honourable Atat has some serious information to give us and we congratulate you on your renewal of marriage vows but you did not invite us. (Laughter) 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am giving information. We have just received this ministerial policy statement and I am just scanning through the one of the Presidency. If anybody would care to scan through pages 164 and 165, you will identify one of the staff called Irene Watega Karamagi earning Shs 96 million per month. Her annual salary is printed and it comes to Shs 1.150 billion. As if that is not enough, you may think it is a printing mistake but Anna Babinaga is earning Shs 96 million and Shs 1.152 billion per year. Rhoda Acen is earning Shs 87 million per month and Najjumba - this is in print, Madam Speaker. Florence Hashaka Kabahweza is earning Shs 87 million and others so it is not an isolated issue, it is not a printing mistake but it is a fact as presented here.

I am being reminded about Moses Byaruhanga but I do not want to make it personal. Some people may think it is personal but the fact is, just read your ministerial statements and not only the one of the President’s Office; you will be shocked at the amount of money people are getting religiously every month when others are not getting anything. There are people who are getting salaries, which could pay 1,000 teachers. This is the information I want to give the House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, please conclude. I want to move to hon. Baba Diri. Order, Members. Please.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Members. During the State of the Nation Address, the President said members of Parliament earn a lot of money; now we know who earns a lot of money but I want to thank colleagues for the information –(Interruption)– Madam Speaker, please save me from hon. Cecilia Ogwal and team. 

You can see how grave the problem is. Allow me to give this information; in some of these districts, some of these teachers are suffering because of corruption that is in the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service.

There is a case of a certain OB of mine which I want to give here. He was a hospital administrator in Mbale Hospital. The chain of corruption in this country is in the Ministry of Finance and those other ministries. They were using this gentleman, because he was a hospital administrator, to prepare ghost staff in the hospital. At one time, one nurse who was being used as a channel of money - the money would leave Ministry of Finance, get to the mother ministry, go to Mbale and then this gentleman would bring the money back to be shared in Kampala. However, one unfortunate thing happened. One of these nurses had informed her boyfriend who then wrote to the IGG and that is how the racket was broken. So some of these teachers are suffering because the officials in the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health want them to include ghost workers on the payrolls but because they have refused, they are being punished. 

This is something that this Parliament must have interest in and investigate. If people want evidence regarding that case, I can give more information because that gentleman was even convicted. He served nine months in prison and he has just left prison. He confided in me. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Of course, we have been having trouble with the payment of salaries of health workers and teachers and so on but let the Minister of Public Service come back to us on that issue. Hon. Baba Diri, two minutes please.

4.05
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is directed to the Minister of Works and Transport and it is to do with compensation of people and institutions whose land and properties were demolished during the current construction of the Arua-Koboko-Kaya road. As the minister stated earlier, the people of Koboko allowed for the construction of the road to start before compensation because we really wanted the road but sometimes, you compensate other people while some people and institutions are not compensated. I would like to know from the minister when they will compensate the institutions and the people who have not received their money. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We ask the Minister of Works to explain to us about the compensation as raised by hon. Baba Diri. Hon. Chairperson, Defence and Internal Affairs - maybe before she comes, I want to announce the presence of the students of St Kizito S.S in Bugolobi. Are you there? Please stand up. They are from Nakawa Division represented by hon. Ruhindi and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome - (Applause)

4.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to inform this House that the problems of Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko are spilling over to other areas in the country. All of us know what happened in Kyegegwa and Mubende. Three weeks ago, the police station in Mubende just survived arson. I, therefore, request that as the minister comes here to make a statement on Kasese, Ntoroko and Bundibugyo, he also explains to us what exactly happened in Mubende and Kyegegwa as well. We should not look at that issue in isolation but as a bigger problem. The people of Mubende and Kyegegwa are calling upon us as a committee to persuade the UPDF to help them.

In addition, I want to kindly request you that as a committee, you tasked us some time last year to investigate the issue of the Kasese tribal clashes. Indeed we did that and we have a comprehensive report. Good enough our report has general recommendations in nature, which can help the House to make a decision on what is happening now. So, I request that you get us space on the order paper to enable us present our report.

Madam Speaker, in the beginning, people had a lot of concern on the issue of South Sudan especially the business community, which is there. Madam Speaker, you allowed us to go to South Sudan and we collected some good information from there and we have a comprehensive report. Kindly allot us time to present it to this House because the Ugandan business community in South Sudan is facing a lot of problems. They have invested heavily in South Sudan and there is a trap that they are going into. 

Madam Speaker, they leased 14 acres of land and have invested billions of money in it and constructed a permanent market. We envisaged that after 14 years, these people are going to be sent back to Uganda and they will lose the billions of shillings that they have already invested in that project. So, we request that you let us report and then we discuss as quickly as possible and get a way forward. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. 

4.09
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much. Many times we have raised the issue on the tarmacking of the Rukungiri-Kanungu Road which has been a challenge to us, the people of Kanungu. But I know that Government applied for a loan facility from the African Development Bank which was approved in May this year and also, Cabinet approved that loan request. So, my concern is why the Minister for Finance has delayed to bring the request to Parliament because when the ADB team came to Kanungu on a pre-financing mission, they said most of their projects were delayed by Parliament; that the parliamentary approval process usually delays but this is occasioned by the Minister delaying to bring the papers to Parliament. So, I want the Minister for Finance to explain why she has delayed to bring the loan request papers to Parliament for consideration [MR MULONGO: “Information.”] I can take the information.

MR MULONGO: Thank you so much my brother, hon. Baryomunsi, for giving way. Madam Speaker, we have a similar situation in Bugisu; the road to Lwakhakha to Mbale via Manafwa is under a similar arrangement. We received a team from the African Development Bank about six months ago and they voiced their concerns and urged us as Members of Parliament to support the processing of the application for the money once it comes on the Floor and they feared - because they had been informed that if Parliament was very slow on this and did not perhaps approve of it – to which I gave my word that we would support in case the Minister for Finance brought the request to the House. But I am also concerned that since the approval in April, they have not made a move to come to the Floor. So, we are also very concerned that the promise of having these roads of Kanungu, Manafwa and Bukwo to be funded under the ADB have delayed so much and maybe they will never be approved or processed in this House. That is the information that I wanted to supply to my honourable colleague.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, our prayer is that you direct the Minister to come tomorrow and lay the papers on Table. I am aware that they are ready but the Minister is just dilly dallying and failing to come to Parliament for whatever reasons we do not understand.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister should come and bring those papers. But I just want to say that it is unfortunate that Parliament is used as a scapegoat. Whenever Government fails to do something, they tell people who do not have access to us that it is Parliament that is delaying and yet I think that we have done our work and expeditiously handled all the loan requests. So, I want to appeal to the government to do their work and not shift blame to Parliament. Hon. Ruhunda.

4.12
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am extremely worried about the state of the security in the country and given all these indicators that are happening, business is being hurt and this means that the economy is going to be very much affected. There is a terror scare that has been going on; recently, they talked of a terrorist attack at Entebbe Airport and all businesses came to a standstill. The people who are operating in malls are no longer making money because the customers are scared of getting into the malls and now the people of Rwenzori are suffering because the tourists have made cancellations. 

These issues we are talking about are really going to catch up with us because issues to do with security have got a much bigger effect on the entire economy and that is why we would like the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Internal Affairs to come up with a comprehensive report on this matter but also to allay the fears and manage the press because every time the press runs headlines of Uganda under attack, we are just missing business and the Uganda Revenue Authority will fail to collect the money and at the end of the day, service delivery will be so much hurt in the entire country.

So, I request you, Madam Speaker, that much as we are looking at issues of Rwenzori, there are bigger issues which we really need to combine and see that we are able to overcome. 

It would be unfair for me to leave without requesting you, Madam Speaker, to observe a moment of silence for the people in Rwenzori who have died.

THE SPEAKER: We shall do that. Let’s have hon. Kabaale, hon. Anywar, hon. Anywarach and hon. Ayena. I hope that by then, the Government would have come.  

4.15
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have really raised the issue of salaries but this time when my fellow MPs were talking, they were speaking about teachers only but we would like to say that when they come to explain, let them also include the area of Police because some policemen who guard us in our homes have explained that they take three months - some are called on phone to receive the money while some receive half pay. So, Madam Speaker, we seek that you intervene in the way the Police is being paid. 

Lastly, the same people gave me information – because I know that even if they want to be disclosed, there is no problem provided that they are saying the truth. On their habitation, for some people who reside in Naguru, they bath at night. The women and children cannot bathe during the day because of the habitation and sanitation. So, we seek that, Madam Speaker, you could maybe call on the committee to tour all areas that are hosting these people because their sanitation is really in a poor state.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. On the matter of the barracks, I think hon. Namugwanya and the committee can take it up as part of their routine works and report during the budget process.

4.17
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A few days ago, I was watching the news and was set aback from what I saw being screened about the rotting mothers in hospital. To make it worse, it was a case being shown in Kamuli but it is not only in Kamuli because this is what is happening in Kitgum District Hospital and elsewhere. As a mother, it was a big challenge and my question is, should women really die when they are giving birth? 

I would like to request the Minister for Health to come to this House and give us the status quo. Are they supervising these hospitals? Do we deserve to see our women rotting in hospitals without anybody coming with interventions? Madam Speaker, it is urgent and we would like to see this statement made here by the Minister for Health – and not only about Kamuli or Kitgum but for all the hospitals in Uganda and the status quo, the situation which our mothers going for delivery face and we take a decision to alleviate the situation. It is sad and appalling. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is a bit unfortunate; although that hospital is private, Government gives a subsidy to it. So, Government also supports the hospital. The Minister of Health will come and explain the health situation, especially about the mothers. The pictures were very bad and many people were alarmed.

4.19
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is in relation to the security measures that were made. Yesterday, at the southern gate, there was a slight drama that was very embarrassing. A gentleman by the name Tumusiime, supposedly the party president of Forum for Integrity in Leadership (FIL), I think he did not know of our new security measures. So, he drove to the southern gate. Behind him there were already two cars parked, ready to enter Parliament. He was told that he was supposed to use the northern gate. So, he was supposed to drive away but he could not even drive back. 

It came to my mind that the general rule is, all visitors are visitors and they must use the other gate. But if we have party president for DP hon. Mao, and then Gen. Muntu for FDC and Olara Otunnu and any other party presidents coming to Parliament, I wonder if your intelligence could consider together with the commissioners that these are not just ordinary people; they are presidents in waiting, whether they wait in vain or not. (Laughter) So, they should be accorded some respect and not have them subjected to the gate meant for ordinary visitors. At least they could enter with us here. After all, some of them were even Members of Parliament, like hon. Mao. So, I seek your indulgence. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, on that one, I do not agree with you. In any country, if you are going to visit Parliament and you are a dignitary, you inform the Speaker that you are coming to visit on such a day. But if you just drive to Parliament and you are a party leader, what do you want me to do? I do not know that you are coming and I have done this even in writing. I have told the Leader of the Opposition. If you are getting guests who would require protocol services, inform the Speaker. I would send a protocol officer to get them, but if you just drive into Parliament, no.

4.21
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance. Going to the battle front is one of the most unenviable things a person can think of. But in the last two years, children from Northern and Eastern Uganda, having no recourse chose to be recruited to train to fight in Somalia. It is sad that over 300 of these children, after being trained and after leaving their homes, for more than six months or even a year or two, their names are forwarded and they are given passports to go to Somalia. When the time for departure to Somalia comes, it is the names of other people from other parts of the country that are sent to Somalia. And when pressure is mounted on them, they say, “Okay, come back and retrain”. 

They have reported to me that some of them have been subjected to retraining for over three times - (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I had a similar experience in Soroti District. I was called by some of those boys who were stranded in Ssingo. They were being given gate passes to go home having undergone training for over one year. During that one year, they do not earn any salary or allowance. When they are given gate passes to go, they are not even entitled to food and they are not give money to take them back home. 

When they come back home, they are supposed to sell their goats and chicken because they are told to spend 10 days at home and come back. When they go back, they are told to undergo another training. So, what my colleague is saying is true. I have a list of them: some are from Karamoja, Teso and from many other places. When they called me, I had to find transport to take them back home. But before long, after we had spoken on radio, Government came back demanding that they go back to Ssingo. But they have stayed there for two years. Some of them have been deserted by their families; their wives have gone away because the kids cannot go to school. The man is not earning a salary but he is there for two years. For you to be deployed in Somalia, you have to pay the people who deploy; that is the information they give us. This should be investigated.

THE SPEAKER: I think the point has been made.

MR AYENA: The point has been made but I want to underpin it, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) This is a matter for which I call upon this august House to fully investigate and call upon the minister to explain, and in fact, pay backwards. Those who were put under this strenuous condition, they have lost wives and children; they have lost very many opportunities and they are a headache to us who are here. 

In fact, one time, I only restrained them from swarming into Parliament because I thought it would be inauspicious. But I think this is a matter that should be taken seriously. If we are left only to do soldier work, and yet we are still denied the opportunity to be paid for it, this is a painful experience. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if there are those who have those types of people in their constituencies, please, supply the names to the minister and we want an answer about those names; and you lay them here on the Table. 

We were still waiting but I think we need to continue with our other business. Item three. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE PARLIAMENTARY CALENDER FOR THE FOURTH SESSION OF THE NINTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

4.26
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to present the Calendar of Parliament for the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda, First Sitting of the Fourth Schedule of the Ninth Parliament from 5th June to 8th October, 2014. 

Madam Speaker, before I do that, please, permit me to thank you for taking into account our request to reconsider the security provisions for Members of Parliament especially when accessing Parliament. That you allowed Members of Parliament to pass through the gates in the manner that you have described, we would like to thank you. But also we ask that the new members of the police that have come in the premises of Parliament should be inducted on what Parliament is, and the people they are dealing with because you get people being sent away without even giving any explanation and without the courtesy they deserve while accessing these premises. I suppose the Commission will do this. 

If I may run through the calendar, starting from the start of session, on the 5th of June, we received the State of the Nation Address from H.E the President. On the 12th June, we received the Budget Speech from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. On the 25th June, Parliament considered and approved a Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2014/15 under Rule 141 of our Rules of Procedure.

According to our timetable, all ministerial statements under Section 6 of the Budget Act are supposed to have been laid before Parliament before the 30 of June 2014.

On 8 July 2014, we were supposed to have considered the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2013 and on 10 July 2014, we are supposed to consider the Public Finance Bill. 

On 15 July 2014, Parliament is supposed to consider the Motion that “Thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address of the State of the Nation Address by H. E, the President on 5 June 2014.”

Madam Speaker, in the course of July, we are expected to receive the first reading and reference to appropriate committees of the budget related Bills. On 17 July 2014, we are supposed to receive submission of alternative policy statements by the shadow ministers of the Opposition. 

Between 17 July and 12 August 2014, the plenary session of Parliament is supposed to adjourn in order to enable committees to consider ministerial statements on the budget.

Madam Speaker, a general debate on the Budget Speech exclusive on mover’s reply is supposed to take place in seven sittings of Parliament.

The presentation and consideration of sectoral committee reports on the ministerial policy statements under Section 9 of the Budget Act is supposed to be concluded by the 31 August 2014.

The Committee of Supply to approve the annual estimates of expenditure for the year 2014/2015 under Rule 146 is supposed to be done not exceeding 15 days.

The consideration for all stages and passage of the Budget related Bills is supposed to be done in the month of September. The first recess is expected to take place from 8 October to Monday 3rd November 2014 giving a total of 26 days for Members of Parliament.

The second meeting of the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament shall begin on Tuesday, 4 November to Thursday, 18 December 2014 and it will have 21 sittings. Parliament will consider the business carried forward from the first meeting and any other business to be presented by ministers and backbenchers. This should last from 4 November to 18 of December.

Between 18 of December 2014 and 2 February 2015, amounting to 47 days, will constitute the second recess of Parliament.

The third meeting of the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament will start on 3 of February to Thursdays, 14 May 2015, giving us a total of 45 sittings. The business to be handled will include: submission of audited accounts by the Auditor-General, which should be done not later than 31 March 2015; laying on Table, the Indicative Preliminary Revenue and Expenditure Framework of Government for the next financial year, which should be done not later than 1 April 2015.

Sectoral committees will consider, discuss and review the indicative allocations committed to them and submit their reports to the Budget Committee for the next financial year under Section 7 (2) of the Budget Act. This should be done not later than 25 April 2015.

But also, Madam Speaker, there will be the laying on Table, a three-year macroeconomic plan and programme for the economic and social development under Section 14 of the Budget Act. This should be done not later than 1 April 2015.

Madam Speaker, the Budget Committee shall scrutinise the estimates and reports of the sectoral committees and submit recommendations to the Speaker, who shall send them to H.E the President. This should be done by 15 May 2015.

By 15 May 2015, Parliament should consider available business to be presented by the honourable ministers and backbenchers for consideration. Those will be Bills and Motions.

The third recess, which should mark the end of this Parliament, shall start from the 15 May to 3 June 2015. I hope some of us will have the opportunity to get the reading of the next calendar after this one.

So, in summary, Madam Speaker, we expect to have 41 sittings in the first meeting. We expect to have 21 sittings in the second meeting and 45 sittings in the third meeting, making a total of 107 sittings. We expect to have a recess of 25 days in the first recess, 46 days in the second recess and 15 days in the third recess, making a total of 86 days of recess.

Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that is the Parliamentary Calendar for the Fourth Session, which will end on 4 June 2015. So, I put the question that this calendar be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, the Clerk to Parliament should distribute this calendar to all the Members and also members of the Executive.

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Winnie Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon of the Auditor-General for the following: 
    i) Ngora District Local Government
    ii) Bundibugyo District Local Government
    iii) Manafwa District Local Government
    iv) Amolator District Local Government
    v) Iganga District Local Government
    vi) Lira District Local Government
    vii) Alebtong District Local Government
    viii) Gulu District Local Government
    ix) Tororo District Local Government
    x) Soroti District Local Government
    xi) Napak District Local Government
    xii) Mityana District Local Government
    xiii) Moroto District Local Government
    xiv) Maracha District Local Government
    xv) Arua District Local Government
    xvi) Katakwi District Local Government
    xvii) Napak District
    xviii) Mbarara District Local Government
    xix) Kalungu District Local Government
    xx) Kumi District Local Government
    xxi) Kabale District Local Government
    xxii) Kabale Municipal Council
    xxiii) North Division Moroto Municipal Council
    xxiv) South Division Moroto Municipal Council. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Chair. Those will be sent on the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

Before I invite the chair of the Public Accounts Committee, join me in welcoming the pupils of Mubende Infants Primary School represented by hon. Ssemuli and hon. Namugwanya Bugembe. You are welcome.

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

4.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following embassies:

    i) Ugandan Embassy Tokyo
    ii) Ugandan Embassy Juba
    iii) Uganda High Commission Nairobi
    iv) Uganda High Commission Pretoria
    v) Uganda Embassy Rome, Italy
    vi) Uganda Embassy Riyadh 
    vii) Uganda Embassy Brussels
    viii) Uganda Consulate Guangzhou
    ix) Uganda High Commission Kigali
    x) Ugandan High Commission Dar El Slam 
    xi) Permanent Mission of Uganda to the UN in New York
    xii) Uganda Embassy Moscow
    xiii) Ugandan High Commission Canberra
    xiv) Uganda Embassy Abu Dhabi
    xv) Uganda Mission Berlin
    xvi) Uganda Mission Addis Ababa
    xvii) Uganda Embassy Khartoum 
    xviii) Uganda Mission Geneva
    xix) Uganda High Commission Ottawa
    xx) Uganda Mission Kinshasa
    xxi) Uganda Mission Copenhagen
    xxii) Uganda Embassy Bujumbura
    xxiii) Ugandan Embassy Tripoli 
    xxiv) Uganda High Commission Abuja
    xxv) Uganda High Commission London 
    xxvi) Uganda Consulate Beijing
    xxvii) Uganda Mission Washington DC
    xxviii) Uganda Embassy Paris. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know who made the error. I noted that the Uganda Mission in Beijing is the mission, the consulate is in Guangzhou. I do not know whether it is my clerk or the Auditor-General. It should be corrected to “Uganda Mission Beijing”. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay Uganda Mission Beijing.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank the Chair Public Accounts Committee and all those reports are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

DESIGNATION OF SOME MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES FOR THE FOURTH SESSION OF THE NINTH PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we were constituting the sessional committees, some Members had not yet identified where they wish to work. So, I want to propose the following Members to the following committees:

1. 	Hon. Kiyingi Bossa, MP, Mawokota South to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.  

I put the question that hon. Kiyingi Bossa MP Mawokota South be approved to work on the Committee of Public Service and Local Government.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsanja Patrick MP, Ntenjeru South, to the Committee on Presidential Affairs.
I put the question that hon. Nsanja Patrick MP for Ntenjeru South be allowed to work on the Committee on Presidential Affairs. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I also want to slightly amend the Order Paper. We had some reports on Supplementary Schedule 1 and 2, which were not reflected, so they will be added to the Order Paper.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Rose Namayanja): Madam Speaker, I would also like to re-designate some Members under Rule 176(2): Hon. Ntabazi Harriet is re-designated from Presidential Affairs to the Committee on ICT; hon. Amero Susan from the Education Committee to Presidential Affairs committee; hon. Kamara John from the Education Committee to Trade, Tourism and Industry. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members I put the question that those Members be approved as designated.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT ON SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULES 1 AND 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

4.46
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on the field visit to Aswa and Ruhengyere ranches. (Interjections) This report is available on your iPads.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that matter was on the Order Paper before we went to recess; it was saved.

MR SSEKIKUBO: But, Madam Speaker, the matter that was read out was on supplementary issues.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, it is on Supplementary Schedule 1. This matter remained pending in the other committee report we presented last time. If you listen carefully, you will get the details hon. Member.

Introduction

The Budget Committee, on 15th May 2014 presented this report on Supplementary Schedule 1 for financial year 2013/2014 to Parliament.

Approval of supplementary expenditure of Shs 2 billion for the purchase of 1,000 Ankole cattle for the cross-breeding programme in Aswa Ranch was withheld pending a visit of the committee to Aswa and Ruhengyere ranches to make an on-spot assessment of the construction works that were reported to have taken place in Aswa Ranch in preparation for the animals that are being temporarily held in Ruhengyere ranch and to Ruhengyere Ranch to physically see the procured animals.

The committee travelled to Aswa and Ruhengyere ranches on 13th June 2014 for the above mentioned purpose and now presents its report for consideration.

Background

Under Supplementary Schedule 1 of 2013/2014, the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank commonly called NAGRC made a request for Shs 2 billion for the purchase of 1,000 Ankole cattle meant for the cross breeding and conservation programme in Aswa ranch. The expected unit cost of the Ankole cattle was Shs 800,000 thereby totalling Shs 800 million for the 1,000 cattle. The remaining Shs 1.2 billion was expected to be spent on, among other purposes, the development of infrastructure in Aswa ranch and procurement of a double cabin pick-up truck, a tractor and implements and two motorcycles for use on Aswa ranch. 

The infrastructure to be developed included installation of water points on Aswa ranch, drilling and construction of boreholes to provide clean water for domestic use, fencing part of the Aswa ranch and rehabilitation of several infrastructure on the ranch, for example, farm housing, a spray race and the kraals.

The methodology

The committee was divided into sub committees. One group went to Ruhengyere ranch and the other to Aswa ranch. The sub-committee that went to Aswa had a tour of the ranch, held a meeting with officials from NAGRC and conducted a hearing with residents from the local community. Also present at the public hearing were some local leaders namely the GISO representing the Resident District Commissioner and LC III councillor representing Atanga and Angagura sub counties.

The sub-committee that went to Ruhengyere held a brief meeting with the Executive Director of NAGRC and farm officials. They also had a tour of the ranch. I wish to report in detail on the Aswa ranch.

Findings

    1. State of Aswa ranch

Acholi ranch neighbours Aswa ranch and both are Government ranches. The total land area covering the two ranches is 136 square miles. The committee found that the community living around Aswa ranch had encroached on some of the land and cleared it for cultivation and in some cases, settlements. Aswa ranch was chosen for the cross-breeding programme because the extent of encroachment there is far less than what is in Acholi ranch. However, despite the encroachment, the committee was informed by the community, some of whom were the encroachers, that the community members are generally aware that the land belongs to Government and is to be used for purposes of establishing the ranch.

    2. Fencing materials

The committee was shown a store that had 200 rolls of barbed wire that had been procured by NAGRC for fencing the land in Aswa ranch. NAGRC claimed that another 700 rolls of barbed wire and assorted nails were being kept at the offices in Entebbe. These were to be transported to the ranch as soon as possible.

    3. Infrastructure at the ranch

The committee assessed the state of several infrastructure due for rehabilitation and improvement including the garage, spray race, loading and off loading ramp, weigh bridge, water source and other structures. Most of the infrastructure was constructed in the 1960s and are in a dilapidated state.

    4. The water supply system

The committee was informed that hydrological surveys and related works that have been done have confirmed the absence of underground water at the ranch. The committee saw a dilapidated piping system and a water tank that formed part of the old water system, and was informed that the existing water system would be rehabilitated and water abstracted from River Aswa and supplied to the ranch. This water is expected to be reticulated and pumped into the 100,000 litre underground tank to be rehabilitated and then into the overhead tank from where it will be supplied by gravity flow to the ranch. A new water pump and engine are expected to be procured as well as a piping system. The pump house shall be rehabilitated.

    5. Ongoing work at the ranch

The committee was informed that so far, the following has been done in regard to this project:
    a) Six animal husbandry breeders have been recruited but not yet deployed.
    b) One thousand1 heads of cattle have been procured and are being held in Ruhengyere ranch. 
    c) Aswa ranch is being slashed by several youth from the surrounding community.
    d) NAGRC was embarking on the rehabilitation of the spray race, loading and off loading ramp, construction of farm offices and residences for staff and paddocking of the ranch on force on account.

The committee was assured that the site would be ready to receive the animals by the end of June 2014.

    6. Community involvement in the process

The committee noted from its interaction with the local area residents that there was inadequate involvement of the local community in the process of revamping the ranch. Even though NAGRC had held meetings with the leadership at the district level, the communities were not aware of the intentions of the programme and it would appear that the information provided to the district leaders was not effectively communicated to the local leaders and the affected community.

The area residents reported that the area Member of Parliament, hon. Odonga Otto, had interacted with them over the issues of the ranch and told them that it belongs to Government. However, some affected people were not involved. The residents expressed concern about their fate given that some of them had prepared their gardens for the planting season and yet, NAGRC had threatened to evict them from the land without adequate notice.

Observations

Fencing material - the committee was concerned that the 900 rolls of barbed wire procured for fencing the ranch was inadequate given the expanse of the ranch. The committee, therefore, recommends that adequate funding should be availed for NAGRC to fence off most of its land and reclaim the areas that have been encroached upon for the purpose of animal breeding, multiplication and restocking the region. In the interim, the committee recommends that a road should be constructed around the ranch boundaries to demarcate it and stop any further encroachment.

    7. Infrastructure improvement and rehabilitation

The committee is concerned that the rehabilitation works have not yet been started. The management attributed the slow implementation to the way the money was released; only Shs 1.185 billion was released in the second quarter for the procurement of the animals, their fumigation and tags. The committee recommends that proper assessment should be undertaken by NAGRC to determine the state of infrastructure, proper cost estimates obtained and the rehabilitation and improvement works done as quickly as possible.

    8. The water supply system

The committee recommends that the water supply system should be urgently rehabilitated to allow for the delivery of animals currently held at Ruhengyere Ranch. Furthermore, the committee urges the Ministry of Water and Environment and NAGRC to urgently develop and sign the MOU seeking to construct valley tanks in Aswa and other ranches.

    9. Ongoing work at the ranch

The committee notes that the preliminary work on the site like the slashing had started shortly before the visit. It appears that these works were done in anticipation of the committee’s visit and probably, would not have taken place if the committee had not visited. The committee considers that the target set by NAGRC, to transport the animals to the ranch by end of June 2014, unrealistic and over ambitious given the current state of infrastructure on the site.

The committee recommends that urgent steps be taken to rehabilitate the infrastructure and provide water supply before the animals are transported to the site.

    10. Community involvement in the process

The committee observed that the lack of adequate information on the project affected the attractiveness of the programme to the local community. The committee recommends that NAGRC should develop a communication strategy to engage the local leaders and community on the programme benefits and timeliness.

A sensitisation programme should be developed and sub county leaders and administrative structures helped to appreciate the programme. Furthermore, NAGRC should meet the affected persons and develop a mechanism of adequately addressing their concerns.

Long term planning for the ranch by NAGRC

The committee was informed that 1,000 cattle that were procured for this project and are currently held at Ruhengyere Ranch have since multiplied to 1,145, though only 1,000 would be transported to the Aswa Ranch for the programme.

Eight pure exotic bulls will be imported from South Africa to provide semen and for cross-breeding purposes.

The committee was, however, concerned that the long term business plans and goals of the ranch were unclear. It appears the interventions were hurriedly done without adequate preparations for the long term planning and conceptualisation of the project. 

The committee strongly recommends that NAGRC provides a comprehensive business plan for the ranch indicating the long term goals, target performance measures, inputs, outputs, strategies and interventions. The plan should be phased and funds for the entire plan provided on an annual basis. The plan should integrate animal breeding, multiplication and re-stocking for the entire sub region that was ravaged by war. 

Improvement of the Zebu breed of cattle

The committee observed that the Zebu breed of cattle with indigenous breed for the area covering Aswa Ranch would be more appreciated by the community, if the Zebu breed was improved for re-stocking Northern and Eastern Uganda as opposed to the Ankole cows.

The committee recommends that for purposes of re-stocking the regions of Northern and Eastern Uganda, the Zebu animal should be cross-bred with the Jersey breed, which is preferred because its size is more compatible with the Zebu and it produces a lot of milk both in terms of quality and quantity; yet at the same time, it consumes less. It is, therefore, more economical, practical and socially acceptable.

Ruhengyere Ranch

Findings
    1. The committee saw the cows and they were all healthy.
    2. A total of 1,000 cows were bought from the seller at a flat rate of Shs 1 million each. 
    3. A total of 145 calves under six months, which were still sucklingwere given free of charge by the seller.
    4. A total of 40 calves have been delivered since February 2014, when the cows were taken to Ruhengyere Ranch.
    5. A total of five calves have died since the cows were brought to the ranch.

Observations and recommendations

Status of Ruhengyere Ranch

The committee observed that Ruhengyere Ranch is very porous, allowing for encroachment from neighbours and wild animals at night. The wild animals could carry disease for the cows destined for Aswa Ranch, which in turn, could cause an outbreak of the same diseases in Northern Uganda where they may not be at the moment.

The committee found that the cows destined for Aswa Ranch are ready to be taken there as soon as the ranch has been sufficiently prepared to receive them. The committee recommends that NAGRC should ensure that Aswa Ranch is made ready to receive the animals as soon as possible.

The committee further recommends that Government should fence off all its ranches to curtail such encroachment and the attendant consequences. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that Parliament do approve the supplementary expenditure of Shs2 billion for the purchase of 1,000 cattle for the cross-breeding programme in Aswa Ranch as contained in the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule 1 of Financial Year 2013/2014.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Chair. Hon. Okumu, Abibiku, hon. Niwagaba - two minutes each.

5.02
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I interacted with the chair of the committee before they travelled to Aswa Ranch and I raised a number of concerns regarding that ranch. There are certain things he has alluded to which are not true. For example, to say that that is Government land is not true. That land belongs to what used to be Acholi district. (Interjections) You can cross-check from the Land Commission. 

So, there are issues – while the project could be well-intended, I think let us put certain things clear. There must be a way of a collaborative effort with the districts in the Acholi sub-region. You cannot just fly in with a project without involving the local administrative units in the planning, organisation and development. 

When you travelled there, you interacted with a few people. I think it is also not fair to inform Parliament that among the local leaders you met, were the GISO. Honestly speaking, what kind of leadership were you looking at, when you went out to look for local leaders and the example you are giving is DISO, GISO? I think that is also not fair for the people.

Madam Speaker, I do not want to oppose this project for the sake of it but I want second clarity to be put because you cannot start getting such a big amount of money and you procure animals when there is nothing on the ground; there is nothing in Aswa Ranch. Mr Chairman, you went there and saw it. If at all you went there, there is nothing!

I have been interacting with Dr Ssemambo over this issue, he heads NAGRC. We even agreed to meet on a number of occasions but there is nothing on the ground. So, what was the intention of getting the money, procuring these animals, when that place is just a bush? There is nothing. Were there some deals? Because sometimes this is how deals are made in Government, to misappropriate taxpayers’ money, when there is nothing on the ground. Why didn’t you go and prepare the ground before you started buying animals? It is like you start buying clothes for a baby when you have not even got a wife, she is not pregnant and yet you are busy buying things for the baby and you say, “I am about to get married and then, I will get a baby.” Why do you do that? And I would only equate that approach on Aswa Ranch with this kind of scenario. 

The committee must be serious, go back to the drawing board, discuss - it is not a matter of saying that money has already been procured. Money must be procured and used properly because this is taxpayers’ money.

Otherwise, in principle, we would not oppose such a project but we want the process to be transparent and benefit not only the people of Northern Uganda because if this is going to be a government project, it must benefit the whole nation. It should not just be hurried because somebody wants to sell their cows, and because there is money lying somewhere and the end of the financial year has come, you want to grab that money and throw it there.

This will be very unfair to the taxpayers, Madam Speaker. Aswa Ranch actually borders my constituency. Previously, it was Aswa County but when counties were divided, then from the R. Aswa the other side of the river, it became Aruu County. Previously, the whole of that Aswa Ranch and Acholi Ranch were discussed and agreed upon by the then Acholi district who agreed to use that as a breeding ground in collaboration with the local district because there was only one district. So that that being a cattle zone, things could work out.

So, Mr Chairman, you represent this committee, don’t be part of the executive. When they are planning their things, where they have made mistakes, you must be transparent in the way we do our things. Let us not endorse deals where we are not involved. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know, I was hoping that the chairperson would explain to us the point of controversy for which we sent them out because we were told that Shs 800 million was spent on the animals, and the balance was spent on water. We were expecting you to explain that you are satisfied that this amount was spent on ABCD but you have not said that - and the cost- that is what we are expecting to hear. (Applause)

MR LUGOLOOBI:  Madam Speaker, I thought that we were very clear; we indicated that whereas we expected to find this infrastructure developed, we did not find it developed. That we made very clear. (Interjections) It is not for me to answer where the money is at the moment.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear hon. Ababiku first. Two minutes each.

5.08
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is need for us to change our methods of allocating money to programmes. At committee level, we are faced with a lot of challenges. Money is voted and appropriated here. But at the end, projects are abandoned because they are not well planned, therefore, not well conceived and owned by the people. So, the objectives are not attained at the end. 

In relation to what has just been presented, I will not support giving money to start a project where we are not sure; we have other priorities where we are sure. Let the committee come out clearly to convince us why we should give them this money because what they have read here actually disqualifies their request. Let the chairperson tell us why we should give them this money. 

Furthermore, I would like to know why the cows produced will not be part of the animals to be taken to Aswa ranch. I heard in the report that animals were produced and kept somewhere- they kept producing. But if they are supposed to be taken to Aswa, the cows would not go with the others. Why is this - (Interruption)

MR WAMAKUYU: The information I would like to give to the House is that the arrangement to procure animals will be 5,000 for breeding. So far, they have procured only 1,000. Now, the 145 calves – because they are still working on the ranch, they decided to transfer the big ones to Ruhengyere, because there are other animals on Ruhengyere farm. So, that is the information I wanted to give. But in the long run, they will be 5,000 animals. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you for the information but I think what you have given me tells me that my people will be deprived. If the cows have produced calves and you are sure that animals will be kept from that site, then plan for them adequately. Otherwise, this shows how poorly we have planned for this programme. 

Lastly, this cross breeding programme is a good one if well planned. When we talk about Northern Uganda and Eastern Uganda, the districts are too many. Aswa ranch cannot be assessed by all the districts surrounding Aswa. So, are there any plans by government to make sure that there are other sites so that other districts can also benefit from this cross-breeding? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.12
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you read this report, you shudder and I wonder why the committee chose to make recommendations that contradict their findings. We seem to be rushing to support a motion whose sole purpose is to benefit the one who has supplied the 1,000 Ankole cows at a price of Shs 1 million each instead of the Shs 800,000 they had earlier sourced. 

We seem to support a report of a committee that wants cows to be transported to Aswa ranch when the water system is not replaced. The committee report itself found the infrastructure there to be dilapidated; to be that of the 1960s. And yet you have already purchased cows to send them to an area where the infrastructure is that of the 1960s. To me, this is a project that was not properly thought out; a project that was meant to benefit just one person or only those people who are supplying the Ankole cows. 

To make matters worse, the committee itself finds the Ankole cows unsuitable; it is recommending cross-breeding like the Zebu and the like, but not the Ankole cows. So, this report should not only be rejected but we need the committee to go down, sit with these people and they make a proper programme of how they would want this ranch to be revamped before you spend money on the cows. 

The findings are contradicting the recommendations and I would personally oppose the recommendation that we allocate this money to a project, which is doomed to failure. (Mrs Ogwal rose _)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Ogwal, you know that you are supposed to ask the Member on the Floor to allow you. But you allowed him to finish – but he has finished. (Laughter) You cannot just give information. Okay, let us allow her to give information; now, you are giving information to me. (Laughter) 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you recall that as a member of the committee, I raised concern about that report and that is why you had to instruct the committee to go back and visit Aswa ranch. I want to confirm that I was part of the team that went to Aswa Ranch. However, I am very surprised that the chairperson did not raise the critical issues that were of great concern to the committee and to the community. One of them came in paragraph six, which says that the residents were not aware of that project. That is very important. If a big project like Aswa ranch is being rehabilitated and the residents in and around Aswa are not aware, that means that project is, therefore, not relevant to the community. 

The second issue is, when you directed the committee to go to Aswa, that is when they started slashing. We actually arrived when the slashing was going on; the grass was still green. They were just gathering people from the town brought by the DISO in a lorry to come and slash. (Laughter)

So, Madam Speaker, I am really concerned. This issue came out to assist Members of Parliament to decide whether we are doing the right thing. 

The committee was also informed that the sector committee – the committee responsible for agriculture had actually advised the husbandry section of this project to come up with a well-written project for the rehabilitation of all ranches in the whole of Uganda. They said they would not provide the money unless the project was brought before Parliament. Now, nobody knows where the Aswa ranch project has come from; it is not provided for in the previous budget, it is not anywhere. Nobody knows where the money is coming from. 

But more importantly, the information which should concern all of us is that we were taken to a store, a private store in town, and we were shown 200 rolls of barbed wire and told that “These are the wires for the Aswa Ranch.” They opened a private store and they told us that that barbed wire was 200 rolls and they were for Aswa Ranch. There is no way you can verify that those rolls in those private stores belonged to the Aswa Ranch, that is very important! Then you are even told that, “By the way, 900 rolls are still somewhere in the offices and in and around Entebbe.” There is no way you can verify that if you go to Entebbe and you open somebody’s office or house, you will find barbed wire meant for Aswa Ranch.

So, Madam Speaker, I am very concerned and I want to provide the correct information because on the ground - the chairman should have told Parliament that we found nothing on the ground and that there was no activity prior to our  going there and that we left no activity. There is no water although we were told that money was already provided for –(Ssekitoleko rose_)

HON. MEMBERS: He is a Member.

THE SPEAKER: Are you a Member?

MR SSEKITOLEKO: I am not a Member, Madam Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure provide for a minority report where a Member who feels dissatisfied with the main report can raise a minority report.

The issues that the honourable member holding the Floor is raising qualify to constitute a minority report. So, would it be procedurally right for her to move in that direction without a formal minority report?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether she did not raise a minority against the main report because this is now the second report after the other one they brought. I believe she had a minority to the first one – yes she had it – she did not bring it?

MR SSEKITOLEKO: She did not bring a minority report.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, there was no minority report and I think I should inform the House that the hon. Cecilia Ogwal travelled in a different car and arrived late at the venue. In fact, she arrived after we had inspected the barbed wires and after we had long held a meeting with the community - (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think the chairperson has to state to the House whether he has interests in this project. It did not matter whether I arrived after you or not. 

Madam Speaker, I could even say worse things than these. For example, he did not even want people to know – I could say worse things than these. So, you tell the House the truth. (Applause)

Can the chairperson tell us who was the owner of that store and who owned the barbed wire? How did he know that the barbed wire belonged to that project? (Interjections) So, is the chairperson of the committee in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had specific questions that we wanted the committee to respond to when we sent them out. But no one has actually answered them. You are starting around the issue.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I thought that we informed the House that the cows were actually procured and that they are available at Ruhengyere. (Interjections) We also informed the House that they had not actually constructed the infrastructure that was expected but that the process was still underway. We provided for all these gaps. And remember –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I hope that the chairman of the committee looked at the contract and the supplier of the cows. So, would you like to inform this House who the supplier of the cows is and at what price they supplied? And would you like to table the documents concerning the supply of the cattle to Aswa Ranch?

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, you will recall that our point of controversy was the cost per animal as reported in the request. We disagreed with that and we asked you to find out the difference between the cost of the animals and the supply of water. I recall asking whether each animal had its own borehole.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, regarding water supply, we have reported that they had logical survey, which had been done and indicated that there was lack of underground water - (Interjections) - and NAGRC was now pursuing the alternative of getting water from the Aswa River. That is what we have reported.

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, can I give a rejoinder to Chairman’s – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is known that Parliament operates through the functions of committees. Here is a committee that was assigned a responsibility on behalf of the entire institution of Parliament to get to the ground and feed us with factual information to enable us make an informed decision.

The procedural point I am raising is, now that it has become very clear before us that even the Members who went on the ground are giving us conflicting information, is it procedurally right of us to continue with such a debate when the whole House is already aware that the committee is not giving us solid information?

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the last words from the hon. Alaso before I give the ruling.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for affording me this opportunity. To me, it is not the recommendations nor the findings. But the fact that a committee can have very telling observations that on their own would give a totally different recommendation. But now here is a committee telling us that there is no water and that there is no functional ranch but that nonetheless this programme can go ahead. It is that double sense that we need to interrogate.

If the chairperson of the committee had to be honest with the stewardship given to him and his committee to watch over the way taxpayers’ money is going to be used on this project, he and the team would be honest with us to tell us what they found there and tell us they cannot authorise the use of taxpayers’ money that way.

Madam Speaker, we have heard from the chairperson that actually Aswa Ranch is not functional. We have heard that there is no water. But they did not even tell us about how competitive the process of procuring these cows has been. So, what moral authority does the committee have to recommend that we proceed with the project?

I think there is a force that has intimidated this committee to give us this kind of recommendation. That is why I would like to ask the chairperson of the committee whether they inquired into the ownership of the cows that we want to have this supplementary budget for. The information available, before I get additional information, is that these cows are actually from the President’s ranch in Kisozi. Is that the reason you feared to give the findings in Aswa ranch and the issue of not recommending the passing of a supplementary budget? (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: The information I would like to give is that the concerns that are being raised by members are really true and those are some of the concerns members of the committee wanted to sort out first. However, I want to be honest - I am a member of the committee - and I would like to request my chairman that we withdraw and we be given time to sort ourselves out because we never got time to sit down and read this report. I personally never received any invitation to read the report; probably, that is why you do not see my signature there. 

Madam Speaker, projects of this nature are very important for our people, especially people who come from a war ravaged region like us. We would not want to miss out on this project; we are not fighting it but we want all of us to understand what is going on.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, given the fact that most supplementary appropriation in this House is sometimes a matter of things that should have been envisaged, a project like this should have been envisaged, budgeted for and feasibility studies conducted. I think that there is not going to be a disaster tonight if we do not pass this budget. We can wait and restructure Aswa; we can go through a competitive process and appropriate money appropriately. I wish to propose.

5.31
MS EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, this issue being considered by this House has got far reaching implications. First and foremost, we are entering a budget period and the budget committee is going to lead this House into this noble process. Now, questions of credibility in the committee are beginning to come up and yet there are bigger challenges coming in future. This is going to create a bigger indictment either on the committee or on the committee leadership.

I want to propose that this House remedies this project by making proper recommendations. However, they can only do that on the basis of an honest report, which is owned by all its members. In the circumstances, I would strongly recommend that either the chairman of the budget committee considers reconvening his committee so that they can re-evaluate as a committee or this exercise be referred to the agriculture committee, which is the sector committee and which can study this and  give us a comprehensive report so that we know how to proceed. If we do not do this, we can get into bigger challenges in the future.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not good to attack each other on the Floor and raise issues of credibility. I want to propose that the Committee on Budget goes back and sits in its entirety, reviews this report and then comes back to us. You are so ordered.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET REPORT ON SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

5.31
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, before I read this report, I should have mentioned that the report I presented was not a one-man report; in fact, it is a report signed by all of us including the Opposition members-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are 30 members of this committee and I see nine names; so we need to account for the other members. Please, go back and look at it; there is no harm. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: I concede, Madam Speaker. I beg to present the report of the budget committee on Supplementary Schedule No.2 for financial year 2013/2014.

Introduction

In accordance with Article 156(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda where it is stipulated that- 
“If in respect of any financial year it is found-
(a) 	that the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or

(b) 	that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act, 

    (c) a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid down before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.”

Further in accordance with section 12 of the Budget Act 2001, where it is stipulated that-
(1) The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three per cent of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament.

(2) Where funds are expended under subsection (1), supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent.

(3) Any reallocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations.”

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to Parliament Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for FY 2013/2014 in May 2014 and an Addendum to Supplementary Schedule No.2 in June 2014. The schedule was referred to the committee for scrutiny and the committee has scrutinised the schedule and now presents the report to the House for consideration.

The methodology is laid out there. I will now go to the total supplementary request. The total supplementary request under Schedule No.2 of 2013/2014 totals to Shs 341.779,185 billion representing 2.44 per cent of the approved national budget of Shs 14.03 trillion. The total supplementary expenditure under Schedule No.1, which we considered previously, for FY 2013/2014, amounted to Shs 237.271 billion, representing 1.69 per cent of the approved national budget. The supplementary requests under schedules No. 1 and No. 2, including addendums 1 and 2, therefore represent 4.13 per cent of the national budget.

According to Section 12 of the Budget Act, 2001, the total supplementary expenditure shall not exceed three per cent of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament. The request under schedules No. 1 and No. 2 exceed the provisions of the law by 1.13 percentage points. This amount cannot be spent without the prior approval of Parliament.

Summary of Supplementary Schedule No.2 for Financial Year 2013/2014 by Category

The first expenditure category is recurrent expenditure, amounting to Shs 266.428 billion. Statutory expenditure amounts to Shs 0.948 billion. The total recurrent expenditure, therefore, amounts to Shs 267.376 billion. There is also development expenditure amounting to Shs 74.403 billion. All this yields a grand total of Shs 341.799 billion.

Overview of the Supplementary Expenditure

The supplementary expenditure requests under Schedule No. 2 for financial year 2013/2014 are as follows: 

Vote 001- Office of the President 

A supplementary funding of Shs 4.5 billion has been provided to the Office of the President of which – 
    • Shs 1.1 billion is to cater for the activities of the Office of the Minister for Security; and 
    • Shs 3.4 billion is to cater for classified expenditure for the Internal Security Organisation (ISO).

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence 

A total supplementary funding of Shs 170 billion has been provided to cover the shortfalls in the budget provision for classified expenditure to address urgent security challenges that require urgent attention.

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

A total of Shs 1.5 billion was provided of which- 
    • Shs 1.093 billion was to facilitate the hosting of the Tripartite Summit held in Kampala on 22nd January and other summits held in Rwanda and Kenya between February and June 2014; and 
    • Shs 0.462 billion was to cater for expenditure related to the hosting of the IGAD Summit in Kampala. 

Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

A total of Shs 10.325 billion was required to cater for the outstanding arbitration fees and facilitation to the Ugandan team in terms of travel expenses to London for the period January to June 2014. This is in connection with the arbitration cases filed by Heritage Oil and Gas Limited and Tullow Uganda Limited in London. This case has implications for US$ 414 million paid as capital gains tax.

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 

A total of Shs 8.8 billion was provided as additional donor funding for Financial Management and Accountability Program (FINMAP II) activities. The funding is coming from the following donors: 
    • Denmark/Danish grant - US$ 1,198,463; 
    • Sweden/Swedish grant - US$ 1,804,500; 
    • DFID/unfrozen funds - US$ 273,937. 
This is a total of US$ 3,276,900. 

The funds were to cater for the rollout of the IFMS to 33 local governments. At the time of presenting the schedule, about 40 local governments had been covered by IFMS.

Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

Under the agreement signed between Government of Uganda and BIDCO Uganda Ltd, Government is required to provide 26,500 hectares of land for oil palm development. To-date, Government has only provided 6500 hectares, which is planted with oil palm in Kalangala. 

Under phase II, Government is required to provide 6,500 hectares for oil palm development in Buvuma. A total of Shs 7 billion is therefore required for the purchase of land for the palm oil project.

Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development

A total of Shs 2.1 billion is required for the maintenance of the Land Information System (LIS). The information system is now operational at nine sites including six zonal offices of Jinja, Mukono, Wakiso, Kampala, Masaka and Mbarara and the survey and mapping offices in Entebbe. The operations are to be extended to new zonal areas of Fort Portal, Kibaale, Masindi, Lira, Gulu, Arua and Mbale.

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports 

A total of Shs 3.741 billion has been provided of which – 
    • Shs 967 million is a presidential pledge to enable Uganda Athletics Federation host the Third African Cross Country Championships; and 
    • Shs 2.774 billion is to cater for the shortfall in budget for marking and processing of the 2013 Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education (UACE) examinations by Uganda National Examinations Board.

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
A supplementary funding of Shs 2.709 billion has been provided to cater for the outstanding Government contribution arrears to COMESA for the calendar year 2013. This became necessary because His Excellency the President was handing over the chairmanship and if Government had not paid, he would not attend.

Vote 022 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

Shs 500 million was provided as supplementary funding to cover the expenses incurred in preparation for the viewing of the solar eclipse at Owiny Primary School in Pakwach.

Vote 103 - Inspector General of Government

A total of Shs 874 million was required of which, Shs 300 million was to cater for statutory wage shortfalls resulting from increased recruitment of staff and Shs 574 million is to cover non-wage shortfalls.

Vote 108- National Planning Authority

A supplementary funding of Shs 73 million was provided to facilitate the reporting of the newly appointed NPA board member, Mrs Mary Muduli.

Vote 112 - Directorate of Ethics and Integrity
 
Shs 0.351 billion is required to facilitate the clearance of non-resource taxes on procurement of eight vehicles to facilitate the activities of the Leadership Code Tribunal.

Vote 117- Uganda Tourism Board

A total of Shs 1.080 billion has been provided to cater for shortfalls in contract staff salaries, social security contributions, World Tourism Fair and facilitation for the board. The additional expenditure arose as a result of the restructuring of Uganda Tourism Board.

Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau 

Shs 1 billion has been provided to the bureau as facilitation to enhance the collection of non-tax revenue. The bureau requires additional staff and setting up of IT systems to enhance revenue.

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority 

A supplementary expenditure of Shs 708 million was required to enable Kampala Capital City Authority purchase Usafi Market located at Mengo-Kisenyi on plots 421, 418, 420, 5A and 5-9 and Usafi Taxi Park on plots 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 353 to 370 and 1602. These funds that remained unspent are part of the funding provided to KCCA to acquire land for development of markets under the job stimulus programme in 2011/12. 

It has been agreed that KCCA will contribute Shs 7 billion towards the purchase of the market. This supplementary will, therefore, enable KCCA to top-up and pay an initial instalment of Shs 2 billion on the said market. The balance will be paid in the medium term over the coming financial years.

Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics

A total of Shs 50.93 billion was provided in the current budget to prepare for preparatory census activities programmed for FY 2013/14, leaving a shortfall of Shs 25.137 billion. A total supplementary expenditure of Shs 25.173 billion is therefore required to cater for the shortfall in the implementation of the National Housing and Population Census activities. The remaining activities will be catered for under the FY 2014/2015 budget.

Vote 152 - National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS)
 
A total of Shs 30 billion has been provided to support citrus growing in Eastern and Northern Uganda; tea growing enterprises in various parts of the country; value addition activities under dairy cattle; and agricultural activities under UPDF, Prisons and Police in form of technologies and inputs.

Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) 

A total of Shs 81 million provided to PPDA as non-resource tax to cater for the clearance of taxes on a consignment of one vehicle.

Vote 201 - Uganda Mission in New York 

A supplementary funding of Shs 286 million was required to facilitate Uganda’s presidency for the UN General Assembly.

Vote 217 - Uganda Mission in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 

Shs 63 million is required to facilitate preparation for His Excellency the President’s visit to Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Qatar.

Addendum No. 1 to Supplementary Schedule No. 2 

A total of Shs 19.56 billion is required to cater for the wage shortfalls in the payrolls due to the erroneous placement of some staff under wrong payrolls during data migration from the Legacy System to the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS). Based on the analysis of the payroll, it was also established that the shortfalls have been occasioned by insufficient budget provisions in some votes while others were over provided. Therefore, no additional funding is required as this expenditure will be covered by the savings within the wage bill through reallocations.  The list of the votes to receive additional wage provision and those to be reduced to finance this expenditure is in Annex 2. 

A total of Shs 798 million is required to cater for the shortfall in payment of ex-gratia allowances to political leaders in municipal councils. This supplementary follows an issuance by the Minister for Local Government of an instrument to accounting officers to pay monthly allowances to municipal speakers, deputy speakers and municipal councillors effective 2013/2014 and yet there was no budgetary provision for this expenditure under the 2013/2014 budget. The list of the benefiting votes is attached as Annex 3. 

A total of Shs 42.08 billion is required for school capitation grant shortfalls for May and June 2014. This follows His Excellency the President’s directive to provide the school capitation grant for all beneficiary institutions two weeks prior to the commencement of the school term. Whereas the total termly capitation grant requires Shs 63.12 billion, the supplementary is meant to cover the months of May and June 2014, which fall within the FY 2013/14. The balance of Shs 21.04 billion will be for the month of July 2014 and would be covered under the budget of FY 2014/2015.

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority 

A total of Shs 2.5 billion is required for Uganda Revenue Authority replenishment of funds from the tax refund budget paid to M/s Curtis as legal fees in relation to the Heritage Oil and Gas Ltd arbitration case in London.

Vote 160 - Uganda Coffee Development Authority 

Authority is being sought to allow Uganda Coffee Development Authority to utilise Shs 42 million being additional non-tax revenue arising out of the proceeds from auctioning worn-out items including computers and vehicles, among others.

Addendum No. 2 to Supplementary Schedule No. 2 

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
 
They require Shs 19,974,000 to cater for salary arrears for the procurement officer for the period of July 2011 to June 2013.

Vote 137 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology 

They require Shs 4,185,160 to cater for salary arrears for the university staff for FY 2009/10 to 2012/13.

Vote 149 - Gulu University 

They require Shs 146,603,000 to cater for salary arrears as verified arising out of underpayment and non-payment of salaries as verified by internal audit.

Vote 153 - Kabarole District 

They require Shs 309,765,000 to cater for salary arrears as verified arising out of underpayment and non-payment of salaries as verified by internal audit.

Vote 550- Rukungiri District 

They require Shs 60,328,000 to cater for salary arrears as verified arising out of underpayment and non-payment of salaries.  Madam Speaker, much of this expenditure under Addendum No. 2 relates to wage shortfalls and so, I do not think that I should read everything.

Observations and Recommendations

Funding for the Supplementary Request No.2 for Financial Year 2013/2104

Sources of Funding 

The committee was informed that the sources of funding for the request are as follows: 
    • Shs 306.14 billion from domestic borrowing; 
    • Shs 8.80 billion from external financing, as we indicated above; 
    • Shs 0.92 billion from non-tax revenue; 
    • Shs 0.43 billion from non-resource taxes; and 
    • Shs 25.49 billion from reallocations within the wage bill. 

The committee notes that, as in the case of Supplementary Request No. 1 of FY 2013/2014, Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires all Government borrowings to be authorised by Parliament. Sections 20(2) and 20(3) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, also emphasise that loans for the purpose of financing budget deficits shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament. 

The committee recommends that in accordance with the Constitution and the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Government must bring a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise domestic borrowing of Shs 306.146 billion before this supplementary request can be approved. 

Sources for the Domestic Borrowing 

The committee noted that the domestic borrowing for of Shs 306.14 billion was quite high and wanted to know exactly what the sources of this funding were. Members were informed that all the funds were coming from the Central Bank through the capital markets. 

The committee was concerned that domestic borrowing could destabilise the macroeconomic stability and cause a crowd-out effect to the private sector borrowing, besides placing a high borrowing cost to the national budget. 

Sources of External Financing 


The committee also wanted to know the sources of funds for external financing towards the end of the financial year. The committee was informed that the governments of Sweden and Denmark as well as DFID have revoked their withdrawal of funding to Government of Uganda following the misuse of donor funds in the Office of the Prime Minister. The donors set certain conditions for the Government of Uganda to fulfil before donor support could resume. The conditions have now been met and donor funding has resumed. 

Reallocations of Shs 25.49 billion to Fund Part of Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 

The committee was informed that the need for reallocations amounting to Shs 25.49 billion arose from the fact that some entities received more money than was meant for them while the reverse happened to other votes. The committee was however assured that all the reallocations in question are from the wage component of the budget for financial year 2013/2014. 

The committee was informed that this kind of situation arose from human error, which may be deliberate or not. Many people get to suffer unpaid salaries because of such errors. 

The committee recommends that in future, a more transparent system of managing the payments and determining the rightful wage bills be put in place to avoid such anomalies. 

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority 

The committee was informed that Usafi Market was developed by Safi Net Uganda Ltd. The market is located at Mengo Kisenyi on those plots which I read, including the Usafi Taxi Park. Usafi Market and Usafi Taxi Park are jointly owned by Safi Net Uganda Ltd and Omar Nasoolo Sekamate who are registered proprietors of 14 out of the 22 plots. The remaining eight plots have been purchased and are in the process of being transferred into their names. 

The Shs 718 million requested by KCCA under supplementary expenditure request No.2 of 2013/14 is meant for the purchase of the market. However, the procurement process for the plots is still incomplete and there are encumbrances on some of the plots. Secondly, the price for the transaction has not yet been agreed to between KCCA and Safi Net Uganda Ltd. The asking price is about Shs 43 billion while the Chief Government Valuer put the value of the property at Shs 33 billion.

The committee was however assured that KCCA made it clear to Safi Net Uganda Ltd that they will only purchase the market when all the plots are in the names of Safi Net Uganda Ltd. Both the individual owners of the plots in question and the holder of the power of attorney for Safi Net Uganda Ltd have given irrevocable commitment to transfer ownership of the respective plots to Safi Net Uganda Ltd and the processes are underway. 

The committee observes that the project in question involves the livelihood of very poor Ugandans- the market vendors, formerly street vendors - who badly need Government protection against exploitation by market owners. The committee, therefore, observes that it is important for KCCA to secure ownership of this market as soon as possible. 

The committee recommends that the Shs 708 million requested for should be approved by Parliament. However, the Secretary to the Treasury should only release the funds to KCCA on the following conditions:
a) 	that they follow the procurement guidelines and fulfil all the PPDA requirements as per the letter PPDA/A29;

b) 	that they clear all the existing encumbrances; 
c) 	that they reach an agreement with Usafi on a price not exceeding that recommended by the Chief Government Valuer, which is Shs 33 billion. 

Vote 152 - National Agricultural Advisory Services

The committee observed that the Government position on NAADS is currently not clear. On the one hand, Government says NAADS should be disbanded and on the other it says the organisation should be restructured. The committee was informed that NAADS needed Shs 30 billion under this supplementary request to cover contracts that have already been entered into with suppliers of inputs. The inputs should be supplied as soon as possible because they are to be used during the on-going rainy season. The requirements were enumerated as follows: 
    • Shs 11 billion is required to support citrus growing in Eastern and Northern Uganda. It is imperative that the citrus is planted during the on-going rainy season so that the fruits are ready for supply to the Soroti Fruit Factory when it is launched in the near future. The current stock of citrus is far below the capacity of the factory. 

    • Shs 10 billion is meant to enable NAADS secretariat complete the presidential pledge for tea in Kigezi sub region and also support other tea growing areas. 

    • Shs 2.5 billion is to purchase 20 milk coolers under the presidential pledge arrangement. 

    • Shs 1.5 billion is to support staff and spouses of officers of the Uganda Police Force, UPDF and Uganda Prisons Services. 

    • Shs 5 billion to repay the budget cut worth Shs 5 billion that was made under the ATAAS project account. Part of these funds have been committed towards the support of special interest groups of veterans and procurement of maize seed under the food security campaign with Members of Parliament. 

The committee recommends that Shs 30 billion be approved to enable NAADS implement key priority interventions for boosting commercialisation of agriculture, which is key to our national development. 

Secondly, the committee recommends that the future of NAADS should be clarified before the consideration of the Appropriation Bill, 2014. 

Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

The committee was informed that in connection with the arbitration cases filed by Heritage Oil and Gas Ltd and Tullow Uganda Ltd in London, a total of Shs 10.25 billion was required to cater for outstanding arbitration fees and facilitation to the Ugandan team in terms of travel expenses for the period of January to June 2014. This case, as earlier mentioned, has implications for US$ 414 million paid as capital gains tax, which in terms of Ugandan shillings amounts to about Shs 1 trillion. 

The committee is concerned about the previous allocations to the same item over the last three financial years. They were all provided under supplementary requests. 

On 15 May 2014, Parliament referred the supplementary request for the same item under Supplementary Schedule No.1 of F/Y 2013/2014 to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. They were instructed to report back within one month with a comprehensive report on the subject. The budget committee expected that this report would offer an explanation even for issues concerning the request under Supplementary Schedule No.2 of financial year 2013/14.

The committee urges the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to present its report to Parliament before consideration of vote on account for the financial year 2014/15, although this has been superseded by events.

Vote 141 – Uganda Revenue Authority 

The committee was concerned that URA, a Government entity, hired a private lawyer, M/s Curtis, to represent them in the Heritage Oil and Gas Ltd arbitration case in London yet in accordance with Article 119 (4) (c) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is the mandate of the Attorney-General to represent Government in courts or on any other legal proceedings to which Government may be a party. It was therefore erroneous for URA to directly involve itself in the matter. 

Further, it was not the mandate of URA to pay compensation of legal fees but rather it is a mandate of the Attorney-General.

The committee recommends that the Shs 2.5 billion requested for by URA to replenish funds from the tax refund budget paid to M/s Curtis Mallet-Prevost to represent them in the Heritage Oil and Gas Ltd arbitration case in London should be referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. This should be handled together with requests on the same subject under vote 007.

Conclusion
The supplementary request sought for under Schedule No.2 of FY 2013/14 is for the approval of Shs 341,779,185,000, representing 2.44 per cent of the approved budget. The total supplementary expenditure under Schedule No.1, which we looked at earlier, for FY 2013/14 amounted to Shs 237.271 billion, represents 1.69 per cent of the approved national budget. The supplementary requests under schedules No. 1 and No. 2 therefore represent 4.13 per cent of the national budget. 

Subject to the adoption of a parliamentary resolution approving the domestic borrowing of Shs 306.14 billion meant to finance part of this supplementary request, the committee recommends that Supplementary Expenditure Request No.2 be approved as follows: 
    • Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 266.428 billion; and   
    • Development Expenditure – Shs 74.403 billion. 

The committee also recommends that Parliament takes note of the supplementary statutory expenditure of Shs 0.948 billion. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and members of the budget committee. I do not know whether members have any comments to make before I say something. Okay, honourable Kabakumba Matsiko; only two minutes.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, mine is a point of procedure, although I am also seeking clarification. There is this supplementary schedule for financial year 2013/14 and to the best of my understanding, that financial year closed. So, how is this money that we are considering going to be handled when the financial year closed with its books and we are already in a new financial year? 

I was also about to comment on the capitation grants for UPE and USE, which sectors have not received any coins yet we are already in the new financial year. So, when we pass this, will it go back to the May/June that he talked about? How can we handle these? I need some clarifications, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before the Leader of the Opposition comes up, I also need to be educated on the use of a supplementary. I am seeing things that I do not know about; I think I am confused. What are we supposed to be addressing through a supplementary?

6.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank you for being a good leader; you head an institution that does not go for supplementaries so much. 

When we were discussing Supplementary Schedule No. I, Government was tasked to bring a request for borrowing because the supplementary we were discussing was based on borrowing - 90 per cent was supposed to come from domestic borrowing. If Government has not brought in that request, then what are we discussing? We cannot pass a supplementary for Government to go and spend money that does not exist. 

As hon. Kabakumba Matsiko said, these are items that have been overtaken by events. We have already passed the vote-on-account and we are already spending. So, which money is this you are asking for? I also think these issues have been overtaken by events and in any case, Government should have brought in a request for borrowing because the law says that Government cannot borrow or spend money unless Parliament has approved. 

Allow me, however, to make a general remark. Government is abusing this supplementary arrangement. You cannot, for example, ask for a supplementary to pay salaries and you cannot ask for a supplementary to buy a market and buy cattle from the President. This cannot be done through a supplementary because we should plan. Has the system totally broken down that we do not plan at all and we just bring in supplementary issues that should have been planned for?

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that you guide this House so that we do not waste our time debating some of these things when actually, they should have not been debated. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: But what are we debating, honourable members?

6.15
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to say that what we are seeing now is nothing but financial indiscipline. If at this stage we are still asking for money to offset commitments of the last financial year when in the planning process those commitments should have been the first to be attended to in any subsequent budget, and to see the Executive coming to exhibit ignorance to us,  this is something we should not take lightly.

Two, the problem that I see in this country, through the Executive, is that of taking Parliament for granted that they can bring any request here and Parliament becomes nothing but a rubberstamp. How do you take a whole institution of Parliament, which is responsible for appropriation, Parliament that makes laws for this country, well knowing what the responsibilities are before us and what you should have done, and you still come thinking that we are going to be asleep and allow you sail through with such kinds of requests? I think this is very shameful. The Executive should just swallow the bitter pill and withdraw the supplementary request.

In any case, we have started a new financial year and out of the blue, grudgingly, Parliament gave you 40 per cent vote-on-account, not the one-third as is required by law. Still, you want to cause insult to jury by assuming we are nothing. I think, Madam Speaker, the institution of Parliament should stand its ground - (Interruptions)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not a member of the budget committee, but what I can say is that this money, as the word says – supplementary - has already been expended. They are seeking parliamentary approval. That is my understanding of a supplementary. After four months, Government comes here to tell us that they have spent this money. Unless the chairman confirms that this money has not been expended - 

MR WADRI: Thank you for your information, erroneous as it is. The hon. Ssebunya has given me very erroneous information. One thing which we need to know and appreciate is that for the last 10 years, Government has been running what they call a cash budget where money is committed. I do not see how a department or a ministry can go and spend beyond what has been given to its allocation. To say that we got this to save face and pay back what we have already incurred certainly cannot hold water.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now I am getting even more confused. I thought that the Minister of Finance had instructed accounting officers not to spend beyond what they have. Is Parliament retrospectively saying it is okay? Is that what you are asking us to do?

6.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Rt Hon. Speaker and members, I want to correct two impressions. One is that Government is making this submission in the current financial year. We did submit well in time during the last financial year but because of limited time and other activities that happened as the year was winding up, we were unable to debate this report. 

Two, under this supplementary request there two aspects especially in terms of wages. We are not asking for extra resources; all we are saying is, “Please, Parliament, allow us to reallocate money from this vote to another.” What happens with salaries of some departments or government ministries that budget in accordance with their agreed establishment by the Ministry of Public Service but in the course of the year, they are unable to recruit for one reason or another and so they have extra funds? Then there are those ministries that prepare for wages but they overshoot for one reason or another. So we are saying could we move these funds from one vote to another? I thought I should clarify this.

6.21
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you Madam Speaker. There is a big problem in this country; I have come to realise that the minister is not telling us the truth. Madam Speaker, we were in this House, and you were in the chair, and you pronounced that we are passing this supplementary for the last time. What were the three reasons? 

The first reason was that the Government has abused the supplementary aspect. On the reading, Article 156(2) says that a supplementary can arise where the money is insufficient or where need has arisen. What would this mean? Government normally submits statements and they normally show the ceilings and we get to know the priorities and unfunded priorities. A sane Government would only bring a supplementary to finance an unfunded priority within the budget. What we see is that these people just pick anything; I think they just go and get deals all over and say, “let us put this under a supplementary”. The items they put under supplementary could have been dealt with. There is a challenge. 

Last financial year, we approved a supplementary for payment of VAT for the seven markets which are being built; it was Shs 15.5 billion. We passed that request in this House; today, the contractors have not been paid the VAT and we have even paid penalties on VAT and yet we passed a supplementary when the financial year was actually ending. 

What is the import of this supplementary? We need to understand that. The law provides for three per cent but it is not automatic that you have to go and spend that three per cent. It must be in line with the law. Any amount over and above three per cent is illegal. You even have the guts to come here and tell us, “You know, we have spent…” 

It is even a lie. Under this budget, if you want to reallocate your money, the PS/ST can grant the authority. What you are asking Parliament to do is to spend money, because it is over and above the budget. This is what we must agree on.  For you to say that you are reallocating money - Under the law governing supplementary, you must show the source of money. It cannot be the Minister of Finance to stand on the Floor and say they want to reallocate so they are raising a supplementary. You do not need a supplementary. 

The law is very clear on supplementary; for you to raise a supplementary you must show the source of money. That is why when the budget cycle starts, the Minister of Finance issues a budget circular and shows that in our resource envelope, this is what we have.  That is why they set ceilings and each ministry is given what to spend within that. There are unfunded priorities within all the ministries; so for you to say that you are raising a supplementary, there must be an alternative source of money for which you want to use on this. 

In conclusion, we are not opposed to a supplementary per se but we are saying that it must be justifiable. This fraud that these people are committing through the budget process, someone one day will answer. We passed the vote-on-account and whereas the law says that the schedule we pass on vote-on–account and the release letter go to Bank of Uganda, the Ministry of Finance did not attach the schedule. They attached the audit warrant and the release letter and they have given some ministries 100 per cent of their budget and others have not got. 

I was talking to somebody from Bank of Uganda - you see, the vote-on-account was for all ministries to operate but you are giving one ministry 100 per cent, what if Parliament does not pass it? He said, “Ah those ones will pass”. We now even have a bad name in the public that we are just a rubber stamp. This process is being abused by the minister and Government. We need to rectify what is taking place, otherwise if we continue in this style we will be wasting time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know this is the month of Ramadan and I need to release the Muslim colleagues; we need to really conclude.

6.26
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Madam Speaker, if the Minister is catholic enough, he should try to be honest to this country. 

One of the things that I wanted to ask is, recently they fired some accounting officers who failed to submit their accountabilities and reports in time. These were from Nakaseke and Nebbi, among others. They were dismissed because they did not account for funds. How come the ministry is requesting for money for the past financial year and at the same time expects these accounting officers to account in time? What accountability will they be giving for these funds they are asking for now? Does that, therefore, require that the ministers in that ministry also fire themselves if they have the moral standing? 

It bothers me that you have entities receiving more than the ceiling; how does that arise if it is not deliberate? You have seen the salary scale, Madam Speaker. I ask you to scan the presidency budget. If you look at the issues of salary in that book, you find that there is a scale as per the appointing authority and there is a scale which is the normal salary scale. Therefore, if the minister is asking for a supplementary for salaries, are they under a given scale or not? How does somebody receive and others do not. There is that specific one in the Public Service Commission – or personal service commission - which is a salary scale as per the appointing authority. Where does this leave us, Madam Speaker?

Finally, it is very disappointing that you ask for a supplementary to purchase land and that land has encumbrances and you do not know the shareholding of the people for whom you are buying this land. Remember the land we are buying is for palm oil; the country is investing in that. We have not even sorted out the issues of people encroaching on national parks; here we are trying to negotiate under the influence that we are actually helping the vulnerable poor in urban centres and cities. (Member timed out)

6.28
MR STEPHEN MUGABI BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. I wonder why these arguments come up every financial year. Does it mean that we do not have a standardised system of handling these supplementaries or that there is something terribly wrong? If my memory serves me right- I do not have the law here - there is absolutely nothing we are going to do about this supplementary. Somehow, we have to approve it - (Interjections) – Absolutely! Let me tell you why. 

One, there are monies that have already been spent here. You have heard of the tripartite meetings, IGAD meetings and COMESA - (Interruption) - I will not take the information. If that money had been spent, - hon. Sebunya gave information here that you ignored - Parliament must approve that money that was spent and that is what we have been doing. That money has to be approved in the next financial year; it could even be in December. You can approve money that was spent in the previous financial year. 

If the question, therefore, is about the monies that have not been spent and we are asking for that money in this financial year - that should be the problem. We could then sieve out those funds that have not been spent and the minister should explain why we should allocate money in this financial year when it has ended. As for money that has been spent, I think we should not consume any more time; we should go ahead to sieve and approve the funds that were already spent.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are confusing me even more. You are saying that in this request there are those that are eligible and those that are not and then you are saying we approve.

MR BAKA: Madam Speaker, I talked of sieving. If we could go by sieving, it is clear. The committee can sieve. There are funds that have already been spent and there are funds that have not been spent; for example, the money for KCCA to buy the markets has not been spent.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give my colleague information from the point where he has concluded. It is good he is aware that some money has not been spent - it may even be all. I want to give an example where I have interest, and that is on the issue of the citrus fruits - the Shs 11 billion - which I have been following.  

On 4th June, I was in the ministry. In fact, the ministry officials and commissioners were complaining and saying that, “How can the Ministry of Finance send us Shs 11 billion on the 4th June and they want us to spend it and by 30th June they want the accounts to be closed?” They wanted Shs 8 billion for citrus seedlings in Teso. They dispatched a team to look for four million seedlings but up to now, not even one seedling has been purchased. So, that is part of the money which is there; it has not been spent. People want to “eat” that money. 

Ministry of Finance sends money a few days to the end of the financial year; how do they want us to approve such money? We want the citrus factory in Teso and the seedlings but the rainy season is ending when we are supposed to plant. If you buy seedlings now and supply them to the farmers in August and September, they will die because of the bad weather. So there is money, definitely. If the chairperson and his team were really critical, they should have been able to isolate which money has been spent and which money has not been spent. Maybe this is the right time for him to go and sort that out. If there is money that has been spent, let it be passed. If there is money, which has not been spent, like the Shs 11 billion, let it be put in this financial year.

6.32
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, I would like to first of all raise an issue of procedure. 

I understand the budget committee is a committee of this House. Really, the committee owes it to this House to give us the exact position and allow this Parliament to proceed in a constitutional manner. However, from the report, they are proceeding under Article 156 yet what we are talking about really is borrowing. They should have proceeded under Article 159. 

When you hide behind the rules, you are not giving us the proper position. You are telling us that this is a budget of 2013/2014 that we are supplementing yet this should have been money spent and now we are finding money to replenish what was spent. In that circumstance, therefore, it is not to finance this current financial year; it is money borrowed to cater for what was spent. You should have been clear to this House and guided this House on how to proceed. You are now leading us into a perception that we are debating the appropriation of a supplementary yet this is a different matter altogether.

Rt Hon. Speaker, are we procedurally right, therefore, to proceed on the appropriation yet this is a different item that is being presented before the House? It is clear as that. There is nothing; we are not supporting the budget of 2014/2015. Out of that, what would have been here would have been a motion by Government seeking Parliament’s authority to borrow money to cater for the money that was taken. That is now behind us; what we have now should have been a different item and procedure –(Member timed out_)

6.34
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I note, like my colleagues, the indiscipline. If the law allows you three per cent and you are going up to four per cent, that is really very ugly. However, there is even a worse devil in the details and it is on these two issues that I would like to draw the attention of the House. 

First, we have the issue of KCCA and Usafi market. The committee has delved on that matter and actually, proposes to this House that we give conditional approval on a matter in which PPDA withheld its approval. The PPDA said, “No, we will not clear you because these five conditions have not been met”. Our own committee now says, “Go ahead and give money” even when PPDA did not allow.

Madam Speaker, regarding the land in question, 90 per cent of it is encumbered and this House is being asked to raise Shs 7 billion, as though we do not have other issues that are pressing like teachers’ salaries and drugs. This is part of an on-going process; whether we give them retrospective approval or not, it is an on-going process and this is certainly unacceptable, Madam Speaker. 

In addition, there is even no agreement. Even to the ones who are selling, the committee has the guts to tell us, “go and tell them you have only Shs 33 billion.” I thought it is a matter of a willing buyer and willing seller. Now we are beginning to legislate here on the price at which the land will be acquired.

Madam Speaker, I have here a letter and I would like to beg your indulgence that I get one additional minute to speak to it. This is a letter written to the IGG by the chairperson, Finance Committee, Kampala Central Division, Mr David Baguma. It was given to us in the Public Accounts Committee in regard to this supplementary for Usafi. It goes into details on this process of acquiring Usafi. One, the land is still in private hands. Two, there are encumbrances. Three, there are the issues of PPDA. Four, there is no resolution of Kampala Central Division. Five, there is even no agreement among those who are supposed to use it. So, how come the committee is proposing that we approve a supplementary in that line? 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the second issue which is very problematic in this thing is the issue of NAADS. The President of this country has said he is dismantling NAADS, that he is reorganising it. However, our own committee does not take note of what the President has said and continues to ask this House to give approval for monies for NAADS, a programme which the Executive – Honourable minister, if I asked you, which Executive do you belong to? (Member timed out_)

6.38
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my second term in Parliament. It would be very strange today if this Parliament agrees to pass this supplementary to fund activities that were meant to have been funded in a financial year that has expired. It is very strange. A supplementary is really meant to cater for emergencies for which no resources were provided in that particular financial year. 

What I am seeing here is that we are dealing with a very technical matter. The supplementary expenditure is already over and above three per cent. I know that there is a constitutional provision that allows Government to spend up to three per cent and then come for retrospective approval of Parliament. Now, this one has expenditure over and above three per cent.

I want to advise, and that is if Parliament agrees with that kind of expenditure, that the Minister for Finance takes back those two supplementary schedules and sorts out the three per cent that is of an emergency nature, for which Government has already been given the constitutional mandate to spend, and then come to Parliament for retrospective approval; otherwise, we cannot pass the balance. You can only redraw another supplementary for reconsideration this financial year and the funds should come from this financial year’s budget, otherwise we will be acting in a very strange manner. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to release members to go and do the needful because it is Ramadan. However, we keep having these arguments on the supplementaries. I have listened to the arguments involved in this matter and I think that it is necessary to settle the matter by a clear ruling, so that we no longer have smuggling of items that should not be in the supplementary and we agree what the use of the supplementary is. So, I will give my ruling on this matter before the end of this week. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.41 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 July 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

