
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 22 July 2021

Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. This is a reminder about a meeting for the Verification Committee on the by-elections to the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA), pursuant to paragraph 9 of the Rules of Procedure on the election of Members of EALA, contained in Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

This House yesterday duly approved the membership of the Verification Committee to vet the suitability of the candidates for the EALA seat. That committee will sit tomorrow on 23 July 2021 at 10.00 a.m. in the Members’ Lounge, located opposite the parliamentary canteen.

The notice of the Monday, 26 July 2021 sitting is about the by-election to fill the vacancy of Uganda’s representative to the EALA. So, I call upon all of you to come and exercise your constitutional rights in choosing that EALA Member of Parliament. This is pursuant to General Notice 875 of 2021 that was published in the Uganda Gazette CX4/114/No. 58 of 19 July 2021; it notified the public about that by-election. We will be sending out the names. Remember, the deadline is Tuesday, 27 July and so, we need to have this by-election on Monday.

Today, we have a very short agenda, which involves the House receiving responses to the urgent questions raised by honourable members, prior to us delving into the Prime Minister’s Question Time. We will first have the responses to those questions before we get to the item on Prime Minister’s Time. I invite you to listen keenly to the responses and see whether they answer the questions that you raised in this House.

In respect to the item on Prime Minister’s Time, I invite you to stay within the confines of Rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 
However, going forward, I would like to inform you that a Member of the House will be expected to put the Prime Minister’s questions in writing and notify the Prime Minister in time to enable her to effectively respond in the next sitting.

Meanwhile, we will also have some few oral questions during the Prime Minister’s Time for responses. I thank you very much for coming and wish you good deliberations.

MS NETALISIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My name is Sarah Netalisire, Woman MP, Namisindwa District. 

Madam Speaker, in your communication to the House, you indicated that we are supposed to conduct elections on Monday to fill up the vacant EALA position, following the death of hon. Mathias Kasamba. That position was occupied by an NRM member and I thought that the rest of the shades in the House are already represented at EALA. Now, there are elections due to take place.

I am seeking clarification on whether it would be right for the name of the NRM flag bearer to be brought to the House for approval without competition? I am saying this because I see other candidates moving around with nomination forms. Why are we having elections yet the person who passed on was an NRM member at EALA? That is the clarification I am seeking. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Sarah Netalisire. Were you in the House yesterday?

MS NETALISIRE: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I made reference to the Treaty establishing the East African Legislative Assembly; Treaty 50. I also made reference to some cases that you must read, for you to answer that question.

The most recent case is the one of Anita Among vs the Attorney-General; go read it.

MS NETALISIRE: Thank you.

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS RAISED BY HONOURABLE MEMBERS ON WEDNESDAY, 14 JULY 2021

2.27
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Maj. Gen (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

On 14 July 2021, two questions were asked. One was about the rampant livestock raids by the Karimojong in areas of Katakwi, bordering the Karamoja Sub-region. This was raised by hon. Koluo, MP for Toroma County.

Madam Speaker, my response is that it is true that there has been a number of cases of insecurity resulting from cattle rustling in the areas of Katakwi, Magoro, Okore and Ngariam, which border the district of Nabilatuk in the Karamoja subregion as well as Palam, Guyaguya, Ongongoja and Okulunyo subcounties bordering Napak District, also in Karamoja.

Most of the cattle rustlers are from the Pian ethnic group of Nabilatuk District and the Bokora ethnic warriors of Napak District. 

Since the beginning of July 2021, 23 head of cattle have been raided by the Karimojong warriors, out of which four animals have been recovered by security forces and handed over to the owners. Tracking is going on to recover the other missing animals. 

Since the beginning of July 2021, some of the key or notable attacks and raids that have taken place in Katakwi District are as follows: 

    a) On 15 July 2021, a one Samuel Odong, an LDU personnel attached to Angaro Detach, was shot dead by Pian warriors of Nabilatuk District in Aleretuk grazing area in Pian Upe Game Reserve as he was tracking raided animals from Magoro Town Council in Katakwi District. 

    b) On 2 July 2021, Pian warriors from Nabilatuk District shot and injured a one Bosco Akileng of Akwoor village, Magoro Parish, Magoro Subcounty, and stole two head of cattle. 

    c) On 1 July 2021, UPDF and LDU personnel put out of action one Pian ethnic warrior from Nabilatuk District, who had gone to raid animals in Magoro Town Council, Katakwi District. In the process, one warrior managed to escape.

Katakwi District has in particular been vulnerable to a number of cattle raids due to a number of push factors. These include: 

    i. Bordering the Karamoja subregion, rendering it easily accessible to rustlers.

    ii. Connivance by elements within the LDU forces. Since some of them were locally recruited from the neighbouring districts of Karamoja, especially Napak and Nabilatuk, they easily share operational information with their kinsmen, the rustlers. 

    iii. Lack of protected kraals in the district where cattle/animals are left to roam and graze freely in open range grounds under the supervision of children, who cannot put up any resistance in the event of attacks by Karimojong warriors or any other rustlers. 

    iv. Inadequate deployment of security forces in the affected subcounties, hence creating gaps for the warriors to raid animals.

    v. Existence of illegal cattle markets in areas of Naturum Trading Centre in Loregae Subcounty in Nakapiripirit District. The raided animals are sold to cattle traders from various places such as Kenya, Busia, Tororo, Malaba and Iganga at giveaway prices ranging from Shs 300,000 to Shs 400,000 per animal. 

    vi. The cattle rustlers/raiders have been accessing guns from the Turkana and Pokot of western Kenya as well as the Toposa, Didinga and Mening of South Sudan. A rifle in these areas is sold between Shs 700,000 and Shs 1,000,000.

Action Taken

    1. Security forces have stepped up vigilance in protecting the affected population. Two days ago, a security committee meeting was held in Katakwi with the commanders of UPDF to deploy more UPDF soldiers in Magoro sub-county where the Karimojong have lately intensified their operations. Yesterday, there was also a sub-county security meeting with the security stakeholders to understand other challenges affecting their operations in the sub-county with a view to rectify the situation. 

    2. There is an ongoing mobilisation of the Karimojong community to abandon cattle rustling for alternative and peaceful economic survival. 

    3. Measures have been put in place to handle the indiscipline of LDUs or any other errant security personnel in the Karamoja sub–region. 

I wish to thank hon. Joseph Koluo for his concern and support. I would like to assure him and the people of Katakwi that we shall work with the other Government authorities to address his concerns and requests as soon as possible. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue raised was by hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka, Member of Parliament for Mukono County North, on alleged torture and human rights abuses by state organs. I have since discussed with hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka and we have agreed to meet so that he can furnish me with more information to follow up this matter.

I, however, would like to state categorically that this Government cannot condone any torture of any suspect. If there was any such case, as usual action will be taken against the officer concerned. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Minister for Security. I urge all the ministers that if there is a question for you, much as you come and respond in the House, you should also give us the actions taken like the minister has done, and closely follow up on the issue. It should not be something done once. 

2.36
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, I would like to join you in appreciating the timely response by the minister in charge of security, especially in giving a comprehensive response on the insecurity occasioned by cattle rustling in Katakwi and those parts of Karamoja.

I, however, would like the minister to come out clearly and furnish this House with a statement on the insecurity that this country is facing. Is this country at war? Recently, both print and electronic media have been awash with stories of an attack by rebels on the sovereignty of this country through Zombo District, and there have been very contradicting statements. 

A Resident District Commissioner (RDC), a one Andrew Kajoyingi, claimed that these are rebels who have a safe haven in the neighbouring country - the Democratic Republic of Congo. A number of the citizens of Uganda have been put out of action. On the other hand, the UPDF 4th Division Spokesperson, Maj. Caesar Olweny, claims that these are a mere gang of criminals. So, which is which? Are we at war? 

I invite your Chair to prevail over the minister to furnish this House with a statement on whether this country is at war or not. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you furnish this House with a statement on what is happening in Zombo and what action you have taken? You may not give us the response now but at least give us a written response on Thursday.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Okay, Madam Speaker. I would like to state that this country is not at war. This country is stable although there may be insecurities here and there, which are contained by our security forces. However, as you have directed, I will come up with a statement on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you sit, there is an issue from hon. Abraham Isamat of Kapir on the discovery of a mysterious tunnel in Komolo Village, Kakong Parish Agirigiroi Subcounty in Ngora District and the curiosity of the locals to tour that tunnel. They do not know where the tunnel is coming from and people want to tour the tunnel, which is becoming insecure in the area. It concerns ministries of tourism, security and lands.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, may I be given time to share with the ministers concerned and come up with an answer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities have an answer to that?

2.40
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have prepared the response and that information is part of the response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon

MR MUGARRA: We prepared a response to the questions on 14 July 2021 and that question is part of the response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give us the responses to your questions?

MR MUGARRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Response to issues raised by honourable members during the Seventh Sitting of the First Meeting of the 11th Parliament of Uganda on 14 July 2021.

At the Seventh Sitting of the First Meeting of the 11th Parliament of Uganda, held on Wednesday, 14 July 2021, hon. Gilbert Olanya, Member of Parliament for Kilak South, hon. Linos Ngompek, Member of Parliament for Kibanda North and hon. Michael Wanyama Odwori, Member of Parliament for Namayingo South raised concerns on the destruction to livelihoods, property and life by stray animals from national parks and fatal attacks by crocodiles on lake shores and islands in Namayingo District. 

Hon. Abraham Isamat, Member of Parliament for Kapir County reported on the discovery of a mysterious tunnel in Komolo Village, Kokong Parish, Agrigiroi Subcounty in Ngora District and requested the Government to consider turning the place into a tourism attraction. 

Subsequently, the Rt Hon. Speaker referred the questions to the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to prepare and present a response and here it is, Madam Speaker.
 
Madam Speaker, I would like to first of all, congratulate you and honourable members upon election to the 11th Parliament. I would also like to thank the honourable members who raised these issues. We appreciate the feedback and through oversight, you help us improve our performance.

The incidents of invasion and destruction of property by wildlife highlighted by hon. Olanya, hon. Ngompek and hon. Wanyama are highly true and regrettable. The issues were reported to the Uganda Wildlife Authority that timely responded by deploying staff to chase the animals back into the parks. We continued to respond to several other claims and incidences across the country.
 
Madam Speaker, the issues of human wildlife conflicts is indeed a national concern affecting almost all corners of this country. The problem we are facing is that both human life and wildlife populations are increasing but the land area is not increasing. On average, the Uganda Wildlife Authority receives not less than 100 cases of problem animals across the country in a week.

It is a very big problem but I would like to assure this House that the matter is being addressed through various interventions despite the resource limitation exaggerated by the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Madam Speaker, the Tenth Parliament amended the Wildlife Act-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you read the question that was raised by Members and respond to each of the questions. Do not do an omnibus response. From what I see, the questions are different. Start with hon. Ngompek. Otherwise, the issue raised by hon. Ngompek is different from what hon. Wanyama and hon. Olanya raised.

MR MUGARRA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. That is where I was getting to. I just wanted to give you a small background but that is where I am heading to.

The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has - the Tenth Parliament amended the Wildlife Act that came into force in September 2019. The ministry has and continues to undertake deliberate efforts to sensitise the general public about the Act. Among other things, we have placed sensitisation jingles about the new Act on several radio stations and local languages across the regions all over the country.

I wish to also inform the House, Madam Speaker, that sections 82 and 84 of the Wildlife Act, 2019, provide for the compensation of loss of life, property and injury caused by wildlife. My ministry initiated the process of developing regulations to operationalise this and other clauses.

I am happy to report that the First Parliamentary Council has finalised the drafting of the regulations that will soon be gazetted to guide the compensation for the loss occasioned by wildlife. The Uganda Wildlife Authority has, with the commencement of the Act on 27 September 2019, been setting aside 2 per cent of the revenue collected from tourism services as compensation fund in line with the Act.

Unfortunately, the COVID-19 Pandemic has greatly affected the tourism revenues and therefore, what is set aside for the compensation fund and what is available cannot definitely meet the demand for compensation claims. My ministry will be coming back to this House to ask for appropriation to Uganda Wildlife Authority to operationalise the compensation fund. 

The Government has been implementing and will continue to implement several measures to mitigate the human-wildlife conflicts across the country. Some of the specific measures are around Murchison Falls National Park, where both incidents reported by hon. Olanya and hon. Ngompek originated from. Some of the measures include electric fencing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, are you getting what the minister is saying? [HON. MEMBERS: No.] Honourable minister, you are just rapping and you know - anyway, it is his maiden speech.

Honourable minister, we know the law in regard to wildlife. We also know that you are supposed to compensate the families that are affected. We would like to know what you have done as a ministry, after that question was brought on board. Did you go on ground to find out whether what was said is true or false? If you went there, what is the position at the moment and what have you done?

MR MUGARRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me go straight to that – (Interruption)
 
MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 83(b) of our Rules of Procedure, which reads that Members shall not cross the Floor of the House or move around unnecessarily. I know the Government Chief Whip, hon. Tayebwa, comes from a cattle area. (Laughter) Since this session started, I have observed him to have covered almost half a kilometre turning this Parliament into a grazing area.

Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister, Thomas Tayebwa, in order to violate rule 83(1)(b) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda by unnecessarily moving around as if he is herding cattle? (Laugher)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen any cows around for the honourable Member to graze. Therefore, the presumption of grazing is not true. He is just doing his work as a whip. (Applause) Minister, can you continue.

MR MUGARRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course, like I said, Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) responded. Our teams were dispatched and there was a follow up. Most of these animals were chased back into the protected areas as we continued responding in the various places over –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you go to check on those areas?

MR MUGARRA: No; I have not visited those areas. It is my prayer that as I make this statement, I engage my honourable colleagues and we plan on how to go there by way of follow up –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give us a response after you have visited the areas and got feedback on what is happening there. Let us not be ministers who are desk-based. Let us take Parliament to the population. Therefore, go to the field and give us feedback on the questions.

MR MUGARRA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, that is a question from hon. Obigah.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request for a few minutes - about 10 minutes - to prepare my folder.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. The minister in charge of tourism, you must report to this House on Thursday.

MR MUGARRA: Madam Speaker, much obliged. I will report with all the information.  

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on the attainment of that office of speakership, and congratulate my honourable colleagues for joining the 11thParliament.

On 14 July 2021, there were four questions put to us as the Ministry of Health, which we need to respond to.The first question came from hon. Chelangat Alinga Solomon, Member of Parliament for Too County, Bukwo District. He raised concerns on lack of a district hospital in Bukwo District and high costs of burial for people who die of COVID-19.

The ministry’s response is as follows:

Bukwo District has Bukwo General Hospital, which was constructed and became functional in 2011, with a full maternity ward and Out-Patients Department (OPD). Other wards are planned for construction starting this financial year, 2021/2022. 

Regarding the second question from hon. Chelangat, there was a concern about people who had succumbed to COVID-19. The Ministry of Health developed guidelines for handling bodies of persons that have passed on due to COVID-19, together with the guidelines from the World Health Organisation (WHO). These outline the process of safe handling of bodies or persons that have died both at the health facilities and in the communities.

The body of the deceased should be put in a body bag and then placed inside the coffin and handed over to the family members for safe burial.

Family members are advised not to tamper with the body or desire to touch it at any time, and to strictly adhere to all COVID-19 Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) while conducting the burial.

As per the President’s directive, the general public is reminded to limit burials to only family members and, in any case, not more than 20 people.

There was another issue on the same question, concerning the high costs of the burials. My ministry wishes to respond that this issue has been optional; it has been left to different families. However, the ministry is studying the different cost options to make it more affordable and manageable. The ministry will respond accordingly once it comes out with the best option to advise our communities.

We received another question from hon. Obigah Rose, Member of Parliament for Terego District, who raised a concern on lack of a district hospital and transport in Terego District.My ministry wishes to respond as follows: 

Terego is still a new district. It started operating in the financial year 2020/2021 with a number of infrastructure yet to be put in place. The district has a population of 193,303 people. Currently, there are two health centres IV; these facilities are Omugo Health Centre IV and Imvepi Health Centre IV. These two facilities are going to be equipped and human resources recruited to provide the required services to the population. 

Considering that the population is approximately 200,000 people, this can be adequately covered by the health centres IV in line with the Ministry of Health policy of 100,000 population per health centre IV. The policy at the moment does not provide for intensive care at health centres IV.

Honourable members, you recall that the National COVID-19 Response Fund Donations Committee, with guidance from His Excellency the President of Uganda, approved the use of the Shs 29.6 billion as follows: Shs 23.9 billion for purchase of 282 pick-up double cabins for disease surveillance and laboratory follow-ups. These will be distributed to all districts. I wish to say that Terego will be one of the beneficiaries.

Madam Speaker, those were the few questions that were put to the Ministry of Health. I would like to thank Members for raising these issues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you said that Bukwo is a new district and that is why it does not have a hospital.You also said that Terego is a new district and that is why it does not have a hospital. You also said that in the 2021/2022 budget, you are making a provision for that hospital. As of now, we only have a maternity unit and OPD. Where do the other people get treatment from? 

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, we have advised that at the moment, they get treatment from health centres IV. We have said that within the current policy of having 100,000 people, Health centres IV are good enough to be acting and well equipped as we have outlined, to be able to take care of the different health issues and patients.

We have said that all the new districts - there are more than 68 districts in the country so far, Ssembabule inclusive, which do not have hospitals -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was actually going to ask you whether Bukedea is a new district.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS BEGUMISA: I am Mary Begumisa, Woman Representative, Ssembabule. In that very regard - thank you, honourable minister. I am rising because of the word “new”; if we have a new Bukwo District and a new Terego District, can I know, when Ssembabule District, which has been in existence since 1994, will get its hospital? Thank you.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, honourable minister, let us not hide behind the aspect of “new districts.” I can also tell you that Bukedea is not new but we do not have a hospital. So, the aspect of new should not arise. Let us look at where the money for the districts is; when are you putting up district hospitals in these areas?

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have taken –(Interjection)– may I conclude on this? I will take as many questions as possible with permission from the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First finish that then we get the procedural matter from this side.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and I have taken note of that. You are all aware, as I have read in the statement, that there are requirements for a hospital to be put into place and these requirements have to be met. One of them is the population. Currently, the policy says 100,000 people and above.

This takes me to the issue of my MP from Ssembabule; yes, Ssembabule District has been in existence for some time and I want to say that it is on record that Ssembabule was by the Ministry’s approval upgraded from a health centre IV to hospital status. 

Madam Speaker, I have been in this Parliament for about 30 years and I have been pushing for this. The problem of Ssembabule Health Centre IV is that it does not have a land title and the acreage of the area where it is supposed to be put is not enough. We are engaging the district local government of Ssembabule to ensure that they acquire a land title and enough land where this hospital can be graded.

In general, I have said that there are more than 68 districts, Bukedea inclusive and I have taken note of that. We are going to look at these districts. We shall come back and update this august House on the progress and how far the Ministry has gone in planning to upgrade these districts.

Honourable members, bear with us that we are working on all the districts. We shall come here with a comprehensive report on the districts that are supposed to be upgraded to hospitals and then we shall ask for the budget for funding and construction of these medical facilities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much time do you want so that you prepare a comprehensive report? There was a procedural matter from behind there -

MS KAWOOYA: One week, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We expect a report from the Ministry of Health in one week.

MR ZIJJAN: Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 83(1)(f) which provides that a Member shall not, without the consent of the Speaker, bring into the House anything other than papers, books or other documents, which are directly connected with the business of the House.

Madam Speaker, this rule provided for only papers and books. However, I have observed that the House is littered with items of leather bags and other things -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With what?

MR ZIJJAN: There are bags littered all over the House. Members come in with items that are not provided for under the rules, to the extent that some people walk in with bags and move away leaving the bags without fellow Members being sure what the bags contain.

Madam Speaker, the practice at airports is that if you come with a bag and leave it unattended, security swings into action to ensure that there are no explosives in the bags. 

However, we have become so comfortable that people leave items unattended to and we do not get concerned. Won’t this, one day, expose us to an unlikely event where a bag might explode and we lose lives? Is it procedurally correct, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, much as we have the rules, it is also unfortunate that you are not a lady - as a lady, you are always supposed to carry a bag. 

However, where we have somebody who has brought in a bag and it is not attended to and we are not sure of our safety, the Sergeant-At-Arms and the security here will check that bag and confirm whether there is nothing dangerous. That is why you we have these people in white clothes. If there is any bag which is abandoned, I am instructing them to have a look at it.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for directing the Minister of State for Health, hon. Anifa Kawooya, to come with a comprehensive statement. However, it should also include a comprehensive list of all districts without hospitals, including their budget requirements.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, have you heard? We want the list of the hospitals Vis-a-vis the budget requirements.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure, particularly rule 48. I notice that ministers, after giving their answers, simply leave without giving chance to Members who asked questions and any other Members interested to ask supplementary questions. 

I have noticed it in the statement given by hon. Jim Muhwezi and the statement given by my sister, hon. Anifa Kawooya. Is it therefore, not procedurally right for these particular ministers to be given time to allow supplementary questions from the Members who asked them and if there are none, whether any other interested Member would be able to ask? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter here. The ministers who have questions to respond to, Members may have supplementary questions in relation to what you have responded to. For instance, hon. Koluo sent another note on the issue that the Minister of Security talked about. Therefore, you should be able to entertain supplementary questions, which is okay.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have taken note of your guidance and what you have just said, that the Members would want to ask supplementary questions and we are able to respond to them. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR LEKU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leku, speak to the microphone. 

MR LEKU: The minister has just mentioned that Terego District is new but the people of Terego are not new. We have people who are as old as 100 years.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leku and hon. Obigah, we have asked for a comprehensive report to that effect. Can we wait for the comprehensive report? We know they are not new. We are going to get a report and that is where your issue comes in. You are the one who raised the question as a district. Therefore, can you sit and wait for the comprehensive report.

MR LEKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Minister, when you are going to a constituency to make an assessment of these areas, kindly invite the Members of Parliament of that constituency. (Applause)

Hon. Rose Obigah, you brought the question, which is being debated. 

MS OBIGAH: Madam Speaker, it is not a question. I have a procedural issue. I rise under rule 112 - leave of absence - and I speak under subrules (6) and (7). 

It is a constant that we come to this august House and we do not register. I do not know how you are going to know if I have missed 15 days without appearing. I do not know whether we have engaged a drone. I do not want to appear like I have not attended. Can I say that there is a procedural matter here? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have cameras in this Parliament and if we want to review, we will review who is here and who is not here. (Laughter)

3.11
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): I would like to thank the honourable Minister of State for Health for agreeing to come back with a comprehensive report. However, what we want in our districts and constituencies is not only the district hospitals but how we can also get the health centres III and IV and how we can work with the health centres II and even develop others.When she comes with a comprehensive report, I would like her to bring even the criteria for a health centre II to become a health centre III. 

Madam Speaker, what I have realised is that the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) numbers, which are the threshold used for these health centres, are so low that the Minister of Health keeps assuming that very few patients come to the health centres. So, they keep looking at the health centre as one that serves few people.Therefore, I would like the Ministry of Health to come up with a report and also information on how they come up with the creation of health centres II, III, IV and hospitals. 

Of course, Kyegegwa District has been in existence for long and I do not think they will count it among the new districts. We have also requested for a district hospital for long and it is a presidential assurance. Dr Diana Atwine, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health, visited the district early this year and pledged that they are working to make it a district hospital. 

I would like all that to come out in the comprehensive report, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee on Health together with the minister, can you take that up and give this House a comprehensive report to that effect.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, in accordance with your guidance and the Members’ request that we should extend the comprehensive report to cover a big number of health centres II and III and to come out with budget costs, I had said that we would be ready within one week. 

However, I am appealing, Madam Speaker, that you give us one month so that we go down to the ground, compile the report on each and everything with the budget, so that when we come to debate here, we debate what is comprehensive and we would have covered issues having been there on the ground. 

I take note that we shall be with the Members of Parliament from that area in consultation with you, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay. Honourable members, discussions should be based on the hospitals

MR RICHARD GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy that the minister is asking for one month to bring a comprehensive report. How I wish this comprehensive report does not restrict itself to districts without hospitals only but covers the whole country, including districts with hospitals, some of which are dilapidated and not functional. Some districts have hospitals but these hospitals are dilapidated and you can barely find services there.

Bundibugyo Hospital, for instance, was considered together with Yumbe and about four others, about two or three years ago, for rehabilitation and money was allocated. To date, we do not have any update to that effect.

As the minister comes back, let her come with that comprehensive report, covering districts where we have hospitals but they are more or less not functional because they are dilapidated and very many services are lacking. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, take note. 

MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker, I have heard from the Minister of Health and I am concerned as a Member of Parliament from Mawogola. Ssembabule is one of the disadvantaged districts and the honourable minister has told us that Ssembabule does not have a health centre because it does not have land. I do not know whether it is the same reason as to why, much as it is a town council, we have a health centre III that always has no medicines and other related equipment. 

Can we conclude that because we do not have land, we fail to get medicines in hospitals?

MR KAWALYA: Madam Speaker, yesterday, I registered a concern here and it still goes to the Minister of Health. Kampala, being the capital city of this country, has only three ambulances. That means that many of our hospitals and health centres do not have ambulances. One month back, Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) passed a resolution that we should have a minimum of 10 ambulances and every division should have at least two ambulances.

Madam Speaker, can the Minister of Health come out clearly with a very comprehensive report about how far they have reached with the supply of ambulances in Kampala since Kampala is also being treated as the epicenter of COVID-19.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have instructed the minister to work with various Members of Parliament of different constituencies to ensure that the health issues of that area are sorted out.

Regarding the issue of ambulances in Kampala, please work with the team in Kampala. 

3.20
MR DICKSONS KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for the report. 

We would like to know, for all these health centres II, health centres III, health centres IV and hospitals, what is the checklist? What is it that the Health centres IV should have as a checklist or health centres III should have as a checklist? 

This is because even for the districts that have hospitals, sometimes you find that they are just as good as buildings. We would, therefore, like to know what the contents of a health centre IV are so that when we are doing our inspection, we are able to tick against the criteria and we go all the way down to health centre IIs. This will provide us with the assurance that for all those who have health units, they are actually fit and doing what they are supposed to be doing.

I, therefore, request that the report should be comprehensive. It should provide us a checklist of what each health centre category must have so that we are able to measure the actual presence on the ground vis-a-vis what the requirement should be. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have instructed the chairperson of the Committee on Health to be there to handle that report. 

Members, you are sending me too many chits. Please be mindful of my health since we are living in these COVID-19 times. 

3.22
MR JOAB BUSINGE (FDC, Masindi Municipality, Masindi): Thank you for allowing me this opportunity. I am Joab Businge from Masindi Municipality. I am rising on a matter of procedure. 

I am concerned as to whether it is not procedurally right for this Parliament, through you, Madam Speaker, to redirect the priorities of Government. This is following your guidance yesterday on the priority as far as the purchase of pickups was concerned. 

You said that those 282 pickups would not be top on the priority list but rather, we would bring other emergency issues given the situation we are in. I am, however, surprised that in the report of the minister of state for health, she still insists that Government is prioritising the purchase of 282 pickups. 

I am concerned whether it is not the mandate of this House to redirect the priority of Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Businge, the pickups have already been bought and there is not much we can do as an institution. The pickups are already in the country. That is why I said that that was kind of a diversion.

3.24
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving us an opportunity to express some of these concerns arising from the report from the Minister of Health to this House. 

We are aware that countrywide, there are many district hospitals that we now refer to that were just elevated from health centre IV status. I would like to know from Government if there is any deliberate effort being put in place to increase the infrastructure of these hospitals because right now, they are operating like health centre IVs but being referred to as district hospitals. I am speaking in regard to Buliisa Hospital. Thank you. 

3.26
MS MELSA AVAKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am very grateful to this Government that general hospitals in Uganda have been elevated to regional referral hospitals. I am very grateful that the Minister of Health has given us an allowance that we should give her some time to come up with a comprehensive report. 

I would like to bring it to the attention of the Minister of Health that some of these regional referral hospitals that have just been elevated have no budget to operate as expected. I, therefore, request that in the comprehensive report that the Minister of Health is going to produce, she should include those elevated hospitals. 

Among them is Yumbe Regional Referral Hospital. It has actually commenced but due to lack of budget, it has not been fully operational. There are only a few services being provided. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we limit this to only about five people?

3.28
MS CHRISTINE NANDAGIRE (NUP, Bukomansimbi North Constituency): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am giving my maiden speech today. 

Referring to National Objective 20 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which states that the State shall take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population, as they have been mentioning health centres II, in our constituency, we do not have a single health centre II. 

I would like the honourable Minister of Health to inform us why the private medical centres are paying taxes in each department yet they give very good services to patients. Remember that in government hospitals, there are completely no services provided here in Uganda. Patients line up there and they end up only coming out with Panadol. 

In private medical centres, you find that each department –(Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, I have a lot of respect for my dear sister but for her to say that there is no service provided in government hospitals, without substantiating, is wrong. People are running to Mulago and all these other regional and district hospitals and she says there is no service at all; that it is only private health facilities providing services. Is she in order to mislead the country? (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am making a response to the point of order, can everybody sit. The debate on health is over. I was very impressed when hon. Ssemujju said that Mulago is the best hospital. Honourable members, we have gotten all the information about health.

I am giving the Ministry of Health and the Committee on Health one month to report on the status of all the health centres, from health centres II, III, IV and the district hospitals. We also expect the budgetary implications and what we need to upgrade health centres II to III, health centres III to IV, and health centres IV to district hospitals. We need a comprehensive report.

Whenever you go to a constituency in a district, you must inform and be with the Members of Parliament of that area. 

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and most importantly for the Government. You have guided this House but I want to bring it to the attention of this House that whereas you have closed discussions on health issues, there is a glaring disparity in one of the subregions of this country, namely Bukedi subregion. This is the only subregion that does not have a regional referral hospital. Whereas -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otaala, I thought that is what is going to come up in the report and action must be taken? However, honourable member, I am surprised that while you were the state minister for health, you could not get that hospital to that subregion.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES): (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my first time to speak in the 11th Parliament chaired by you, so allow me congratulate you upon assuming that chair.

We were asked three questions and I would like to respond to them as follows: 

Hon. Abed Bwanika, MP Kimaanya-Kabonera Constituency, asked a question regarding the disbursement of funds to Masaka City. I would like to say that the budget for Masaka City for financial year 2021/2022 was approved in June 2021 and the first quarter expenditure limits, amounting to Shs 10,668,520,000, were issued as per our circular dated 9 July 2021.

I wish to briefly summarise the process through which local governments undergo to access their budget releases as below:

    1. Local governments submit budget estimates to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the programme budgeting system;

    2. The budget directorate reviews the submitted budget estimates and approves or rejects them as per different programme guidelines;

    3. Once the budget is approved, it is uploaded onto the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) through the PBS, IFMS interface;

    4. Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury issues a circular communicating quarterly expenditure limits by the 10th of the first month of the quarter;

    5. Quarterly expenditure limits communicated in the circular are uploaded;

    6. Accounting officers of local government votes submit their accounting warrants on the IFMS to access funds on their Treasury Single Account in Bank of Uganda; and

    7. Departments in the local governments submit invoices for payments.

To date, Masaka City has not yet submitted its accounting warrants to be able to access the funds on its Treasury Single Account in Bank of Uganda.

I wish to inform the House that Masaka City will access its quarter one releases once the accounting officer submits the accounting warrants clearly indicating the expenditures as per its quarterly work plans. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is hon. Bwanika here? Is it true that Masaka City accounts have not been submitted?

MR BWANIKA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to know why Masaka City was allocated the least money among all the cities, in terms of COVID-19 response. We were given only Shs 180,400,000; it was the least.

I want to know from the Minister of Finance how they did that allocation that saw Masaka City, among all the cities, receive the least and out of that, still Shs 30,000,000 was not disbursed. That was my concern in addition to the question on the quarterly release.

I talked to the Town Clerk and he said that you gave a circular that they were not going to receive the first quarter release. I need clarity from you on that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it in writing?

MR BWANIKA: Yes. The Minister of Finance must clarify because there is a circular to that effect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it to only Masaka City?

MR BWANIKA: I do not know whether the circular was to all cities.

MR JOAB BUSINGE: Madam Speaker, I would like to concur with the hon. Bwanika from Masaka City on the statement that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development communicated to different local governments, including my municipality, that they would not receive releases for the first quarter of this financial year. I am wondering how local governments are going to deliver services amidst these challenges.

MR NAMBESHE: Honourable minister, before you respond, even districts or local governments that are beneficiaries of the first quarter release have not received it and that is of grave concern. The new administrative units are missing out on the budgetary allocations. This is not only in one, two or three districts; it is almost a universal outcry. What is the ministry doing about this?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, can I respond?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, this should also be answered by the Minister of Local Government. They do the budgeting for the administrative units and the finance ministry does the other part.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate honourable colleagues for the concerns they have raised. I can begin with Masindi. The MP from Masindi Municipality has put on the Hansard that in this quarter, Masindi Municipality is not receiving any money.

Madam Speaker, I want to categorically state that this is absolutely false. The budget for Masindi Municipality and other budgets is structured in the following categories: wage recurrent, non-wage and development. All Votes across Government have received 25 per cent of wage recurrent and this is consistent with the quarters we have in the year. I am sure the honourable MP from Masindi is aware of this.

Madam –(Interjection)- Can I submit?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you allow the minister to submit and then you do a rebuttal? Please sit.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, where there is a disparity, it is in the non-wage recurrent. In a situation where you find a Vote having an item of workshop, seminar or travel abroad, that money has not been released; it has been suppressed across the entire Votes of Government.

On development expenditure, in quarter one, you will find that in most cases there is no release at all. However, that does not mean that the entire year will pass without Votes receiving development budget.

You may get it in quarter two or three – depending on the revenue performance – because we release money based on what we have received. Where we have received less, we disburse less. Where we receive more, we disburse more.

Hon. Abed Bwanika tried to twist the question to imply the need to know how the COVID-19 funds became different in the various cities.

Madam Speaker, I do not have the facts about Masaka but I can use the facts I am conversant with. In districts and municipalities across the country, we gave Shs 100 million for every municipality and Shs 150 million for every district. That one is flat.

However, the question arose that Kabale District is getting Shs 412 million; Rubanda District is getting Shs 340 million; Rukiga District is getting Shs 268 million. The people started calling me, “Now that you have become a minister of finance, you are taking all the money to your home district.” 

I said, “No. Look, the money is going to Village Health Teams (VHTs). A VHT is at the village. If your district has 350 villages and another district has 500 villages, the district with more villages will definitely get more money.” That one explains the variance in releases across the Votes and I believe Masaka Municipality is facing the same challenge.

I did not get hon. Nambeshe’s question well but I believe this wider response I have given takes care of his concerns.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, honourable minister, you are now telling us Rubanda got this amount and this constituency got this amount. I am not aware whether all the MPs know what their districts got. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, when we release funds, we publish. This is public information, available on our website at the ministry and also with the accounting officers – in this case, the Chief Administrative Officers. We normally give them this information and they are required to put this information on their noticeboards at the district.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give us a printout of how much each district has got? Put it in our pigeon holes. We want to know what we have got in our districts.

MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. We should be able to avail this information by Tuesday next week –(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Honourable minister, you said you did not get my question. It was about the new administrative units missing out on the releases for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you very much, hon. Nambeshe. Madam Speaker, hon. Nambeshe has been with us in this House for quite some time and clearly knows that releases and expenditures of Government are through an appropriation of Parliament. At the finance ministry, we only release what Parliament has appropriated. 

That notwithstanding, we have new administrative units, particularly town councils and sub-counties – around 714 – which were created towards the end of the last term of Parliament and have just started operating, although there are a number of challenges. 

These town councils and sub-counties only have elected leaders but they do not have substantive staff working there. At the same time, money was not appropriated to these town councils and sub-counties.

We are working with the Ministry of Local Government to pursue the possibility of bringing a supplementary here of about Shs 30 billion, which can facilitate the operationalisation of these new administrative units. However, as of now, they fall under unfunded priorities and no monies were appropriated to them by this House, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move to the second question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before you move to that question, we want you to give us the allocations to each district vis-à-vis the disbursement such that we make a close follow up. Members are supposed to perform an oversight role. If they do not know what has gone to their districts, then they will not be able to make a follow up on what is being used. 

MR JOAB BUSINGE: Madam Speaker, I pray that I clarify what the minister has just said in regards to Masindi Municipality and other local governments. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and the minister. 

First of all, I would like to state clearly that I did not say that the Government has not released any money to the local governments. I said that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has written to the local governments that it would not get releases, and this is especially in respect to the local revenue.

I am from a municipality and the municipality has a number of challenges including garbage management. Other local governments have issues of running their local councils. We know very well that local councils are run with the help of local revenue. May I, therefore, find out from the minister how much of the local revenue has been sent to Masindi Municipality and other local governments? 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I am giving information to my colleague because I also come from a municipality. Indeed –(Interjection)– Somebody is saying “order” when he has not been recognised. Please, give me an opportunity. 

Municipalities are suffering terribly because of local revenue –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order. 

MR MOSES OKOT: I rise on a point of order specifically under rule 82 of our Rules of Procedure. Specifically, I am addressing my mind to rule 82(1)(a), subparagraphs (i) to (vi). 

I have keenly looked through the House and I have found that Members of this august House have defaulted the required decorum provided under rule 82. Specifically, there is a Member that is seated right behind the water dispenser, facing the Speaker, who is dressed in a casual vintage shirt and casual trousers, and he is expecting to debate in this House with Members who are fully dressed for the purpose. Is the Member in order to continue sitting in this Parliament? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member in question is not dressed properly. So, can the Member get out of the House. (Laughter) Hon. Aogon was on the Floor. 

MR AOGON: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was backing my colleague because I also come from a municipality. Recently, most of you might have seen in the news that there was a demonstration in Kumi Municipality due to failure by our authorities to remove garbage. 

This issue of local revenue has become a real thorn in the flesh of municipalities and town councils. We used to collect our own revenue and spend it. Now that the authorities collect money and send it to Kampala, yet Kampala does not send it back to the authorities, what are we going to do? 

We want to ask the minister to tell us today what has gone wrong to make them not help the municipalities. The municipalities raise the money but it is not disbursed to them; why?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you tell the Members what is – Basically, they are talking about the Non-Tax Revenue (NTR).

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, it is true that our policy now is that all the local revenue is budgeted as non-tax revenue and it comes to the Consolidated Fund. What happens is that this money is sent back to the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) that collect it? Even –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need to be brief because we have eight minutes to the Prime Minister’s Time.

MR MUSASIZI: Even though I do not have facts now, I can come back on Tuesday with the facts. I am, however, wondering whether during this lockdown, the municipalities are able to collect the local revenue they have been collecting. That could be the reason.

Can I quickly present item No.2 in three minutes? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olobo, the minister is coming with the report on Tuesday. We are restrained by rule 41(3) of the Rules of Procedure, on the Prime Minister’s Time. The Prime Minister’s Time must start strictly at 4.00 p.m. 

MR OLOBO: He has not given us the time limit, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is bringing the report on Tuesday. 

MR OLOBO: I am talking about the supplementary budget, which he is saying he will bring to the House. He has not given us the time limit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We cannot ask for a supplementary budget before we know what has been done. Let us first get to know what is being done. Can you sit down, please. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kabanda from Kasambya County asked a question regarding the Government's decision to tax the hardship allowance for health workers. We would like to respond as follows:

Under section 19(1)(a) of the Income Tax Act, Cap. 340, employment income is defined to include any allowance paid to an employee. You will also note that under section 19(1)(f) of the Income Tax Act, any amount derived as consideration for the employee’s agreement to any conditions of employment or to any changes in his or her conditions of employment is considered to be employment income. Therefore, it is in accordance with the above provisions of the law that the hardship allowances for health workers are being subjected to tax.

Contrary to the usual sentiments regarding taxation, paying tax is not a punishment. It is a duty of all able citizens to pay taxes. It is also an opportunity for all citizens to make a fair contribution to the development of our nation as we strive to be politically and economically independent. 

We appreciate the fact that all civil servants’ salaries are inadequate. Therefore, exempting the income of health workers from tax will set a bad and unsustainable precedent since it would provide a justification for other categories of workers in both the private and public sector to demand for similar treatment. 

The way forward is as follows: 

I wish to appreciate the health workers for their dedicated service and commitment towards saving the lives of Ugandans, particularly during this trying period, when we are dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic. 

The Government continues to enhance the remunerations of public servants with priority being given to remuneration and working conditions of health workers. I beg to submit.

Madam Speaker, can I lay copies of my -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please lay on the Table.

3.58
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I refer to Article 176 of the Constitution of Uganda and in particular, Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the provisions under Chapter 11 of our Constitution, which states that everything that is in Uganda must comply with, and also pass through a system that allows activities to be channelled through local governments. This should be the practice as we continue to serve as leaders and Government.

Madam Speaker, for emphasis, allow me to quote the Constitution, specifically, Article 176(2) which echoes the principles that apply to the local Government system –

    a) “The systems shall be such as to ensure that functions, powers and responsibilities are devolved and transferred from the Government to local Government units, in a coordinated manner.” 

Madam Speaker, you have already ruled that the honourable minister shall come back here with a full report. May it please you, therefore, to request the minister to also brief this House on how far they have gone to use the local authorities, as we progress and do a number of activities in this term? I would like to report to you that continuously, the Executive has infringed on the powers of local governments. Sometime back, we learnt that if you pretend to employ somebody, that person will also pretend to be working for you. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the Government why our colleagues and the leaders in local governments are now bypassed, and hold no authority as the leaders of the people at that level. I further contend that anything that is done well in Uganda, the implementers ignore, refuse or even fail to involve the local leadership. This is a constitutional matter to the extent that - anybody who avoids this route, he or she is presenting here an illegality.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we have been asking for the difference between the RDC and the LCV chairman –(Interruption)-
 
MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, hon. Nambooze for giving way-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, hon. Nambooze, you have given up your time.

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, the information I am giving to my colleague is that today morning, I got information from my district that the Permanent Secretary has written to all districts, instructing them not to hold district council meetings as long as there is still a lockdown. That means that whether we pass supplementaries and send money to districts, district councils cannot sit. This is information I got because the Buhweju District local government was supposed to have a district council meeting, which has been cancelled.
 
Therefore, linking this to what the Member is raising, maybe the minister or the Prime Minister who is here will inform us whether district councils cannot sit and do business as usual; yet we, as Parliament, are carrying out business as usual under the lockdown.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I would love that when you are coming with such a statement, you come with a copy of the letter and lay it on the Table other than relying on hearsay. If somebody is calling you and is alleging that we are not supposed to sit, is it documented? Let us have evidence-based debate; that there is evidence here, I am laying a letter on the Table, that district councils are not supposed conduct business - it is not about rebuttal. However, I am saying that we need evidence-based debate and not just hearsay.

MR MWIJUKYE: I will bring it tomorrow morning. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I beg that you allow me to notify this House that I will bring a motion concerning the issue about decentralisation. I am very grateful for the time you have given to me, Madam Speaker and I will be very happy if you find it appropriate to allow my motion and the debate about decentralisation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will wait for your motion and decide when it comes. Honourable members, I received a lot of chits. I would like to inform Members that when you have a matter of national importance, kindly take it to my office and give it to the personnel there, at least before midday. Then, it will be captured as a matter of national importance. However, when you keep sending me chits here, it won’t be considered. 

I also have a number of issues that were supposed to be responded to; one from hon. Kaberuka, hon. Isamat of Kapir, hon. Enos Asiimwe, hon. Silas Aogon, hon. Koluo, hon. Kiwanuka, hon. Christine Apolot, hon. Christine Ndiwalana, hon. Zijjan, hon. Feta, hon. Donald Katari from Mwenge and hon. Siragi Ezama. The responses are ready with the ministers.

We also have issues that we have received from the following Members of Parliament that are being processed for responses from the ministers. These are from hon. Ben Betom, hon. Silas Aogon, hon. Olanya, hon. Dorcus Achen, hon. Edakas, hon. Okello from Aruzi, hon. Joyce Acan, hon. Amos Okot, hon. Mariam Makaye, hon. Ssemwanga, hon. Christine Apolot, hon. Mary Annet Nakato, hon. Sylvia of Kamwenge, 
hon. Ababiku, hon. Feta, hon. Musinguzi Yona, hon. Amos Okot, hon. Abed Bwanika, hon. Bwiire Sanon, hon. Isabirye Aga.

Those will be presented in the next – However, I also request that when the ministers are responding, they should be brief. Members should also not interfere a lot, for us to be able to get the feedback in time.

We are now getting to the Prime Minister’s Time. It is the first time we are having this time. The Prime Minister has given me a response to only two questions. Other questions that had been raised have been responded to by other ministers.

Next time, we will have a comprehensive Prime Minister’s Time. After the Prime Minister has made the presentation, the Leader of the Opposition, as per the rules, has a right to reply.

The chief opposition whip (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With all due respect to the guidance that you have given on matters of national importance, there are matters of urgent public importance that are of an emergency nature and require urgent attention. Would it be compliant with the procedure that guides those urgent matters to postpone them, like you have said, that they would be raised early next week, yet they are urgent? 

The Deputy Speaker: If the matters came to my office – Actually, these matters are coming up on the Floor, so how do you expect these matters to be raised? You are the ones who made the Rules of Procedure saying that the Prime Minister’s Time should always start at 4.00 O’clock on Thursday. If there are matters of national importance, we are going to have a sitting on Tuesday and Wednesday and they will be raised. Therefore, there shouldn’t be an issue, unless you want us to review the Prime Minister’s Time. 

Remember, we have said that matters of national importance must be brought to my office by midday before we come to the House. You cannot bring your matter to the House when I am already seated here.  Bear with me also.

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.11
The Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all inform colleagues that rule 41, (1) to (9) on the Prime Minister’s Time states thus: 

“(1) There shall be time designated as Prime Minister’s Time, commencing at 4.00 p.m. every Thursday.

(2) During the Prime Minister’s Time—
(a) 	the Prime Minister may make a statement, or 
(b) 	Questions may be put to the Prime Minister relating to matters of Government policy or the general performance of the Government and Government agencies. 

(3) 	Questions to the Prime Minister shall be made in writing and submitted to the Clerk.
 
(4) 	The Clerk shall enter all questions in the Prime Minister’s Question Record Book and select fifteen questions by raffle, which shall be forwarded to the Prime Minister.

(5) 	The Prime Minister shall provide written responses copied to the relevant Member and respond to these questions during the Prime Minister’s question time. 

(6) 	The Clerk shall publish a list of all questions and the responses made every month.

(7) 	In the absence of the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister may make a statement or answer questions put to him or her.

(8) 	The Prime Minister’s time shall not exceed forty-five minutes.”

Madam Speaker, in view of the fact that this is the first time I am being given questions – the fact is that I have not got these questions apart from the ones they have given me here - I request you to guide whether it is procedurally okay for us to continue now.

The Deputy Speaker: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have two questions that your office told us you are ready to answer. We will push the rest, which are not very urgent, to the next sitting. We will handle the urgent questions on Tuesday and Wednesday. 

Ms betty nambooze: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. It shall be recalled that during the Prime Minister’s question time, Members in the plenary would get up to contribute through catching the Speaker’s eye and then the Prime Minister would answer the questions there and then or inform this House that they would return on such and such a day with a detailed answer.

The procedural matter I am raising therefore is, having heard the presentation of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, which in a way or another shows that she is not ready, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that we use this time to raise the questions so that the Prime Minister notes them down and brings us the answers on Tuesday? May it please you, Madam Speaker, to give us guidance - 

The Deputy Speaker: Madam Nambooze, it is so unfortunate that the time we changed the rules towards the end of the last term, you were busy with campaigns. You can check rule 41(3). Kindly, check the rules, which were changed in your absence.

Mr tayebwa: Madam Speaker, for emphasis, it is very important that the Member checks in her bag, which was given to her when she was sworn in, where we put a copy of the new rules. She must be referring to the old rules. It is very important for Members to get copies of the new rules –

The Deputy Speaker: I have already made a ruling to that effect. (Laughter)

Ms betty nambooze: Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence –

The Deputy Speaker: Madam Teacher, we changed the rules.

Ms betty nambooze: Madam Speaker, allow me to say this - 

The Deputy Speaker: Can I read you the rules first?

MS NAMBOOZE: Before you read them, Madam Speaker, it is a known fact that each Parliament must make its rules. The Tenth Parliament, in their last days, instead of concentrating on saying good-bye, sat here, amended the rules and now we are being denied the opportunity, as the Eleventh Parliament, to make our own Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nambooze, I am imploring you to bring a motion to change the rules and then we shall have rules of the Eleventh Parliament to the effect that -

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to request you - If you look at rules 41 and 42, rule 42 gives Members time to raise questions to the ministers. In addition, from our Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, under normal sittings, there is no time that a Member of Parliament is given an opportunity to ask the minister.

Madam Speaker, I am requesting you, if you can combine the questions to the Prime Minister and the questions to the ministers at the same time. I think that would give more time for Members of Parliament to ask questions. 

We have so many concerns that we are supposed to raise as Members of Parliament and the Prime Minister has a right to choose any minister to respond to the questions raised by Members of Parliament.

I am requesting you, Madam Speaker, if it is okay, you could combine that so that when Members of Parliament come, they ask the ministers and the Prime Minister at the same time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On Thursdays, we shall be having oral questions to ministers from 2 o’clock to 4 o’clock and from 4 o’clock, we shall have the Prime Minister’s Question Time. However, matters of urgent importance shall be discussed whenever they come and before the House starts.

4.19
MR JOHN-PAUL LUKWAGO (DP, Kyotera County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 41 over an issue concerning Kyotera-Masaka-Mutukula Road. Without overstating the importance of this road, it was built in 1960 and it has a stretch of over 96 kilometres from Masaka to Mutukula, which is one of the major routes linking and promoting trade ties and cooperation between Uganda, Tanzania and the rest of the East African partners.

The state of this road has deteriorated over the years, which is adversely affecting traffic flow. The Government last upgraded a section of this road in 2003 from Kyotera-Mutukula to class two-bitumen standard. Since then, there has not been any civil works on this road.

However, the commissioning of the Mutukula One-stop Border Post in 2016 has witnessed a surge of volumes of cargo traffic flow and the Masaka-Mutukula Road has occasioned its gradual deterioration. Could the Rt Hon. Prime Minister inform the House of plans by Government to rehabilitate Masaka-Mutukula Road? Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The feasibility study for the Mutukula-Masaka Road and the details to rehabilitate it were completed in October 2020 and will be financed by the AFDB Grant through the EAC. 

It was agreed in the EAC Council of Transport and Works ministers that the road rehabilitation works is implemented as a regional project and the ministers were to inform finance ministers to submit requests through the EAC. 

On 9 July 2021, the honourable Minister for Works wrote to the Minister of Finance to request for funds from the AFDB through the EAC. We will continue to rehabilitate that road - to patch the potholes - until funds for rehabilitating that road are secured. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what timeline have you given to the ministry to follow up on this funding?

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I can give two months from now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you will get a response in two months’ time. That is an assurance from the Leader of Government Business; that in two months’ time, we will be good to go.

4.23
MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of concern from Budiope East, Buyende District. This is a matter about the road network in the area. Buyende District happens to be at the end of Busoga between the fingers of Lake Kyoga. 

We have only one road under the control of UNRA and it was a bad road; 10 years later, the road became terrible. Today, as we speak, the road is impassable. What used to be transport by road is now transport by water - a road which is under the control of UNRA.

What is the plan of Government to address the situation of this road, which comes from Kamuli District to Iyingo landing point and connects to Serere District across the lake but also goes through Irundu and back to Kaliro District? If the road is not worked on, the people of Budiope East are cut off from the rest of the country and we shall soon become an island instead of being part of the mainland. Thank you very much.

MS NABBANJA: Thank you so much, hon. Magogo. Kamuli-Kidera-Bukungu in Buyende is due for upgrading to tarmac. There is a contractor maintaining that road. Uganda National Roads Authority has a framework contractor working on maintaining Nabirumba-Buyende-Kidera-Ndulya and that will be worked on in this quarter. Kamuli-Iyingo was worked on by Rock Trust Limited. All these will be reviewed again and an intervention will be made in quarter two. Kaliro-Irundu is under periodic maintenance by Swift Engineers Limited.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam, did you say Kamuli-Kidera? Actually, that is a different road. There is Kamuli road – 

MS NABBANJA: There is Kamuli-Iyingo and Ndulya, which he talked about and there is also Kaliro-Irundu, which he talked about. Kaliro-Irundu is under periodic maintenance by Swift Engineers Limited and roadworks are starting very soon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam, for how long should we expect the road works?

MS NABBANJA: Like I have told you, the releases for this quarter have just been sent and the work is going to start this quarter. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, after Prime Minister’s Time, it is only the Leader of the Opposition who has a right to reply as per the rules. These rules were made when hon. Nambooze was not there. Leader of the Opposition, can you reply?

4.29
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for attempting to answer the questions that were raised by Members.

These rules were improved upon so that the Prime Minister’s Time does not degenerate into a question-and-answer time like it used to be. If the Prime Minister was to conclude what she was reading in rule 41(5), the Prime Minister is required, and the word here is “shall” - “…shall provide written responses copied to the relevant Member and respond to these questions during Prime Minister’s question time.”

This is the commencement day, I suppose; next time, you will be in absolute compliance with what the rules require.

Madam Speaker, the two questions that were raised were both on roads. We know that in our budget allocation for the financial year 2021/2022, the lion’s share of that budget was for two sectors; Ministry of Works and Transport and the docket under which these roads are supposed to be rehabilitated and maintained as she has responded, received well over Shs 5 trillion and the other lion’s share was taken by security. 

There would be no justification whatsoever from the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, with all that huge budgetary allocation, to continue to have roads in deplorable states in this country, and of all places even in the city of Masaka. This remains a serious challenge and egg on the face of the Prime Minister. I beg to respond.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, and thank you, Prime Minister, for your response.

I also urge Members to make a close follow up on their issues since the Prime Minister has committed herself and said that within this quarter, work should be done. Prime Minister, you need to appreciate what Members are going through. Some of these people used those names as a campaign tool – “when I am in Parliament, I will make sure that this road is worked on.” Therefore, we need to be mindful and help these Members of Parliament with issues that they are raising. 

I would like to thank you for today’s sitting and for coming to attend. It is a practice that after the Prime Minister has spoken and given a statement, we do not have any other business. Therefore, I adjourn the House to Monday. 

(The House rose at 4.32 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 26 July 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)


