Wednesday, 6 July 2011

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I want to ask the sessional committees, especially those whose policy statements have arrived, to start sitting in the mornings in order to lay their action plans for the budget process. You can convene your meetings between 10.00 O’clock and 12.00 O’clock to set out your programmes for handling the budget process that we will start debating immediately after the State of the Nation Address debate.

Secondly, I also want to remind the Executive that there are ministries that haven’t sent in their policy statements yet ordinarily 30 June should be the deadline. Those that haven’t done so, please do the needful so that Parliament can work.

Today, we are starting the debate on the State of the Nation Address. In that regard, I would like to remind you that every Member has to contribute for only five minutes. So, I appeal to you not to have wide preambles; just say your name and constituency so that you can use your five minutes maximally. The other rule is that you are not allowed to contribute twice on the same issue. So, once you contribute to the State of the Nation Address, the next time you will contribute should be during the debate on the Budget. This is intended to have all the Members get opportunities to say what is of concern to their constituencies. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE 13TH ANNUAL REPORT 2010 - UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

THE SPEAKER: Is the Attorney-General here? If not present, please let us go to the next item.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCU THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 7 JUNE 2011

(Debate continued.)

2.20
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, especially for giving me the chance to be the first to make a comment on the State of the Nation Address. 

Yes, the President made a wonderful address that shows where we are, where we are planning to go and how we can get there. However, allow me make the following observations: 

One is that when you read this address, you realize that there is no mention on the serious climate change that is taking place in this country. Let me take the example of Mubende District, which I represent in this Parliament. We are experiencing serious water shortages, which have come about because of the reduced levels of rainfall and the prolonged dry spell.

This is so bad because for quite long, Mubende District has been a safe haven for many pastoral communities where during the dry spell many of them would migrate to with their animals to access water and pasture. However, this time round, we are just beginning to experience this dry spell, but Mubende is already experiencing a very high shortage of water. In this address, the President said that Government was planning to look at the issue of water for production by constructing small irrigation schemes. But I would like to request that Government only rehabilitates existing facilities. These facilities once rehabilitated, can hold sufficient amount of water to help in the production sector. Some of these are the valley dams that were constructed way back in the 1950s and 60, by the Europeans. The facilities were constructed in prime sites, where a lot of water could be harvested but today we don’t rehabilitate these ones and just go in for new sites; it means we will not get as much water as we used to get from those unattended to water facilities. The experience from Mubende is that in five sub-counties, a 20-litre jerrycan of water is sold at between Shs 500 and Shs 1,500.

Let me now comment on health. When you read through this address, you realise that it dwells a lot on the hardware; little was said about the software. Many of our facilities today are facing the problem of staff shortage. To use Mubende as an example, we have a regional referral hospital, which is supposed to have 42 doctors, but as I talk, we have only four doctors working in that hospital. But also none of them is a specialist. For example, we don’t have a pediatrician and we don’t have a gynecologist; we only have those ones doing general work, which makes the hospital not to perform well.

And when you get to the lower health facilities, you realise that there are similar problems - shortage of personnel. I would like to request that that is looked into.

In addition, I also request that we try to revise the procurement processes for drugs and other sundries that we have in place. Okay, the procurement process is centralised with all the medicines and sundries being procured by the National Medical Stores, but I would like to request that some little flexibility is allowed to the managers down there to procure about ten percent of the required medicines. I am saying this because these hospitals and other health units often run out of gloves yet they are considered as the first line centers for treatment. They cannot even buy gloves when they have run short of them; they have to wait for the National Medical Stores to procure. That is why I am requesting for some flexibility to be allowed on their budget to enable them address some of those emergencies.

Let me also say something about the education sector. I thank Government for the proposed free A’ Level education next year. Unfortunately, what was presented in the President’s State of the Nation Address was more to again do with hardware and not software. It was all about construction of classrooms, teachers’ houses and the like. I would like to request that we also look into the issue of accrediting more A’ Level schools to be government-aided. For example, in Mubende we have only six schools that are A’ Level schools. This number is too small to absorb all the students.

I would like to say something about the teaching of sciences in our schools. Again in this address, the President did not say anything about improving the teaching of sciences in our schools yet Uganda needs to improve in the science and technology areas –(Member timed out_)

2.26
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of national concern. In Buhweju, I have a biological emergency. Caterpillars have emerged from the area that borders the Kaswoha-Kitemi Forest Reserve and they have started eating the vegetation. I was there on Monday and the insects had come close to entering people’s houses. 

This is a peasant economy and the people are currently in preparations of growing millet, beans and potatoes. Those insects have got an effect on people’s bodies as they cause an itchy rash that results into fever. So, consequent upon the invasion of the insects and the caterpillars, people can no longer go to their fields to do any preparations. The people’s habitats have been threatened; children can no longer sleep because one insect is enough to chase the people out of their houses due to the itching effect. 

The community of Ugandans in Buhweju that I am talking about are tea growers. Last year, their tea earned Uganda foreign exchange worth Shs 21 billion but because the vegetation that these insects depend on also grows together with the tea, people can no longer go to the tea gardens. 

This community has received people from the vector control or crop protection unit but the verbal report that they gave is that, the insects do not kill people but my fear is that people may not die immediately but later on because of poverty and famine. So, there is need to address this situation urgently. 

Here with me is a tin in which I brought a sample of the insects and the vegetation on which they depend and with your permission, Madam Speaker, I request to lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.31
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Biraaro rose to raise a matter of urgent public importance and has laid a tin of caterpillars on the Table. I thought that before we get further into debate on the State of the Nation Address, we ought to get a response from Government on the course of action that they are going to take in response to that emergency that is affecting the people of Buhweju. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you should leave that to me. That is the most important matter in his constituency because it touches the income of the population. The caterpillars have been brought here and the ministers are here; they will give us an answer when responding. 

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also have a matter of national concern on the protection of consumers in Uganda. I would like to know from the Minister of Trade and Industry whether the Government, through the National Bureau of Standards, is equipped or has the capacity to detect any toxic materials or radioactive substances that come in various forms of imports. I would like to know whether we have this mechanism in place and if we do not, then it is high time we compelled Government and the ministry concerned to establish this mechanism at all entry points of Uganda because as you are aware, recently Japan was devastated by an earthquake that actually damaged two nuclear reactors and most of the projects from Japan were somehow affected by the radioactive material. We get a lot of products from Japan in form of vehicles and vehicles spare parts into our country. So, very many people in Uganda are concerned about this matter. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for the State of the Nation Address, you can raise any problems. So, you have actually used your opportunity. 

2.32
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to draw the attention of this House to what is transpiring in the city and in my constituency today. All traders and people with small scale businesses have closed their businesses peacefully without using any violence and I would like to call upon this honourable House and the minister to clearly come up with something. I commend the minister for trying to meet a few of them, but I know that the situation there was not the best because tempers were high and people are really concerned. 

The dollar continues to surge with no answer to this problem. Our people import their goods in dollars and they even exchange the shilling to travel with dollars. If we do not address the issue of fuel - the President spoke about this issue in the economy during his State of the Nation Address but it was too broad and no solution was expressed. 

Taxes are high –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Nsereko, for giving way. I heard you talk about the depreciation of the shilling and I want to give you this information. This issue really hurts Ugandans, especially the business community. Can you imagine that most of the people who have property in Kampala or anywhere else in Uganda are charging rent in dollars? I really do not know why the ministry does not act in a patriotic way in order for us to begin promoting our Uganda Shilling. Why should we accept to pay rent in dollars? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsereko, if you continue allowing information, your five minutes will pass but it is up to you. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, all of us know that when Kampala is on fire, the whole country catches fire and you will realise that this is the epicentre of this economy. This is the epicentre of the common Ugandans who dig into their pockets and go to the bank to attract a few mortgages and at high interest rates. With the increasing rent that is levied in dollars, like the hon. Member stated, the window in which the Uganda Revenue Authority charges our people is in dollars and they are now attracting all taxes to be paid through one window. I think these issues are all deterrent to traders and they are affecting the trade of the common business man down there.

That notwithstanding, you can see the level of the way things are moving in the city. The disrespect that you see for elected leaders; you see the Executive Director proudly disrespecting the powers of an elected leader like the Lord Mayor. This is unacceptable! They are talking of breaking buildings, yet people have already paid rent seven months upfront. What do you expect the people to do? 

In reality, we need this Government to come out and address mainly the issue of the surging prices of goods, the hiked dollar rate, the issue of interest rates because the cost of borrowing in this country is appalling. 

In conclusion, I would like us as Parliament to come out and show solidarity with the traders in this city but also, I would like to commend the effort the Minister in charge of Trade, the hon. Amelia Kyambadde, has tried to do but this is not enough. 

We, as the people of Kampala and the people of this country, demand something better and very fast. With the surging price of the dollar, fuel prices, there is no way - look at sugar; the price is about Shs 3,800. What will the people do? Soap, basic commodities at home - what are the people going to do? For us we earn slightly or moderately good wages; but what of the other government workers who are in this country: teachers, servicemen, doctors, nurses, to mention but a few? They buy these things from the same supermarkets like us. Do we have to come out openly and say, “We must cut down on the taxes that are levied on fuel, petrol, diesel and others?” 

We must come up, even if we are in a liberal economy, to address the issue of people being charged in dollars. We are a shilling economy; why should we run things in dollars? I know the dollar is the mode of trade internationally but not in this country. We should protect our shilling. We call upon the Minister of Finance to come here with a statement and give us a solution; not cosmetic statements to just come here and tell this country, “You see, the dollar is surging because of this.” We want real solutions, “That now, we are going to inject this money into the economy in order to see that the price at which the shilling trades with the dollar comes down -(Member timed out_)  

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know whether there are no other Members who want to raise issues on trade because you could wait and listen. I think you should listen first because there may be other Members wanting to talk about trade. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your kind consideration. I rise on a point of procedure. While closely associating myself with the submission of hon. Nsereko, it would be terribly insensitive for the House to sit here when the capital city and many other towns have closed business to continue talking about other things as if this is not an emergency. Therefore, I request that we get a submission from the Minister of Trade who has made some attempts. We hear where she has reached so that we find a practical solution. Otherwise, it would be terribly insensitive on our side.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is not only the traders who have a problem; there is also load shedding; there is also what - you know, if we are going to do that, it means we destroy the State of the Nation Address. Let the ministers listen; I will give you an opportunity for you today to answer because others are going to stand up and talk about the trade. You cannot just answer for Kampala. There may be others who want to talk about trade. I will give you time before we close this session today to give us your explanation.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, mine is also just a procedural concern. Indeed, in associating myself with the remarks of the MP for Kampala Central, from the media, I am informed that this type of action, the Kampala type of sit-down by traders, is shifting to the countryside as well. I would like to implore you that we find time because this matter had come up last week. If Government had come up on the Floor and given a convincing reassurance to this nation, and given strategic interventions that would help stabilise the shilling, perhaps we would not be having a sit-down strike in Kampala now. What happens if it continues like that? My prayer to you, Madam Speaker, is that this matter finds adequate space but also an urgent reassurance to this nation because if it doesn’t, it is going to go out of hand and it will be very difficult for us. My prayer is that it doesn’t get submerged in the state of the nation.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have already said that today I will give an opportunity to the minister to speak about that issue; but let us do other business. She is going to speak. Please. All that is state of the nation; trade is state of the nation.

2.42
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as I asked, Madam Speaker, to instruct the Minister of Finance to come and talk about the dollar, I anticipated it. Really, it is worsening.

Furthermore, when I go back to my constituency, people wake up in the morning, go and cultivate, they grow crops; which is at least encouraged by our Uganda. But again, you find that we have animals like elephants that destroy the people’s crops. As we talk now, people cannot manage to buy a kilo of sugar which is at Shs 3,000. So, I would like to bring it to your attention that at least this country should come up and assist the people neighbouring the national parks.

My constituency is called “Ekitara kya Bushenyi,” meaning, “The store of Bushenyi” where food comes from. We produce tonnes and tonnes of food; but when you see the infrastructure, especially the road from Katerera towards Ibanda joining the main one, it is impassable. When I was reading about the roads to be constructed under the road network, it is not there. The constituency is not happy about it because they are producing and do not have well-developed infrastructure to ferry their produce.

This does not affect Katerera only as a constituency or Bunyaruguru but also goes back towards the western region. We would like to use this Floor to make sure that at least that concern is addressed.

We are here but there are people who are suffering in the village. They are dying. They do not even have money to buy Panadol yet in the hospitals, there is no medicine. If it is the wish of this House, we should at least make sure that we advocate for our people to make sure that the government avails drugs in the hospitals. Thank you very much.

2.46
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have some concerns about the education sector. My first concern is about the staff ceiling in primary schools. If a class has about 20 pupils, I would think that it requires having a teacher. Because even when schools are registering for PLE centre numbers, the minimum required number of pupils is 15. But what is being done in our localities is that they do not consider the distribution of pupils in class. They only consider enrolment, which I think is unfair. 

For instance, if a school has, say, 150 pupils, the staff ceiling there is only three because the teacher to pupil ratio is 1:50. So, even though the ratio is improved to 1:56, I don’t think that it will make any change. There are schools where you go and find only three teachers. You find in some classes teachers shouting at the top of their voices and when you ask them where the other teachers are, they tell you that their ceiling is only three teachers. And when you ask them how they handle the other classes, they say that they only give them exercises which they do without assistance of a teacher. So, I think that there is need to revise the staff ceiling in primary schools.

My other concern about the staff ceiling is that head teachers should be above this ceiling. What is being done in our localities is that a head teacher is allocated to a class. We know that a head teacher, as an administrator, is at times invited to meetings, workshops and other official events but if he attends to any of the two, it means that one of the two will have to be missed. He will either attend a workshop or meeting and fails to attend to the class or he attends to his class and does not attend the official and important meetings. 

We know that as an administrator, a head teacher is supposed to supervise his subordinates but if he is allocated to a class, I don’t think he is able to supervise the other teachers in other classes.

My other concern is that the capitation grant is sent to districts even though we have heard that there is a resolution that was passed by the Eighth Parliament that it should go straight to school accounts. When they pass the district, it takes them time to get the funds. You may find that the release is got when the term is almost ending, which I don’t think is fair.

Lastly, I would also wish to I request our banks to extend their services to distant areas. Some have tried to distribute ATM services but the problem still remains unsolved. A teacher may wish to go and withdraw his or her salary but finds it out of operation. The teacher now gets stranded and cannot get transport to travel back. Such a teacher may now opt to stay at a relative’s home for two or three days until the ATM becomes operational. Most areas don’t have ATM services. In the meantime, when the teacher is waiting for the ATM, the pupils are not being attended to. They will therefore return home without having had any lessons. So, my request is that banks should extend their services to distant areas. 

2.52
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In his State of the Nation Address, on page 39, His Excellency talked about regional and international relations and he said Uganda enjoys, and continues to enjoy, very excellent relations with her neighbours. 

I want to bring it to the attention of this House and the Government that as I talk now; a Sudanese investor came and surveyed over 1,000 hectares of land belonging to the Madi people. They even went ahead to plough it and use over 100 hectares and when the local people made noise and wanted to fight them, they took off. 

About two-and-half years ago, His Excellency, the President of Uganda and his counterpart, Salva Kiir of Southern Sudan, flew to Moyo for on spot assessment and reassured the Madi people that they were going to work on the issue of land. But so far, nothing so far has been done. The people of Moyo are living like squatters on their land. So, it is my request that the Minister of Defence or Internal Affairs goes to Moyo to asses for himself what is taking place. Otherwise, the people there are threatening to demonstrate. I just had to telephone them and told them to relax and wait for what the Government will do. But as I talk now, we are squatters on our land.  

Four people died last year; they were killed by Sudanese policemen along the border. One of them had gone to check on his crops but they claimed that he was inside Sudanese territory. The other went to dig and he was shot on the spot. All these murders remain unsolved. We are requesting the relevant authorities to take steps to address the situation. Otherwise, time will come when I will fail to control my people in West Moyo. 

Secondly, I would like to talk about the Universal Secondary Education (USE). UPE is still limping; USE has failed to take off properly and we are now introducing universal A’ Level education! How shall we have all the three improved upon when the two are failing? As an educationist, I feel I should mention this.   

The issue of the border and land in Moyo; and the issue of education, should be improved upon. Thank you very much. 

2.56
MS ANNET OKWENYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate very much that Government has tried its very best to bring Uganda to the level it is today, as far as development is concerned. However, we have challenges and I represent a district that, if you look at, is one of the most disadvantaged districts in this country. It is my pleasure to use this opportunity to tell perhaps the honourable ministers present about some of the problems that we are facing in Otuke, and I hope they really note because we are suffering. 

First, the health situation; we do not have a hospital. We only have health centre IVs. Please, Minister of Health, if you are listening, help us! I am making it brief because I have only five minutes. 

Education: in Otuke, we only have four secondary schools of which only one is A’ Level. So, please help us with that. I will not mention the primary schools because the level of education, UPE and other things - I am not the opposition but I am just trying to give you people my problems in Otuke so please take note.

The roads are the worst in the country. We do not even have a murram road. Those of you who have gone to Otuke know how the roads are. So please, those are some of the challenges we are facing there. 

As far as what is happening in the country today is concerned, I know it is affecting us because right now everything is being sold in dollars. The businessmen are switching to selling their goods in dollars right now and I do not know if a common man in Otuke who even cannot afford Shs 1,000 in a day can afford to buy anything in dollars.

Concerning power or electricity, we are in a black out. So, please infrastructure-wise, I request Government to look at my district. I am not being selfish but those are the problems we have. Thank you very much.

2.59
MR MICHAEL KAFABUSA (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion. I would like to appreciate the indication as enshrined in the State of the Nation Address regarding the issue of land. It is indicated here that Government is committed to sustainable land use and land tenure security, which is very good. And I may appear tautological but I need to state this for emphasis. In order to realise this, we need a sound national land policy and I am glad to note that the last draft of the national land policy is before Cabinet and I would like to urge Government to expeditiously move so that we approve the national land policy because whatever we do in terms of transforming this country will be premised on a sound national land policy -(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am just seeking a simple clarification, Madam Speaker. Hon. Werikhe was a Minister of Lands in the very department he is talking about. Can you tell us why you did not do what you are telling the others to do now? (Laughter)

MR KAFABUSA: I think that is why I informed the House that the last draft of the national land policy is before Cabinet -(Applause)- and to arrive at that stage you go through several processes. We had country wide consultations. Yesterday I listened to the Leader of the Opposition who indicated in his speech that perhaps there was no draft national land policy. There is one but Cabinet is in the process of debating it, and then it will be brought to the august House. That is why I am urging Cabinet to expeditiously move so that we have this policy here. (Applause)

A number of laws will be affected by the national land policy. When you look at Article 237(3) it is provided that land in this country will be owned according to four land tenure systems: customary, leasehold, mailo and freehold. But when you go to clause 4(b) of the same Article, you find that the customary land tenure system is –(Ms Alaso rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, if you give your time -

MR KAFABUSA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to hon. Alaso, permit me to make my point. We can negotiate outside the Chamber. (Laughter)

On the issue of the Land Fund - because this is also alluded to under the very sector of land management - we passed this way back in 1998 and the Land Fund is managed by the Uganda Land Commission. What disturbs me is the inadequate funding that is given to the Land Fund because it is supposed to do quite a lot of things, among these the redress of injustices that were created by historical accidents in certain parts of this country, one of them being Kibaale. 

We need, as a House, to support this move so that the Land Fund is adequately given the necessary support so that people who are regarded as bona fide and lawful occupants in some of these areas are accorded the opportunity of owning something called land. Kibaale people are sitting on land; they are using it but they are not owners. You find that the owners are not even actually in this country or they do not know where the land in Kibaale is, and yet they are owners because they flag the paper titles. So, the Land Fund, I believe, is going to resolve some of these challenges that we have.

Concerning petroleum, I would like to appreciate the efforts of Government to ensure that we extract oil as quickly as possible to contribute to the process of transformation. However, in the Albertine Graven, as we inch towards the final extraction of oil, we need to have the area or the region well planned because there are lots of pressures that are now being exerted on the land in the area. If we do not plan this area, we shall have chaotic and disorderly development.

The ministries – because this is not something for one minister as such; it is a multi-disciplinary activity or initiative - I implore various ministries like Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Ministry of Water and Environment, to come together and create a plan that will address the comprehensive planning in this area -(Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want you to join me in welcoming students and teachers of Gombe Secondary School, represented by hon. Faisal Kikulukunyu and hon. Mariam Nalubega. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.08
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, Rukungiri Municipality is a newly created constituency so I am here to report the serious problems we are facing as a new constituency. We have many problems but I will mention a few and I think they cut across other newly created municipal councils.

The first one is a problem of water. The whole of Rukungiri Municipality has spent three months without water. I appeal to everybody concerned to come to our rescue. 

Secondly, there is a problem of road equipment; we do not have any and since we are a new constituency, we need to open up roads.

I want to comment about the multi-party system in the local governments. At least here we have the Leader of the Opposition and the shadow cabinet and so the situation is a little okay. But in local governments, some leaders, especially the councilors subscribing to the Opposition parties have a problem; the multi-party system is not straight. So, we need to hear from whoever is concerned in this House so that our people at the grassroots get a voice.

Lastly, there is a transport problem for our officials: the town clerk, the mayor and some technical staff members do not have even a single vehicle for their official use. Please, come to their rescue. Thank you.

3.11
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have several issues as stressed in the State of the Nation Address. The President pointed out clearly that unemployment is a big problem, which I appreciate. He also outlined some issues that have to be undertaken. And if I may refer to the national budget framework paper, Shs 44 billion was set aside for job creation, especially for provision of funds in the small and medium enterprises for the youth, dedicating work space for the youth in common markets and re-tooling the youth for income generating activities.

I wish to point out that the different ministries, departments and agencies have staff ceilings that are not yet filled. For example, in Kasese we were recently supposed to recruit 58 health workers but the wage bill could cater for only 20 of them. This issue should be taken seriously as we think of creating more jobs.

I also want to talk about the issue of retirement. The law provides that you retire at 60 but as we think of creating more jobs, why don’t we reduce the retirement age for both the civil servants and politicians? (Laughter) I propose that 55 years are ideal for civil servants and 60 for politicians.

I also want to propose that the investments that are coming in and the projects that are being undertaken, as we mainstream them, we should include the Ugandans to acquire skills. I have seen many people coming to do projects in Uganda: building factories but they bring technicians from abroad without involving Ugandans. We are talking about building numerous power stations in Uganda but how many Ugandans are acquiring that skill? We have engineers – I wish that the supervisors and implementers of such projects could include Ugandans so that if we set up five power stations, Ugandans set up the sixth.

There are issues that are pertinent to Kasese: Kilembe Mines Hospital is a very big hospital but when I was there recently, I discovered that they do not have an x-ray machine and yet it serves over 300,000 people.

Regarding the creation of employment, Kilembe Mines is a very big mining area that is idle. I have seen very many investors showing interest and I have talked to some of them; but what comes out is that Government is not assisting them to take on those mines. If it were to happen, over 5,000 jobs would be created in Uganda. I wish the minister concerned could expedite this issue and we get the jobs for our people. 

Since I come from an urban area, I am seeing a problem on what we call the land boards. There is a lot of land grabbing and conflicts in urban areas and we still depend on the district land boards, which cover quite a big area but some of them seem not to be conversant with operations of urban areas. I wish to propose that urban areas should also get statutory bodies in the name of urban land boards. 

3.17
MR NGANDA SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If someone came to this Parliament, that person would need your guidance in order to know which side is in Government and which one is on the Opposition. Colleagues who have spoken before are all lamenting, and giving a catalogue of what they are facing in their different constituencies. But it is routine that Parliament must thank the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address, although the submissions of Members of Parliament on either side are actually lamentations and complaints. 

Unfortunately, when some of us were walking to raise the profile of the problems in this country, there were people who were laughing and dismissing us as fanatics and hooligans. Some of us went to jail! Now, I am not celebrating but only reminding them that these problems are never localised to individuals and constituencies. (Applause) You may come here and pretend that your Government is doing enough but tomorrow when you have the microphone, you are going to apologise: “Forgive me for speaking like I am in the Opposition.” (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I hope that you are not intimidating other Members.
 
MR SEMUJJU: I am discussing the State of the Nation Address.

THE SPEAKER: Please, do not intimidate your colleagues in this House.
 
MR SEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I need your protection. 
 
THE SPEAKER: You are protected. 

MR SEMUJJU: When we were walking, the response was brutality from the Police, military and all the state agencies responsible for security. The traders have staged a strike and the response has been the same. Trucks full of policemen have been offloaded and deployed all over the city. And that is how this Government responds! If you have a problem, they must send you the Police, which is an exhibition of insensitivity of the highest order. 

The shilling is depreciating and the response is sending Police on the streets. The prices of essential commodities are skyrocketing but the response is to send the military and Police to make people keep quiet. 

The institution responsible for electricity, Umeme, has been sending us messages of regret that there is now a power generation shortfall of 50 megawatts during the day and 120 during the peak hours, resulting in what they have described as an emergency load shedding. The good thing the Leader of Government Business is here; I do not know whether he is going to send Police and tear gas to Umeme. (Laughter)  

From the shilling depreciating to load shedding, lightning and everything, we are a country that is falling apart! In fact, you have to be reminded that there is a Government or if that Government exists, that it cares by either Parliament moving a motion to thank the President for giving the State of the Nation Address. So, we are just performing the routine role of thanking and then complaining later. So, at the end of the debate, what are we going to be thankful about? Is it the hours we spent at the Conference Centre or the content of the speech each one of us is complaining about? 

I had intended to speak about issues of land - the grabbing of land, which has become an official policy of this Government. They will tell you, “We are going to construct a hotel at Shimoni by a prince from Saudi Arabia,” but that prince disappears in thin air -(Member timed out_)

3.22
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Order Paper today shows that this is the 13th Sitting of the First Session of this Parliament; but I have a concern pertaining to one Member of this House, and as far as I remember, I have not missed even a single sitting in this House but I don’t remember to have really seen him  present in this House. According to the procedure, he might lose out on his post and that is hon. Gilbert Bukenya. What makes the honorable member to absent himself? Is he serving the nation? Is he having a problem in that he is stressed and cannot serve the nation? What is really happening?

Back to the State of the Nation Address, the conclusion of this speech says: “The NRM Manifesto is the principal agreement between the NRM Government and the people of Uganda.” During the campaigns, the President happened to make several pledges outside the manifesto. I have read the manifesto of the NRM and with particular interest in Kaliro District, which is my constituency anyway, and found that the manifesto doesn’t speak expressly about where I come from.  

The President made several pledges like tarmacking Kaliro-Gadumile Road, extending power to Nawampiti, making a bridge between Bulamogi and Pallisa and I would like to get an assurance, probably form the Minister for the Presidency, that actually these pledges, which are not part of the principal agreement, are going to be fulfilled because it is not the first time for us to have promises by the President and they are not fulfilled. Can we have in the beginning of this Parliament an assurance that within these five years, these promises are going to be fulfilled? 

I would like to talk about the welfare of civil servants and with particular concern, the primary school teachers and other low-paid people. I can with certainty say that if a teacher in Kotido had a patient that he wanted to transfer to Mulago and there are two or three people escorting him, probably half of his salary would be spent on transport only. And given the rate at which the cost of living is going up, Government needs to come out clearly without any ambiguity concerning the improvement of the salaries of the low-paid civil servants in consonance with the cost of living as it stands today. Can you imagine if a primary school teacher had a child in university? How would he pay tuition for that child? It becomes practically impossible!

Finally, on the issue of corruption, which led the Opposition Members of Parliament to move out of during the delivery of the State of the Nation Address, one thing I am sure about is that corruption moves from up and comes down. If a minister is not corrupt, it will be very hard for a permanent secretary to be corrupt and it will be very hard for a CAO to be corrupt at the district level and similarly, it will be too hard for the sub-county chief to be corrupt at the sub-county level.

We want this responsibility to be taken on and in fact, I would suggest that this nation adopts, as a policy, procedure where if somebody has been accused of corruption and found guilty of even taking Ugshs 1.0 million or Ugshs 500,000, that person be published in the national and international media on the list of shame and we adopt it for this country that, “This person was corrupt and was found guilty of having eaten public funds.” I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the chance you have given to me.

3.28
MR ROBERT SEKITOLEKO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of concern regarding the energy and mineral sector as talked about in the State of the Nation Address. You will realise that it looks like we are doing so well regarding the hydro power generation as well evidenced on pages 19 and 20 of this State of the Nation Address.

My concern is that for the last 45 years, we have been relying on this same hydro power generation with no big problems probably because the demand wasn’t too much. The honourable members will agree with me that hydro power generation entirely depends on the act of God. If there is not enough rain that implies that we shall not generate enough hydro power. The honourable members will also agree with me that we do not have a contract with God that we shall always have enough rain whenever we need it. So, it is about time we began thinking about other methods of electric power generation. We have other methods, which include geo-thermal. This is a very good and environment-friendly one and as far as I am aware, it is affordable. This is because right now we are running a thermal power arrangement, which is even more expensive than the geo-thermal and other types like gas and wind types.

Right now we are burning fuel in order to generate the would-be hydro power because of the low water levels at the dam. Now we are constructing so many more hydro power plants, which is very good but I am afraid sooner or later, these power plants are going to convert into thermal generation plants like what we are doing right now. This is a very expensive venture and, therefore, not sustainable. So, it is about time for us to know what the medium and long term plan is within our Ministry of Energy so that we know how to advise and go about this. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

3.32
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to, first of all, thank His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address. I want to take this opportunity to also commend the Government on the achievements that were registered in the last financial year.

However, allow me to make a few comments especially on economic growth. I appreciate the economic growth of 49.1 percent but I want to say that the economic growth should be reflected in the standards of living of our people. I happen to represent a rural constituency, where you would find families worried about what to eat the next day and worried about lack of shelter. So, I would be very happy to see economic growth that reflects our standards of living.

Secondly, I want to talk about transport. In the Financial Year 2009/10, I remember very well when His Excellency talked of the UPDF assisting in repairing the railway network. The entire financial year of 2010/11, it has been only feasibility studies. When this was mentioned, quite a number of Ugandans were happy because we know that over reliance on the road network has not only hiked the traffic jam but has also led to increase in transport costs.

If you compare the Mombasa-Kampala railway network, you will find just one route to Kampala from Mombasa and a trader, exporter or business person would spend about US $2,000 on one route and yet if we are using the railway network, it would cost half that. So, the onus is upon the Minister of Works, who is not in the House – Oh, is that the Minister of Works? Hon. Lumumba, are you the Minister of Works? I would be happy to say this when the Minister of Works is around to take note. One year of feasibility studies is enough; we would love to see the operationalisation of these railway networks.

Thirdly, I want to appreciate the revenue collections that surpassed the estimated figure by Shs 24 billion. I think this justifies why we can now fund 70 percent of our budget. I must commend the good work done by URA because I know they have generally done a lot of sensitisation and education to taxpayers. This has really helped us in reducing over reliance on external financiers that have been financing our budget all along. So, I must commend Government and URA in particular for this great job.

Last but not least, I want to talk about corruption. I thank His Excellency for his resilience in fighting corruption. (Interjections) I am entitled to my opinion, don’t say, “Eh!” I am entitled to my opinion, hon. Members! Protect me, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order Members! You are protected.

MS NAMARA: He has out-rightly come out against corruption, time and again. Although he said that he is going to put in position a committee to fight corruption, I think we have enough departments to fight the scourge. What else is lacking? We need to see these bodies such the DPP, CID and others - we need to see them biting if political figures and big shots in this Government do not interfere in their work. Let them do their work independently –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members some of the people who were excited about the railway were the Basoga, they were thinking that we would get the Busoga loop line. 

3.37
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): I am standing here to bring to the attention of this House the youth question, in view of the state of the Nation Address. 

Before the President addressed the nation, a youth councilor called and asked how we stand to benefit from the State of the Nation Address. I am happy that we were not disappointed as there were some social and economic interventions that were pronounced to help the youth. To that extent I am very happy.

However, when the President talked about the economic growth being at 9.1 percent, I asked myself, what is the contribution of the youth? We always say that the youth are the majority. I would be very happy if the President continued to tell us what the contribution of the youth is as far as 9 percent growth is concerned.

You see we have a problem because we say that the youth are challenged with unemployment. This House should call upon all the necessary players to take into consideration the issue of employment census. If we come up with a clear database and statistical information on how we stand as far as the contribution of the youth in the relevant sectors of the country, the issue of employment census will clearly address how many youths are employed and yet are under-employed. It will also help determine what structural reforms we need to address the issue of unemployment -(Interruptions) 

I was very happy when the President came up with the idea of five cows per household. One time, I was doing my research and I found that when Winston Churchill visited Africa, he summarised Uganda as the counsel; meaning that if we concentrated on developing our country, we would be the financial drivers of East and Central Africa. If the President at this time realises that if we provide our households with four or five cows, then I am happy.

I would also like to appreciate the issue of entrepreneurship; the President talked about developing the skills of the youths. I want to bring it to the attention of the Minister of Education. If we can integrate entrepreneur mentorship right from primary, secondary and all tertiary institutions, we would be helped because the limitations we have in our country are not about social but commercial entrepreneurship which we need the youth to exhibit but also we have the limitation about the socialisation of our systems.

One day, I was talking to a Chinese friend and I asked him about his impressions of Uganda. He said in Uganda we have money. “Uganda is full of opportunities”, he said. If we have opportunities and we still have unemployed youth, then the issue is that our social networks have a problem. Please, Ministry of Education, much as you are allocating funds to mentor the youth in entrepreneurship capacity, it would be wonderful if we inculcate this system of entrepreneurship right from primary. Some people are saying that some of the subjects that we teach are useless but the issue is that teachers need to be trained such that they attach an entrepreneur’s mind to what they are giving to our students. This will help to avert the issue of unemployment and under-employment in the country. 

As I wind up -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I will allow the Minister of Trade to talk about trade issues later.

3.43
MR IDD ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. 

We are here to represent the interests of the people of Uganda. I have observed that sometimes districts fail to utilise money and it is sent back to the central treasury. This is an embarrassment! The ministry of finance should explain why districts are failing to utilise the money.

During the Address, the President stressed the commitment of Government to extend power to our rural areas. I remember there is a grant that the Eighth Parliament approved. The loan was worth Shs 500 million of which Mayuge, Bwonda and other places were beneficiaries. Up to now there is no work going on. The responsible minister must also explain why Parliament can commit, approve and then keep quiet. It was a loan that was granted and approved by the Eighth Parliament. 

I wonder why Government is always recruiting soldiers and police officers while undermining health, which is a very important sector. Last month, I went to Jinja Hospital and found a whole ward being attended to by one nurse. This was an embarrassment! I wonder why this Government cannot have money to recruit doctors. Why do we have so many police officers? Wherever you go, they are there, and yet we do not have doctors in our hospitals? (Applause)

I think there is something that this Government must do because when we are here - I want to disagree with my brother, hon. Semujju Nganda – we are here not to oppose but here on issues of national concern. (Applause) We are here to represent our people and when there is an issue that affects all of us, I think this is the time now - this is the right House that we can sit in and address these issues. 

There is a gap that was left out in the elections that we have just gone through - and that is the LC I chairpersons. We cannot have leadership without village leadership. We have leaders at the village level who are not constitutionally recognised. A statement must be made as to why these elections have failed to take off -(Member timed out_)  

3.49
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butaleja): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the President for the very good address that had important ideas. (Applause) However, where, I face a problem is implementing the ideas – this is going to be very difficult. I quoted from the last State of Nation Address he delivered concerning agriculture; on page 12, there was an idea about forming structures concerning NAADS. He gave it in the former State of Nation Address –(Applause)– but up to now, it has never been implemented. (Laughter and Applause)

I also made research on the last State of Nation Address because I was not around and I was trying to compare notes. He talked about corruption and gave very good and brilliant measures to fight corruption. After reading these ideas, I was just saying in my heart, “Yes, Uganda is now going to move forward.” But I got disappointed! (Interjections) 

Concerning inflation, I wish to inform this House that this problem is becoming big - driving from Kampala – it is really touching and hitting my pockets! I used to drive from Entebbe to Kampala and at first I used Shs 20,000 then I went to Shs 30,000. Whenever we complained, Government always said we would normalise. Then I went to Shs 50,000 and the Government said, “The situation is temporary.” Right now, I use Shs 100,000. (Applause)

On a serious note, every day I use Shs 100,000 to fuel my car. Madam Speaker, you always see me getting out before the session ends because if there is jam –(Laughter)- I will not be able to reach home and so I have to go before jam has increased because my pocket will not be able to afford. We really have to tackle this problem because the prices have been going up and have not been coming down, which is a serious matter that we have to handle.

On health, I really appreciated when the President said that Government would construct more health centers and hospitals. But what I am wondering is that we have old ones but in a very sorry state. I want to invite you to my district of Butaleja and you will even cry. It has only one regional referral hospital. People from Budaka, part of Namutumba, part of Nagongera come to Busolwe Hospital but there is no machine that functions and yet it is a big hospital.

In the last Parliament, you passed money for the construction of health centre IIIs but if you come to my district, you will not even find Panadol. You will find only one nurse. (Applause) I request that as we are getting more ideas to construct more hospitals, we should first make sure that the old ones we have are in good shape so that our people will have some assurance that -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I have noted that the clerk is not warning the honourable members at four minutes and that also my team downstairs is not flashing the green light to warn the honourable members that they have one minute. Please, do it.   

3.54
MS JANE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of Nation Address. I have about four areas of concern and I would like to start where the hon. Member West Moyo has stopped.

When the President and His Excellency, Salva Kiir visited Moyo District, I was the Mistress of Ceremony and the president told Members of Parliament, local leaders and LC Vs to keep their hands off international border matters. It is now more than eight months since but nothing has been done. Today, we are in that confusion and as leaders from that district, we do not know what to do because we are told to keep our hands off and yet there are issues on the ground. 

As Southern Sudan is getting its independence on the 9th, they have written to invite us to participate and yet our community wants to hold demonstrations. We are now confused. I am asking the Minister of Foreign Affairs to find time and advise us before the 8th so that we go and talk to our people. It is very important for the ministry to come to the ground as soon as possible.

On agriculture, I would like to thank the President for recognising the fact that agriculture remains the backbone of our economy. In this year’s Budget Speech, the President said that irrigation schemes are to be put in place. However, what I would like to propose is, it is good to rehabilitate the old irrigation schemes that are already in place, but there are these water bodies like River Nile. There are also many other water bodies. Why don’t we start from those? Is there a plan by Government for the districts surrounding those water bodies to immediately benefit from the irrigation schemes?

Government has put aside an agricultural credit facility worth Shs 90 billion. That is good, but we should also take into consideration the changing climatic conditions. Will the farmers be insured against these loans? My proposal is that Government should come up with an agricultural loan insurance scheme that can protect farmers in times of disasters such as floods.

On education, the President said that last year there was a hardship allowance. But I am sorry to say that Moyo District, which is one of the furthest districts in Uganda, was left out of this arrangement. Internet is still a problem in Moyo. And when you have to get to Moyo, you have to cross a water body using a ferry at Laropi. The distance from the furthest sub-county to the district headquarters is about 70 kilometers. Internal public transport - like the taxis that we have in Kampala - are not available in Moyo. The teachers who come to receive their salaries from, for example, Obongi pay Shs 25,000 and yet sometimes they come and find the network off for about three to four days. 

Who suffers in this situation? That is why I am saying people in Moyo still have problems. And if these facilities are going to continue (to be useful) I request the Minister of Education to consider Moyo District as one of those to benefit from the allowances for people in hard-to-reach areas. 

I am happy that Government has finally considered –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can I ask the minister of trade to update us on what is happening?

3.59
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, whereas Government has tried to create a conducive environment, there are still pertinent issues we have to address especially as far as the traders are concerned.

We have had two days of discussion with KACITA – in fact today was the third day. Among the issues they raised, and some of them have been raised by honourable members in this House, regarded high taxes – the trade licenses do not commensurate with the services offered –(Interjections)– allow me to finish -(Interjections)- I will issue a statement later -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are the ones who demanded that I create time for the minister to speak on this issue; please, it was your side that demanded for this. Minister, please proceed.

MS KYAMBADDE: Of course, there is the issue of immigrants who are dealing in fake trade – we had a team from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. There was also another team from the ministries of finance and that of trade, but we could not convince the traders from carrying out this strike.

So, what is the ministry of trade planning to do in the short run? I would like to inform this House that we have decided to suspend the trade licenses because they are extremely high in addition to not being commensurate to the services offered by the people.

Secondly, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is going to carry out a head count of the immigrants who came in as tourists. We are going to try very hard to see that we facilitate the arbitration committee to intervene into the issues of the traders who have had problems with Sudan.

Their medium term issues are going to be set out in my comprehensive statement tomorrow after further consultations with the stakeholders. Although yesterday we agreed with KACITA that they call off the strike, we were surprised to see one of the leaders turn around to say that he had been coerced or that he signed the document under duress. That is not true because the document was signed in the presence of many members of the KACITA Executive. 

Today, we went to Nakivubo because that meeting had been proposed by KACITA. Unfortunately, there was nobody from KACITA although there were so many other traders who numbered almost 500. We told them about our medium term strategies, one of them being creating an umbrella for the SMEs in the ministry of trade. This was arrived at after we realised that all these problems emanate from the fact that these people do not have a voice. They do not have a central point from where to air their views and challenges, but we are working towards that.

Another medium term is to review the trade licenses by all means. We have to sensitise the community about the bilateral issues like the East African Community – they do not know what is going on.

And for Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda, which is not my docket, they are trying to work very hard to see that the dollar stabilises.

Allow me to present a statement tomorrow because we have to do further consultations in the morning; I can present it in the afternoon. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Members rose)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us wait for the main statement tomorrow. You cannot debate today and then do the same thing tomorrow when she presents her statement. We shall debate her statement tomorrow. Minister, please, go with them and give them the information. 

Hon. Todwong, make your contribution.

4.05
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to respond to three or four areas that appear in the State of the Nation Address. My sub-region and the entire Northern Uganda is just recovering from a two-decade war that saw us lose generations of young people, although we have a stock of those whose skills we need to develop.

On page 26 of the Address, the President talks of Business Technical Vocational Education and Training (BTVET). It is in our interest that we request Government to empower our districts with more vocational training schools to enable us send our young people to learn and acquire skills that they can use in their lifetime. In addition, we request an increment in the capitation grant that Government sends to schools in Northern Uganda. We have schools, pupils and parents that were displaced. All these people are resettling and as a result, parents, schools and the administration do not have enough resources to run these institutions. The capitation grants that are being sent by Government are not adequate and as a result, parents are being asked to pay additional fees to schools and as a result, these poor parents cannot even afford that additional demand that they are given and most of our pupils are at home in spite of the UPE environment. 

We thank the President for giving scholarships to children from Northern Uganda to study at the university and we would like to appreciate him for the good gesture he showed when he said that in this financial year and the coming financial year, Government would continue sponsoring children from Acholi and Lango sub-regions in universities. We request that the procedures of selection should be made clear; that they should put on record those who should benefit from these scholarships. 

Secondly, on the issue of petroleum, I come from Nwoya District and I know that there is exploration of oil in my area but neither, in the government document nor in the private company’s document, is my district mentioned. Every time we talk about oil, we hear of the Albertine, Pakwach and nothing like Amuru or Nwoya and all the oil wells in that region are in our area. It is only courteous that we are recognised so that we do not lose out from the loyalties that might accrue from oil. 

On the issue of peace and security, as we recover from the war, of course there are consequences of war and some of these consequences border on the areas of compensation. The President, while campaigning in my area, mentioned that all the physically deformed war victims would be compensated by Government. When there was a bomb blast in Kampala, when there was a landslide in Bududa, so many of these victims were considered but my people of Northern Uganda have been crying for the last 20 years to be assisted. Many of them lost limbs, ears, noses and they are helpless. We need Government to come to their rescue. 

My colleague talked about the challenges we get from wildlife. My constituency borders the park and in the last one week, more that 100 people in a village called Agung are not sleeping in their houses because the elephants are moving out of the park and are grazing on people’s plantations. The Wildlife Authority is quiet. Two days ago, we made interventions and the only reply we got was that they do not have fuel to ferry the rangers. We are helpless; people’s crops have been destroyed and they are not sleeping in their homes. They are thinking of going back to the camps –(Member timed out_)

4.11
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join other Members in thanking the President for the wonderful State of the Nation Address. (Applause) The President pledged that Government is committed to improving health service delivery and I am beginning to see that. It all happened in my district of Namutumba when what was called a strange disease attacked my district and within the course of last week, we lost 16 children. When I raised the matter in the press, the Ministry of Health sent a team to the ground to assess the magnitude of the problem. The ministry came up with a diagnosis that these children are dying of malnutrition. 

I would like to partly agree with them because my district was hit by a heavy hailstorm sometime in May this year and all the crops were destroyed and indeed it is true that the people do not have anything to eat and as such, the children and the adults are hungry. But at the same time, I want them to go further because as a lay person, I have seen that when some of these children fall sick, their skins turn yellow and peel off. So, I would like to request the Ministry of Health to take keen interest and investigate why the skin peels off. 

I request the Ministry of Agriculture that since the Ministry of Health has diagnosed “maltrition” –(Interjections)– I am not a doctor -(Laughter)- I am requesting that the Ministry of Agriculture should come in to ensure that they get seeds and farm implements, especially hoes, for my people to plant crops because they are energetic and are willing to work but because of the heavy hailstorms that hit us, they do not have the money and they do not have the food. 

I would also like to urge the ministry of water to come in because when I visited the areas that were affected, I found out that my people are sharing the same water sources with domestic and wild animals and I suspect that it is the reason for that queer disease, which I do not understand, since I am not a medical person -(Member timed out_)

4.16
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I respond to the State of the Nation Address, I want to start by appreciating what Government is doing as far as the state of affairs in the country is concerned. In a special way, allow me to thank Government for its effort towards the calm and peaceful situation that is being experienced in Northern Uganda these days. 

However, allow me to also raise some concerns as far as the State of the Nation Address is concerned. I will pick it up from what my colleague hon. Todwong said about the support to the students from Acholi and Lango sub-regions. Two days ago, I received a call from the chairperson of Pader Town Council informing me that there are some people in Pader claiming to be from State House registering students for State House sponsorship and they are demanding money from these poor students. As we all witnessed during one of the presentations during the induction, the people of Northern Uganda are really suffering. They are swimming in poverty. It is really an abuse if some people go and demand money from these poor students in the name of trying to support them. 

I also request the minister or the person concerned to make it very clear to us, the leaders from this region, so that we know the procedures and specific officers who are going to be involved in the process so that we give clear information to our people about how they are going to be selected to benefit from this initiative. 

Concerning roads, I appreciate there is an improvement in the national road network but I have a concern about road maintenance. I want to bring this to the minister concerned because some of our roads get degraded to a terrible state. For instance, last year the road from Gulu town to Kitgum via Pader got degraded to a terrible state. Maybe, that can happen. My problem is when the concerned people wait when the head of state is visiting the area then they rush to improve the condition of this road; it becomes a problem to me because it is also important for the head of state to know what some people go through. You may believe me or not, last year up to around November, one would take close to three hours to cover the distance from Gulu Town to Aswa Bridge. That is only 41 kilometers but one would take close to three hours to cover that distance. By the time you get to Pader, you are sick. So, it is important for the people concerned to try and upgrade this road not only at the times when the head of state is visiting such areas. 

About the issue of recruitment of officers to implement the NAADS programmes, I noted that the President said that in all the sub-counties, we already have technical staff but I think he was not given a clear picture as far as other districts are concerned. In all the 12 sub-counties in Pader, there was no single sub-county that had a technical officer to implement the NAADS programme. The NAADS programme was being implemented by community development officers who do not have the required qualifications to help the farmers benefit from the programme. So, the President needs to be given clear information about what happens in the districts. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.21
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the President more especially for the roads in my constituency. The road network is good and I want to appreciate hon. Nasasira for that.

I also want to thank the President for his speech and the address about health. However, I am representing a new constituency. The background for its creation was the high rate of maternal mortality. Very many women die during delivery. In the fight to get a constituency, there was even a demonstration. These people want a doctor and I implore the Minister of Health to hastily give us a doctor. 

As I have said, I represent a new county. It has five sub-counties but out of the five sub-counties, it is only three that have got secondary schools. That means they are not benefiting well from USE and other programmes. My constituency does not have a single A’ Level school and I want the minister of education to come up and help us.

On water, I have been in the district council for a long period of 14 years and a lot of money has been sunk into shallow wells, which are not sustainable. I implore this Government to begin investing in harvesting water for human consumption since very many people have put up houses with iron sheets now. I also represent a county with cattle-keepers. I wish the minister of agriculture would help us undertake construction of valley tanks! 

On the national level, I want to tackle the environment. In the State of the Nation Address, the President talked very little about the environment and a few weeks later, the environment began talking and everybody here felt it -(Interjections)- yes, it began talking. Our country still relies on forest reserves. I propose that we engage every Ugandan with land to plant appropriate trees on the land. If you have just a plot of land, plant trees around that plot. If you go to Mbuya and look at Kololo, you will see a very good place. But should you look at Kireka and so on, you will see dust –(Interjections)- on top of those places. I wish the Government would come up with a strategy quickly; but if it does not, I am offering myself to come up with a Private Members’ Bill on this -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, it is not only individuals. We have Churches, we have schools, all the other stakeholders; they can be partners in planting trees to liberate our environment in Uganda. 

The country is still poor at planning. You go to Rwanda; you will see very small but neat towns. You go to Tanzania, although the housing is still poor; there are plans. If we cannot come up with a plan for towns, we should have a model plan of a town where two houses or three merge and begin following that plan as the case for -(Member timed out_)

4.26
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): I thank the President for his State of the Nation Address and for the brilliance he has shown as far as heading this country is concerned, especially economically.

Over the weekend, Kabale Parliamentary Forum held a workshop in Kabale and many issues were raised, some of which we should bring here, especially in as far as the health and education sectors are concerned. 

I would like to inform you that Kabale was scrapped off the hard-to-reach areas and yet there are some areas that cannot be reached. When some teachers are sent to those schools, where it’s hard to reach, they cannot go there to teach. In the long run, our children find it very difficult to learn.

In the same way, some doctors and nurses who are sent to health centre IIIs and IVs cannot access the health centers because they are in mountains and hills. So, it is very hard for them to go there and attend to patients. 

Most of the councilors in Kabale and their district chairman want Government to take Kabale as a priority and ensure that it is also included among the hard-to-reach areas in as far as health and education is concerned. 

On the disaster of lightning, in Kabale we used to have a place up the hill where they used to put mercury and a long iron bar – I do not know what it was called. (Laughter) Those were lightning conductors at the time. I do not know what it is called now. Maybe the engineers can help me on that. All those things that were up the hill that used to act as blockades of lightning and would stop lightning from coming down to the population were taken out, they were removed. When I visited Kabale, I tried to go to those areas to see whether that equipment was there but they were all removed and they said the mercury had been taken to schools to be used in laboratories. I remember sometime back during the Rwanda war, they used to tell us that they were intercepting the satellite system and I think that was the time when they were removed. 

Uganda has suffered a loss in our schools and homes in as far as lightning is concerned, especially recently. I wish to appeal to Government to go back to the old system and reintroduce these things and make sure that we have good lightning conductors that will stop the loss in our homes and schools. Thank you very much.

4.30
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, so much. Madam Speaker, you are quite aware that we in the Acholi area have been in camps for the last 24 years. In the past four years, our people started going back to their original land. As I talk now, Uganda Wildlife Authority has started massive eviction of the people in Amuru District from their land. As I talk now, our communities are returning into the camps but the situation is very alarming. 

When I talked to Uganda Wildlife Authority, they said very clearly that the area had been gazetted by Parliament in 2002 to be the control hunting area. In 2002 our people were still in the camps. 

To my surprise, I got the resolution of Parliament of 2002 and the resolution states that the area was de-gazetted and as I talk, it looks as if there are some people who want to use our land for their selfish interests. I spoke with the Uganda Wildlife Authority and they are telling the community there that they received the order to evict the people through the former Minister of Tourism and Trade, hon. Otafiire. Therefore, I would like to find out from him - he was around but unfortunately he is out now – I would like to find out from him whether he really gave the order for the eviction of our people. 

What is happening is that they are not only chasing away people from that area but they are also cutting down their crops, for example, mangoes and avocadoes and they are even uprooting trees! Our communities are suffering. 

Secondly, the President talked about education and he made mention that Government was paying what they call the “hard-to-reach” allowance for teachers. This Monday and Tuesday our teachers have been on strike. The teachers of Amuru are not going into classrooms because they have never received the so called “hard-to-reach” allowance. Government is very good at making policies but implementation is becoming a tag of war. You will also realise that private schools that are in partnership with Government are threatening to pull out from USE because Government is not remitting the funds on time. 

I would like to make an appeal to the minister of finance; the Finance ministry normally releases money on a quarterly basis. The quarterly basis does not rhyme with the school calendar. The money should be given on a term basis because sometimes the money reaches the school during holidays hence the money becomes useless. So, let us work hard and solve that problem.   

The prices of commodities have also been increasing. As I talk now, the price of a kilogram of sugar in my district is Shs 6,000 and I am very sure that by tomorrow it may reach Shs 7,000. Government needs to be very serious. 

Finally, the President mentioned that in the last election they managed to fully fund the campaigns for both President and Members of Parliament. Madam Speaker, I have great fear that the way money was used in this election -(Member timed out_) 

4.35
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you. On the President’s State of the Nation Address on education, it is good the President said they are going to expand universal education to A’ Level. But as they were implementing the USE, the Ministry of Education did not put in place good inspection processes such that any school which came up - a mushrooming school, a briefcase school, or a school which came up and wanted to implement USE without inspection - was given a chance. Some of them were not even in existence yet the Government had said earlier on that they were going to put a seed secondary school in each sub-county. So, they hurried into this policy and our children are now suffering. Some of them are studying under trees. They are studying under papyrus. Last year during the UNEB examinations some of them lacked where to sit. The schools were not licensed. They are not registered. They do not even have centre numbers. 

This year again the President is saying that they are going to implement this Universal Secondary Education of course at A’ Level. My worry is: it is good the minister of education is here. I passed through the corridors of the ministry of education yesterday morning and I discovered that even a list has been picked to put up a shortlist of the schools to implement the USE next year. But my question is: when were these schools inspected, Madam Minister? The inspection has never been carried out. The Government is again hurrying and saying that schools should implement the Universal Secondary Education. I fear that what happened with the USE and at UCE is going to happen at A’ Level again.

On the agricultural policy, the President noted that there are plans - he appreciated that food production has increased, which could be very true. Unfortunately in some areas in the Bugisu sub-region and in the Mt Elgon area, the President, during his campaign trail, went to the people of the Bugisu area, the Mt Elgon area and condemned the Uganda Wildlife Authority for having stopped them from going to the forest reserves. He allowed the people of Bugisu to go to the forest reserves and cultivate up to the 1993 boundary. After the campaigns and elections, of course the land had been tilled and the crops have now been planted, the Uganda Wildlife Authority has stopped the peasants or the farmers from going back to weed and harvest their crops. 

Currently, there is food shortage in Bugisu and especially in the Budadiri East constituency. In these areas, population density is very high. Of course, they are on the slopes of Mt Elgon and very many of them sold their goats and cows and went to the forests to go and plant. When the Minister for Trade, Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, went there, we thought he was going to intervene and perhaps help the peasants. Instead, he went and joined the Uganda Wildlife Authority and castigated them for having failed to chase the peasants out of the forest reserves. Very many of them have been wounded. Some of them were shot dead and others have been hospitalised and even up to now the food has not been harvested. 

So, Madam Speaker, I am getting scared. The peasants are now saying if the President and the Wildlife Authority do not allow them to go and weed their crops, they are threatening to come to Kampala and stage a demonstration. My worry is that an angry Mugisu - a circumcised Mugisu - is a very tough man. (Laughter)  If they come to the streets of Kampala and go and camp at State House, there will be disaster. So, I ask the minister concerned and the Prime Minister to come in and rescue the situation.

Lastly, on the infrastructure, the President has always promised - as usual even in the last budget he promised to work on the roads. He talked of working on the road from Budadari-Nakibondwe-Bukuse-Buwalasi which he has never done. This morning I got a call that the wanainchi themselves have stopped all Government vehicles from passing via that road. The Police have gone in and there has been a very big battle. The peasants or the wanainchi have stopped any Government vehicle from crossing. They have got hoes and spades and they themselves are working on the road forcefully. If this state continues I think, it will be very hard -(Member timed out_)

4.40
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to be brief and address myself and the House to particularly two issues that arose out of the State of the Nation Address.

First of all is my concern on employment or call it unemployment. I appreciate the attempt by Government this financial year of earmarking Shs 44 billion for job creation for the youth. However, my concern is that when you mention Shs 44 billion given the state of the economy, then I am afraid if you applied, for example, a GDP deflator on 44 billion now, it is about 20 billion or even less. If we continue in this state of the economy, I will still convince younger people out there that our disposal, our Shs 44 billion - I look at the entries and exits into this Parliament and I am afraid my colleagues on this side have no adequate space for exiting. If the pool of the unemployed youth descended on this House demanding for action, I am very sure Members would find no space to exit. We are talking about 80 percent graduate unemployment and 44 billion at the current inflation is actually peanuts.

In my pigeon hole, I have received a number of ministerial policy statements and I am afraid they are consuming statements. You can hardly see effort, at least for the ministries whose statements I have read, at creating employment. The general feeling is that this Shs 44 billion is adequate to create employment across the board, which I believe is a big mistake.

I thought that the President would compel all ministers in their attempt this financial year ahead of us to create a minimum number of jobs for the young people in this country. Very soon we are going to see requests for borrowing and borrowing to consume. I would like to implore this House that we should never and we should not allow any minister to come here and request for borrowing without an indication of how many jobs will be created from any form of borrowing. Otherwise, we shall turn out to be a borrowing and consuming House which I believe we should not be.

My other worry which is related to unemployment is that when you look at the generic economic model, you can hardly tell whether we are a demand following economy or a supply leading economy. For the most part I have looked at the NDP and it is largely cut and pasted from the Asian Tigers’ experience. For those who have read it; for the most part it is a cut and paste of the experience of the Asian Tigers. Their model was supply-led but if you are going to cause employment by attracting investors, you must invest a critical minimum effort into supplying skills that will attract the investments that you desire. 

In the last admissions on Government sponsorship, how many admissions were made to actually rhyme with this policy of Government of being a supply leading government? If we are demand following, how do you reconcile the current inflation with the purchasing power in the country? The general feeling is that somehow we are running right, left and centre and Government does not seem to see where to actually concentrate effort as far as employment creation is concerned -(Member timed out_)

4.46
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few concerns, and the first one is on education. In his address the President – in fact I was glad to hear that the supplementary readers for lower primary will be developed. I come from a district where the materials for the thematic curriculum have not yet reached the schools. Personally, I participated in the development of those materials at NCDC but up to now the schools have not yet received those materials in the local language. My plea to the minister of education is that let the process of developing these books be fast tracked because I remember we developed these books with people from Lango and Abim - I do not know whether those colleagues have received them, but I have never seen them.  

The other thing is about the hardship allowance. The teachers in my district get this allowance the hard way – as the name indicates. People take very many months to get it. Moreover the teachers there are not from within the district; we are just encouraging people to go to school, so most of our teachers are from the neighbouring districts. Some of them got attracted when they heard of an extra allowance and they came and applied for jobs but since the allowance is not forthcoming, many of them have sought cross-transfer back to their districts. 

I am happy that Government is committed to maternal and child healthcare; but I would have loved it if mention were made on FGM. I come from a district where FGM is being practiced and we were there last week trying to fight it. I appreciate the Eighth Parliament for coming up with the anti-FGM law. It is indeed a health hazard that needs to be fought and the President should have mentioned it in his speech to show that there is concern and the will to fight it to the end.

On livestock, I come from a community which keeps cattle. In January, we had an outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease but two weeks ago the quarantine which had been announced was lifted. These are people whose livelihood entirely depends on the cow. I request that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries responds to such concerns just like the Ministry of Health responds to outbreaks like the recent Ebola that we had to avoid taking too long to come and vaccinate the animals. Thank you.

4.50
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Person with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to the State of the Nation Address. I feel that as a person representing people with disabilities, who are in all our communities and homes – some of us, of course, hide them. I want to begin with the issue of the national identity card. I am not sure if the technology is friendly to the blind people. We need to get cards which are in a Braille format so that the blind people can know that they belong to them. I propose to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to take note of that. 

I appreciate that the Government recognises us in the Constitution; we have the Disability Act and Government has signed and ratified the convention on the rights of people with disabilities. Our issues should not be taken as a benefit or a token – it is a right. We know our issues better than anybody else.

Regarding NAADS, which is a programme for poverty alleviation; people with disabilities are the poorest of the poor but on the ground, the extension workers will say: “We do not know where to get your people.” A meeting is organised at the sub-county headquarters and you expect somebody crawling to move for kilometers to get NAADS messages? Moreover, there are no sign language interpreters to help the deaf and nobody to guide the blind and yet 80 percent of people with disabilities depend on agriculture. I have done research which shows that although they are farmers, they are not targeted. So, whereas the NAADS guidelines are very clear, let the implementation take note of that. As much as we talk that agriculture will be given loans, I am worried that we might be left out. Since we do not have any money, we do not have accounts – so, where do we get the money to service loans? The minister of agriculture might have to give us a special package. That is something that would help us.

On education, some Members have talked of hard-to-reach areas but we need to look at teachers that are hard to find; teachers who are looking after children with disabilities. They need to be given some form of incentives. Imagine a teacher handling a child with a mental health problem and is struggling with them. Nobody appreciates them and instead removes them from the payroll. You even find the ministry of education saying that special needs subjects are not on the time table. Why do we have all these rules? We need to look at that. Whereas UPE is a very good programme, parents have to buy notebooks for their children. For us, if you have a blind child, you have to buy a Braille machine which costs Shs 1.5 million. Moreover, they are not sold in Uganda but South Africa. Where will the poor parents buy that machine from? I request that the ministry of education looks into this. I participated in a zero draft of the policy on special needs and I request that the minister follows up on that policy and signs it so that these people are on board. There are no sign language interpreters in schools because people say they are expensive.

Regarding the ICT, as much as it is a very good programme, how many computers are sensitive to blind people? That is why we do not have employment. When people want to employ us, things are not there; they bring you a computer but putting in jaws – something very cheap costing about Shs 800,000 but we cannot afford and people say it is difficult to educate you. As a result of affirmative action, many young people with disabilities have gone to university but do you know where they are? They are running to the NGOS; they go to NUDIPU, Uganda National Association of the Blind and other places because they do not have anywhere else to go. I feel that Government should take up its responsibility and when we allocate resources in Uganda we talk of population but we need to turn to talking about needs not population because our needs are very expensive. When we come here, you walk with your legs but my crutches here cost Shs 200,000 – you can see how I buy my legs! (Member timed out_) 

4.56
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the President for the elaborate State of the Nation Address. It was actually balanced. Nevertheless, I have to make my comment specifically on inflation. In the State of the Nation Address, some of the causes are well highlighted like drought, imported inflation and maybe the depreciation of the shilling. However, I would think that what we would really concentrate on is the real cause. When you look at what we are going through now, it is not accidental; it has been happening gradually and this is where we are and sooner or later, we may experience some state of emergency, which worries me. 

Many colleagues have already noted that there was excessive expenditure during elections, which is a fact because all of us were here. In this case, I would not describe the inflation as having been caused by depreciation of the shilling; but rather I would concentrate on what caused the depreciation of the shilling. Whereas I would say some inflation was imported, imported inflation would account for a very small proportion. The inflation we are experiencing today is what I would term as, “monetary inflation due to excessive expenditure”.

Other than excessive expenditure during elections, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that sometime back our currency was demonetised. And in any economy, once the currency is demonetised, the essence is to the effect that liquidity should be either reduced or stabilised. When the old currency was demonetised, the impression was to the effect that with time the old currency would be wiped out and we would be using the new currency. But what is happening now? These days if you go to the bank you can rarely get a new currency note. What does this imply? It implies that we have spent the new currency and exhausted it and are now reverting to the old notes. (Laughter) We have to note that all this excessive expenditure is not backed by production. In such a case would we say that the situation we are experiencing today is accidental? No, we have not planned well. 

I wonder what monetary policy we are practicing because it seems we are simply practicing the expansionary monetary policy where we are simply increasing the liquidity in circulation, which makes me shudder, Madam Speaker.

The economic situation we are in now, we would be practicing the restrictive monetary policy. I was happy when I recently heard that Government had issued some treasury bills but it was long overdue and not enough. We should not explain the situation in which we are as just an inflationary situation; it is tag inflation because we have inflation; we have depreciation, unemployment; we are suffering from everything and we are getting ruined. 

I would rather encourage the minister of finance to focus on the restrictive monetary policies, to focus on strict fiscal policies so as to get out of this situation. Because when we are here and hear that our traders are rioting and going on strike, we seem to pretend and appear as though it has just happened. No -(Member timed out_)

5.01
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would want to add my voice to the rest of the speakers in thanking the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address, which highlighted all the areas for operation in this country. I know in executing the business of Government, ministries will be referring to the State of the Nation Address together with His Excellency’s manifesto. 

I will make reference to some of the points in this particular document. My area of interest today is education. If you make reference to the last paragraph on page 26, it says, “The popularisation of the BTVET Act, 2008 will be continued as will the rehabilitation and construction of physical infrastructure. All the above will be continued in other areas and districts that are still in need.”  

Maracha, where I come from, is a very new district. It does not have many of these technical institutions. We know that we are today suffering from unemployment because we deviated from encouraging our children to use their hands and instead look for white-collar jobs. We have very many children in Maracha who call themselves “jua kalis” because they do not have any vacation training. I am, therefore, praying to the minister of education to seriously think of creating at least a technical institute in one of our sub-counties. I know there is a policy which requires every sub-county to have a technical institute but Maracha, which has eight sub-counties, has none. Madam Speaker, I request the minister of education to seriously consider putting one in Maracha District. 

On the point of health, my interest is on maternal and child health. Members in this august House, everything we talk revolves around the number of people you are feeding. Even in your own home, if there are many children, malnutrition could be easily felt. We are many people in Uganda and the population expansion is at 3.5 percent per annum. Where are we going? If you take my district, the population expansion is at 4.04 percent. Therefore, I recommend that we put a very strong policy of family planning in place. Family planning started in Uganda in 1959 but the prevalence is very poor. Today, you even hear people saying that there is a lot of land for them to use. But it is not about land; it is not about how rich you are, it is whether you can afford to feed your people - you know Ugandan women are very fertile; we are even talking of about eight children per woman, which is a big number. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Minister of Health, to emphasise the issue of family planning. She is not here but we must emphasise the issue of family planning.

Madam Speaker, I am also asking the rest of the ministers to write to us if they have read these documents like hon. Mutagamba did -(Member timed out_)

5.07
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity. I want to begin by correcting the impression that seems to be developing right from the communication and submission of one of my brothers from the Opposition, hon. Ssemujju that while they were raising concern about the pertinent issues in this country, some people appeared to be silent.

The impression I want to correct here is, whereas we are in this House, we stand firm as long as issues pertaining our country are concerned and here we join hands. What matters is the action you take. If, for example, you invited me to bang empty tins and hoot all over the city of Kampala like a mad person, I may not join you but I appreciate that that is a good concern. We should also consider what actions bring us together when it comes to matters of this country.

As I proceed, on the issue of education I want to join most of the colleagues who have raised this issue. It is true that to change mindsets and develop any community, we must address the issue of education. Page 27 of the State of the Nation Address, if you refer to the plans of the Financial Year 2011/2012 in part (e) the President made it very clear that there is a plan to sponsor students hailing from the Northern region. 

I appreciate and support that initiative but I also want to put it categorically clear that one region in this country that is very disadvantaged is Karamoja and I thought probably the President would have reconsidered that Karamoja, being one of the regions in this country that is being affected, should also be put in this plan. So I want to put this across to the relevant authorities to probably convey this message and I know the President is going to get this message to reconsider Karamoja in this initiative.

What about the traditional schools? I have a concern here. Whereas we are talking about education, I want to impress upon the ministry of education to revisit - in the 1970s and 1980s, we had the shining traditional schools in the Northern, North eastern and Eastern regions. What has happened? There is imbalance in education. Let the Government revisit the strategy of ensuring that the traditional schools regain their glory. We have very brilliant Ugandans in this country who hail from those schools and I want to put that on record.

What about agriculture? There is an issue of agriculture. I appreciate that agriculture is the backbone of this country but also the strategies that we put on the ground matter. I am happy that the hon. Deputy Prime Minister is here. For the case of Karamoja, I represent Moroto Municipality; you can imagine a technocrat sitting down to think that what Karamoja needs is cassava cuttings! Madam Speaker, that is a very unfortunate strategy. If you went to Karamoja now, most of the areas that do not even deserve cassava cuttings have got them kept under trees. Who utilises that? That is a strategy that we need to revisit. The ministry in charge should revisit that. This distribution of cassava cuttings is not a demand by everybody. We need to retool and equip the farmers in this country not merely giving them the cassava cuttings.

What about health? On the issue of health, it is very appalling. I want to join my colleagues who have raised that matter. If you visited Moroto Hospital as we talk now, the so called referral hospital has only four regional doctors against 36 as required by the standards. Also the medical officers who are there sleep in a mental health unit; they have turned into mental cases and that is very appalling. I call upon this House to support an initiative that will address this health factor.

Peace and security. I am happy the Minister of Defence is here. There is an issue, which is breaking out and it is the state of lawlessness. Our neighbours are now getting affected and the rate at which cattle rustling is going on – we are also condemning that but what is happening? Disarmament is ongoing but what is the issue? I would like to ask the Minister of Defence to make a comprehensive statement pertaining to what is happening. Whereas disarmament is going on, where are the guns coming from that - there is still raiding and a state of lawlessness in the region and the neighbouring districts? It is up to the Ministry of Defence to convince this House that there is a plan to address this factor.

As I conclude, I want to address the issue of employment. It is true Japan has reached where it is now because of the strategy of vocational training. In 1945 when the Japanese were bombed in Hiroshima-Nagasaki, they learnt a lesson that fighting is not a solution and they resorted to –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me assure you that every Member will get their five minutes, tomorrow, on Friday morning, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday. We are still around so, do not worry.

5.12
MS JUDITH AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Government, and my voters. I want to also thank our dear President for the credible achievements that he has made in this country. I register the positive achievements in my district for instance the Entandikwa scheme, PEAP, NUSAF, NAADS, PRDP, UPE to mention but a few.

On the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech, it is like Pallisa was forgotten. I did not hear anything about Pallisa and I am very worried. It was not allocated most of the resources that others have benefited from. During the campaigns, our President made a statement that Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi road was going to be graded and tarmarcked but that has not taken shape up to now.

Pallisa-Kamonkoli-Budaka road is a grave road and has caused us a lot of problems. People have died on that road and we call upon the line ministry to take immediate interventions as it is very serious.

In our campaigns, our President promised the people of Pallisa that Butebo would be elevated to district status. Our people are on our necks pleading with us that they want this in place as promised.

As I speak, the people of Pallisa are going without food. Poverty and famine are now moving hand in hand and actually I beg the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness to immediately intervene in this as it is critical. All the calls we get now are saying, “MP, send me something for five kilos.” The staple food there is cassava and beans and a kilo of cassava is now at Shs 1,000. Please, my people if you look at the economic situation of that area, it is not good. 

I have heard from colleagues in the Eastern and Northern regions and we are all sharing the same problems. When I hear about the poor performance in schools, health services and agriculture, we share a lot in common with these regions and we need a special arrangement. Although we have PRDP - actually the Government programmes are very good there but the strategies they are using - the strategy they have used from the time Government directed these programmes is falling into corrupt hands. The political alienations that people have had from the time people have taken offices is such that they always look at who campaigned for who and these programmes are benefiting the first people who benefited from Entandikwa. These are also the very people benefiting from NAADS and NUSAF and this has not caused any change in the lives of the masses.

I have passion for the women of Pallisa and maybe the entire country. The women of Pallisa like any other area would want to benefit from us the women MPs but you find that the facilitation we are given is not enough. We should be able to organise our women so that we can uplift the livelihoods of their families by doing capacity building training to facilitate the small things that they can do. The facilitation is not enough and you may find that a woman MP is representing three constituencies and she gets similar facilitation as the area MP. Actually this is not helping us in changing the livelihoods of our women.

5.17
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA KABARAITSYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): I am adding my voice to the previous speakers in thanking His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address that he gave on 07 June 2011. I want to talk about three issues concerning my district. 

I will begin with health. My district is the 47th out of 112 represented here but I am dismayed that it has never got a district hospital. This is a district with a population of over 150,000 people and it is composed of 14 sub-counties, which are supposed to have at least a health centre III each.

In my district there are only 9 out of the expected 14 health centre IIIs so the rest do not even have. We have 76 parishes and each should have a health centre II. Out the 76 parishes, we only have 18 health centre IIs. 

In the speech of his Excellency on page 26, he mentioned about rehabilitating and upgrade of health centre IVs to be district hospitals. These were 27 of them. I want to know the criteria that they normally follow. If my district is the 47th in this country and it does not have a district hospital what about those districts that are being created now and we may even create more?

I am appealing to the Ministry of Health and Government to do something about us as we are vulnerable to so many diseases because we are surrounded by so many national parks like Queen Elizabeth, Katonga Game Reserve and Kibale National Park. We are vulnerable to so many diseases and yet we do not have a district hospital. And this is an area with a high infant mortality rate. Our people down there are suffering from the problem of Fistula. I take this opportunity to thank the people of Kagando hospital because they have assisted us a lot in helping our women in Kamwenge District. I think they are the biggest clientele that they have at Kagando Hospital in Kasese.

We do not have a district ambulance; we do not have a hospital and the infant mortality rate is very high. We are appealing to Government that Kamwenge being the 47th district should be considered such that we can get at least a district hospital.

I am also adding my voice to that of hon. Hatwib Katoto from Bunyaruguru. We have a problem of wild animals coming from those national parks. In Kamwenge most of the people depend on agriculture. These animals come from the game reserves and destroy the crops of our people. We are saying that we should increase the household income but these people lose their crops and they are not compensated. Some people lose their crops when they have loans from microfinance institutions. These microfinance institutions are demanding their money but the Government is not responding. The only policy that we have is that when people are caught in those national parks poaching or even collecting firewood, they are charged and put in jail -(Member timed out_)

5.23
MR MARTIN MUGABI (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): I want to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. I will go straight to the issue of agriculture. Among the interventions that have been outlined by the Government, the last one was post-harvest handling, which I realise is very important. If we are to control the price then we have to tackle this. The problem that we have in our areas as we talk about commercialisation of agriculture is that normally when the season is on, the prices go down below the average cost of production.

You realise that in September last year a kilo of maize cost between Shs 100 to 150. As we speak now the same kilo costs over Shs 1,000. As the harvest season comes, you realise that the producers or farmers will sell their maize at Shs 200 or 300. Therefore, I propose that as the Government looks at these interventions this should be considered as one of the major key factors in order to control price after harvest. We should actually look at bringing back co-operative unions. They were helping our people a lot. 

We should tackle inflation as many people have talked about it. Today a US dollar is at Ugshs 2,500 and this is too much for us. This has caused the skyrocketing of prices for most of the products that we have in Uganda. Most of these products are imported. I want to propose the following: we should subsidise the price of diesel because it is a key factor in the transportation of these products. I believe that if the price of diesel is reduced, it will have a multiplier effect that will help reduce the prices. 

Looking at the issue of trade, you may realise that tourist activities have reduced and it is one of the reasons why the dollar is scarce in Uganda.

The other issue, which is very important, is excessive repatriation of profits from Uganda. We have our investors here in Uganda but what they are doing, on top of the Government funding them, giving them free land, exempting them from paying some other taxes - even the little profits that they get from here, they are taking them away from Uganda? I believe it is one reason why the dollar is going up every day, every hour. If the Government can come up with a measure to curtail all this, I believe we shall have a better solution to this. 

The other issue that I also feel is that there is always a tendency – I am a businessman and I was actually importing some products but I was told at the border that I was not supposed to import that particular product because there is somebody importing it and this person is actually selling it very expensively. I can give you an example; if we can import sugar from Brazil, it would be very cheap. Sugar that is being produced from here is very expensive and I think we should come up with a system that encourages free trade for importation and exportation. I thank you.

5.28
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Allow me to take this opportunity to thank and congratulate everybody who successfully went through the recently concluded elections. I appreciate and congratulate those who have attained various levels of leadership in this country and I pledge my total commitment to co-operate with everybody.

I would like to thank His Excellency, the President for the submission of his State of the Nation Address. It was quite good and a lot that has been said and that has been successfully implemented, we very much appreciate. We know that a lot has been done commendably well but equally, we still have a lot to do to deliver improved service delivery and performance for this country.

One of my major issues of concern is performance: setting performance targets for every department in terms of achievable things, which we must critically monitor and ensure that we evaluate and even attach individuals who are responsible for non-performance. I think this is a critical element that we need to look at as Parliament to help Government to deliver services to the people. This is a very important element. If Rwanda has made it in a short a time – it is using a miraculous secret of attaching performance to every individual and setting targets that are critically monitored so that if you do not perform, then you are answerable for your failures. 

The second aspect is production and productivity. I think we need to look at the productive sectors and see how we can increase on the production levels. Compared to the East African countries, our productivity levels are very low. I am studying the fisheries sector and it is currently generating over US $200 million annually when we are just hunting using the capture approach within the existing resources. Uganda has 18 percent of its surface area as water and you do not need to get irrigation technology to carry out fish farming.

Instead of spending too much on the degraded land areas, let us change our style of doing business and go into serious fish farming and aquarium methods so that we can increase our understanding of this sector to ensure that we can even generate far much more revenue than any other combined sectors we are dealing in - in this country. This is an area we need to focus on so that we increase our production levels and also think outside the normal practices we are doing.

The third aspect is power. We appreciate the effort to increase on the power generation in this country but the cost of generating power in this country is still very high. We appreciate that Bujagali is about to come on board with 250MW but it cost over US $800 million.

Sometime back in 2009, we went to Sudan and visited a dam that was under construction, Merowe Dam. It was going to generate 1,200MW costing US $1.2 billion. Currently we are planning for Bujagali which is going to generate about 750MW. I am reliably told that it is going to cost US $2 billion which is very unimaginable. We must look at the cost of production of our power generation and that is why the tariffs are very high. So, we must look at the cost of power generation in this country. We are appreciating that the dams are being put in place but what is the cost compared to other countries? 

My brother, hon. Muwuma was in Thailand a few weeks back and he has visited a power generating plant of 3,000MW which is far cheaper than what we envisage and it can be done in this country so that we make sure that we generate power for everybody at a cheaper cost.

My last submission is on education. We appreciate Universal Primary Education, Universal Secondary Education and coming on board is the advanced level but we are all producing job seekers. I am proposing that instead of disjointing the education system, let us urge the youth yearning for employment - let us introduce an integrated education system whereby every student who joins senior one takes on a technical subject. It is a matter of getting instructors in every secondary school so that we introduce practical education in all the secondary schools rather than saying that we shall build BTVET secondary schools standing alone –(Member timed out_)      

5.33
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): I would like to first fortify my colleague’s position on education. The access and relevance of our education system are very wanting. We had an opportunity as students while at Makerere to find out how many students actually come to the university and indeed can afford to pay their own tuition – we are looking at schools that pay school fees over and above Shs 500,000 per term; schools like St Mary’s College Kisubi, Namagunga, Budo, Namugongo, Kitende and others. We discovered that indeed 80 percent of the students in public universities can actually afford their own tuition especially those that are on Government sponsorship; 80 percent of the students on Government sponsorship could actually afford their tuition. 

We took it up and engaged the then Prime Minister saying, “Look, this Government sponsorship does not help the needy - it does not actually achieve the intended purpose.” Prof. Nsibambi, the then Prime Minister, assured us that it was already on the Government White Paper and that soon we could probably see a student loan scheme being rolled out in the entire country. That was about 2006 but up today, I think it is still somewhere on the shelves of Government.

This is so critical to the entire nation because we are very much aware that education is the engine of development and it will reduce the pressure on us, the Members of Parliament, of trying to contribute tuition to our constituents. I know many go through a lot of challenges when students are reporting back to universities.

The other point that relates to this is about the relevance of our education. When you critically analyse what has been taught for the past almost 40 years, you realise that nothing significant has changed. In fact most of it is what the Governor, Sir Andrew Cohen left here. We need to know that this has not been the case for the countries that have developed elsewhere. So, there must be a very particular overhaul of our education system if we have to progress as a nation; that must be done.

Madam Speaker, the other issue is on employment. The last time I checked the statistics at the National Bureau of Statistics, over 100,000 job seekers leave our institutions – both universities and tertiary – but our economy can only accommodate about 8,000. This means that about 92,000 people who complete their studies in these institutions remain languishing out there. During our campaigns we kept talking about industrialisation and modernisation of agriculture, but keep the people waiting and they patiently wait on to see when this will happen. 

Let me remind the Government that if we are to be serious about the welfare of our people, there is need to move beyond the campaign posters and industrialise –(Member timed out_)

5.38
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, I had booked to speak on Wednesday, but since I have been given the opportunity, let me speak now.

Let me start with the issue of agriculture. When it comes to my district of Rubirizi, I think we are living on wretched earth. The staple food used to be Matooke, but as I talk this Matooke is no more. Why? Because the banana bacterial wilts have raided all the banana plantations; they are no longer there. The ministry of agriculture has failed to intervene by bringing the alternative source of livelihood.

My constituency is blessed with 52 lakes, including Lake Edward and George, the others have been depleted and we are now renting out lakes at Shs 90,000 per year while encouraging people to dig ponds elsewhere. I would like to inform you that people lost interest in this exercise and no longer have any income.

Madam Speaker, to add salt to an injury, my constituency borders – one of the sub-counties in my constituency, Katunguru – borders a national park with a 38-kilometer stretch. The elephants always come, invade and destroy people’s crops, but what does the ministry responsible do? It only brings posho for them. 

When you go to the Nairobi National Park, you realise that it is fully fenced but here the issue of fencing the national park in my area has been on for long, but there is nothing being done. When somebody from Bunyaruguru enters the park, they are arrested immediately for poaching even when that is not the reason for going there. That is the situation we are in. What is my suggestion? I would like to suggest that we control that banana bacterial wilt. If Government can’t do that, please give us the seeds for upland rice.

Let me also ask the minister of agriculture, because I heard we have hatcheries of fish, to bring the fish to my constituency; we have those lakes. This will help people restore their livelihood.

On education, I would like to say that the money sent to UPE and USE schools is too little. Government cannot even allow contribution of money – what happens when the toilet gets full? The children will just use the bushes to help themselves. Schools do not even have any money to buy toilet paper; the children use leaves thereby destroying the environment! 

My suggestion is that Bunyaruguru should be added onto the list of the hard-to-reach areas. The staffing in schools is less than 20 percent. Let me give an example of St Michael. The whole district has only three schools with only one running A’ Level classes. At St Michael, for example, they have only one teacher for mathematics from S1 to S6; only one teacher! They have no teacher for chemistry and physics yet they are offered at A’ Level; and when exams come, the students fail. Do you know what is said about the people of Bunyaruguru? They are dense; but they are not, they don’t have teachers. My suggestion is that Government should send there more teachers.

On health, I want to inform Government that the staff are also less than 20 percent. We have a theatre, but there is no doctor to use it to operate patients. We don’t have any doctor. The nurses that are there work on voluntary basis –(Interjections)– they have not gone to Rwanda; we just don’t have them.

My suggestion is that Government should upgrade health centre IVs. The last time I visited Kasese, I got to learn that they have many hospitals like Bwera, Kagando, Kilembe and many others, but in my area there is nothing. I once worked with the Uganda Red Cross and I can tell you that in Rukungiri every health centre III has an ambulance, but in my area we do not even have a motorcycle to work as an ambulance. How do we allocate resources? I think this allocation should be based on vulnerability and capacity assessment so that we can put resources where they deserve to be.

5.44
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): I will basically comment on three sectors: education, minerals and energy and health. Madam Speaker, my first concern is about the quality of education that our children are receiving from primary to secondary schools as my other colleagues have said before. But I just want to echo one point. In the primary schools - I am very happy that the minister is here – but what is so touching is that we are at a stage of trying to integrate a new system, which is not very new especially in primary schools. This is about the new curriculum called thematic. We have to appreciate and understand it holistically.

This thematic curriculum was used in Uganda until the late 70s when it was abolished by Amin. That is when we went to the general curriculum categorising subjects into Mathematics, Science and so forth. But now all of a sudden, with due respect, the former minister of education – I don’t care about the seniority of the people who were behind the bringing back of that thematic curriculum, what I care about most is – even the Bible says: “You will know them by their fruits ….” However senior you are, if the product is such that when you analyse a pupil in Uganda, you realise that they are worse off in internalising and understanding English than their counterparts in Kenya and Tanzania.

What am I saying? Madam Speaker, we should either suspend that thematic curriculum or we totally do away with it. Suspending it would mean giving it time so that even right from the training that is being given to students in the PTCs – the teachers need to understand the methodology of teaching thematically; otherwise we shall continue having dwarfs.

Hon. Members, you all pay school fees and we are talking of Universal Secondary Education, but I wonder why I must pay excess money even for a USE student. Hon. Minister, you really need to help us in that area because in my constituency the minimum that you will pay for a USE student is Shs 59,000. Some schools even pay Shs 120,000 and others Shs 86,000 for a USE beneficiary yet you claim it is free. 

Madam Speaker, I am very happy that we have discovered minerals and in his State of the Nation Address, the President said that the economy is soon going to be better. But I wanted him to at least say something on how the areas that house mineral basins will benefit. We are talking about the cultural institutions and the districts. There is no clear mention of how they will benefit from such wealth from oil. So, we need Government to come up with a paper on how these people will benefit from these minerals. 

On the issue of electricity, my area and the whole of the West Nile is waiting to rely on the Nyagak Power Project. There were some anomalies in the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech. Whereas the State of the Nation Address pointed to Nyagak Power Project as one of the 13 schemes to be commissioned this year in September, in her address, the minister of finance actually said it will be commissioned next year. The postponement of this commission has been overdue and I think that the commissioning and completion of Nyagak Power Project has been more for political reasons. 

Sometimes we politicians do things to win the next elections but we do not do things like statesmen. Statesmen do things focusing on the next generation. Nyagak Power Project has been a song since 1997, so the whole of West Nile still awaits it. I see no justification to spend this amount of money –(Member timed out_)

5.49
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With reference to the State of the Nation Address, I would like to comment on two areas and these are the health sector; and peace and security. 

First of all, I want to thank his Excellency the President for taking the time to address the nation on matters of national importance. However as I said, my concern lies in the health sector. His Excellency the President stated that the Government is totally committed to the improvement of the health sector, especially service delivery all over the country. These nice words, “total commitment” worry me a lot. They have been used all over on a number of occasions but if you look at the away events are taking place, the health sector is in a bad state in general. 

We actually need to turn theory into practise; it is actions that we need. There is no point in stating health promotions, diseases, prevention, maternal and child health, nutrition, etcetera when in actual sense the hospitals are understaffed and not facilitated. What is the point of building structures when you cannot facilitate them? You are actually doing the reverse. 

So, there is need to prioritise things. Human lives are a priority and there is no need to beg or debate on this matter. They should know very well that we need to have a fully staffed medical health sector as well as a functioning, facilitated medical sector. 

The second issue is related to peace and security. Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President talks about the UPDF most of the time but he never acknowledges or appreciates the Police. The Police are equally an important institution in this country. They are the people we stay with and they work 24 hours but their welfare is not actually considered. They are the first point of contact when we are in need; they work day and night but the President does not appreciate them. 

My point is that we should try and appreciate the Police as well. They equally offer a very valuable service and they are the first point of contact in times of need. You will not run to the UPDF, you will always go to the Police and we should appreciate them for the work they do and as well respect the nature of work they do and we should work towards improving their welfare. Thank you very much. 

5.52
MR VINCENT SEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address. I believe that there are many things that have been done by this Government, which the President talked about, and we need to appreciate because some of them are obvious. 

This morning, I went to Kalungu and I was in time for the meeting and I was in time for Parliament because of the good roads. There are so many obvious successes that we really have to appreciate but what I want to talk about are the missing links. 

Madam Speaker, at one time, our currency matched very well with the rest of the region and we were told that we had the three Cs and Ts – that is copper, cotton and coffee; and tea, tourism and tobacco. These were the main engines for supporting our currency and it was strong. Today we have all these scenarios in our country and everybody is saying that Government should go to the reserves, get the dollars that we have kept there and bring them to the market. 

But even with this planning, we are forgetting that we used to depend on agriculture and I stand to respond to the point where the President says that Government has introduced an agricultural financial arrangement. This is welcome but the biggest problem is how much we are putting there. We need to build an economy which majorly depends on exports. The biggest problem is that we now get taxes from only the importers and our exports are dwindling. We need to build our economy on exports. We must balance the exports with the imports and this war will somehow end. 

Madam Speaker, Shs 90 billion for this agricultural finance is really nothing. We have looked at fish farming; we have looked at coffee and others and seen that some of our progressive farmers need more than Shs 2 billion to finance their projects. But if you have Shs 90 billion, how many will you finance when we want to create jobs, get income for our people and so forth and support foreign trade?

I want to thank the Government for coming up with an idea to support pensioners; these people who served this country. The President clearly put it that these people – even those who are supposed to be paid by local governments are going to be paid by the centre. This is good because the district, which I used to lead, had a lot of problems: old districts in this country have problems because they retain the burden of paying the pensioners who used to be their employees. So, this is good. In Masaka for example, people are still coming from Kalangala and Rakai to be paid by Masaka District administration.

5.58
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I purely represent people who are depending on agriculture and I want to start with agriculture.

In the State of the Nation Address, the President talked a lot about agriculture. I remember he said soon, even the inflation we are having will be history when we harvest. But as we speak now, in my constituency - my constituency went full blast on agriculture after receiving the rains. But as the crops were flowering, the groundnuts were starting to put on the seeds, we were hit by drought and we are not going to have the best harvest. 

I hope the Minister for Disaster Preparedness is prepared with food for the people of Serere. You know Serere is almost the food basket of Teso. We have a problem. When I was hearing the President convincing the nation that we are going to have relief from this inflation caused by food shortage - I can see we are not moving away from it; so, more problems are ahead of us.

This takes me to the issue of NAADS, which we have all been convinced about year in, year out that it is one of the tools, which is going to help us modernise agriculture. I have been in the local government; I have been in the district. My district performed quite well in NAADS when I was still the chairman but it wasn’t easy. I must say that the Government somehow has failed. The other day the President was saying that he is not comfortable with the design of NAADS recruiting service providers in the sub-counties because we have officers already there which the Government is paying; but I want this august House to take note that we no longer have these officers in the sub-counties. If we are going to rely on them, we are deceiving ourselves and the President knows it. 

The design of NAADS – I remember the President suspended NAADS for almost one year because the technical people went to do the redesigning and new guidelines were given. He saw it in the design that the service providers were there and he accepted it. Now when we receive the guidelines, which have kept on changing almost every time and have affected even the implementation of NAADS – and this time I was again shocked to see the President complaining about the same officers he himself saw being put in the system. I think that has affected us.

I also remember when the President visited my district and I think the whole country – this takes me to the irrigation, which he himself promised to many farmers. I remember a good number of farmers from my constituency and the region were promised at least some irrigation component, which has not come up to today. I do not know what we are going to do. This is affecting NAADS in our region.

We have gone full blast on orange growing because we were convinced that we were going to have a factory. Up to today, in Teso in Soroti District where I have been a chairman; there is only a signpost reading that there is a citrus factory site. I do not know when it will come. I do not know whether we shall wait until when Jesus comes back for us to -(Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know if that gadget is working. If it is not, you come to this one. It’s on? Okay.   

6.03
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my honourable colleagues in thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address.  

In Ntungamo, we have been attacked by the banana wilt. As we talk about the Foot and Mouth Disease and the HIV virus; in Ntungamo we depend on our bogoya and Matooke. However, today as I talk, bananas are drying up. We have been attacked by the disease. We do not even know what to do. The ministry has neither announced nor pronounced itself on the way forward. As we debate the State of the Nation Address, I hope the minister or the Prime Minister will advise his minister to come up with a big solution immediately.

I appreciate the Eighth Parliament for the work well-concluded. I remember in the Eighth Parliament, you saw to it that we should become like the European Union, IMF and you announced that you would construct a market in Sudan. I appreciate your indulgence. However, I am one of the few privileged Ugandans who have been doing some good business in Sudan. I have been looking for that market and I have not seen it up to now. Therefore, I would task, as we help the President in his statement of zero tolerance to corruption - I would request and task the Prime Minister or the minister in charge to come here and advise us on that issue next time. If not, I beg that this Parliament sets up a small committee, which I can lead because I know the place very well, to go on the ground, investigate and see if there is any market which the Ugandan Government has donated to Sudan. It is appalling! 

As we talk of employment and unemployment, we appreciate those few who are employed although there are very many people who are not yet employed but even those who are employed are no better. There is no minimum wage. Our investors in their factories and industries employ our professionals for Shs 50,000 or Shs 100,000 per month and we are just here seated. Members, we cannot allow this to go on. However, in our Government, I also know that there are some ministries where people are getting little pay, and some Members were suggesting a threshold of Shs 350,000 for the Pay-As-You-Earn. 

Madam Speaker, Pay-As-You-Earn, on that small money: our doctors are complaining about the little pay. The policemen we are talking about do all the pro bono work in this country – actually in the whole world, it is only the police that does the most work but they are getting less than that. I advice Members to abolish Pay-As-You-Earn because I know for example four institutions which are actually abusing Pay-As-You Earn money. In 2009, I was at the Council of Kyambogo University and we were astonished to learn that those people were not remitting Pay-As-You-Earn to URA. I came to be a Councillor at Kampala City Council but one day when the books came, we found that Shs 3 billion had been swindled by the then Town Clerk – if I am protected I can mention his names – Mr Sseggane and his group swindled the money which they were supposed to remit to URA. What is the use of Pay-As-You-Earn? There are other institutions that are charging that money but are taking it to their pockets instead of taking it to the treasury in URA.

Members, let us not lie to ourselves that the threshold of Shs 350,000 will help. What is Shs 350,000 to you? It is just fuel -(Member timed out_)  

6.08
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you. I also wish to register a vote of thanks to His Excellency the President for such a wonderful presentation during the State of the Nation Address. 

Many of my colleagues have talked about quality service delivery. Last week I was at my district and we presented our budget. What I noticed was that however much Government’s priority is on service delivery on sectors like agriculture, education, health, water and so forth, we have got a big problem. While talking with the CAO, I noticed that districts are facing a problem. Most of the sub-counties are understaffed with a few extension workers, a few agricultural officers and a few community development officers. 

At the same time I was able to receive a circular from the ministry of finance directing all accounting officers at the districts not to recruit more staff for the Financial Year 2011/2012. The question is: how are we going to enhance and enforce quality service delivery mechanisms when in my district, Mubende, most of the sub-counties have two extension workers and two community development workers? I think this is a challenge which needs to be addressed.

I wish to talk about the current economic inflation. It is good that the Ministry of Trade and Industry has addressed this issue today but to me the current inflation in this country is all about addressing issues concerning global inflation or exported inflation. The challenge we are facing is that this is a liberalised economy and the forces in the economy are very difficult to control. 

Madam Speaker, while I was on the Internet I noticed that most importers or big countries like China, Malaysia and Indonesia, in responding to the global inflation, appreciated their currency values. The question is: how is Bank of Uganda going to address this issue? To me, responding to the pressures of KACITA is not the only solution. I was very surprised last week when the value of the shilling depreciated by almost Shs 150.

I also wish to talk about the changing weather patterns. We are a predominantly an agricultural based country and we need to understand that there is a change in the weather patterns. Meteorological predictions have also not been adequate. I am calling upon you, Madam Speaker, to have a report to ascertain how the weather conditions have changed. According to me, this period should be dry but it is very surprising that we are still having rains. And if I am to anticipate, we may have fewer rains in September and October. So, I am calling upon your office to address this issue.

Lastly, I want to talk about the conditions in our hospital in Mubende. Mubende Hospital is one of the largest hospitals in the area. And luckily enough, I am grateful to Government because it is being transformed into a referral hospital. The problem we have is that the catchment area is very huge. According to regional standards, its catchment area is supposed to be Kiboga, Mityana, and Sembabule but because of the many lacking neighbouring districts like Kyenjojo, Kibale and Sembabule, they all come to Mubende Hospital. The problem is that Mubende Hospital is understaffed. At the moment we have only one clinical doctor to carry out all the surgical operations. The beds are not enough. Madam Speaker, I am calling upon you to come to my district because some of these issues are very touching -(Member timed out_)  

6.14
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker, at least I have caught your eye. I want to join the rest of my colleagues to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address.

I want to talk about minerals, which His Excellency highlighted. I expected that Moroto would feature in that address. When you look at Moroto, it is endowed with a lot of minerals. We have limestone, gold, uranium and other minerals. However, you also realise that the limestone, which is brought to Tororo cement factory is got from Moroto. When you go to Moroto, through Soroti and Mbale, you find that they are ferrying stones from Moroto to Mbale. 

I am just wondering: if there is a lot of limestone in Moroto, why doesn’t the Government put up a factory to employ the youth? (Applause) These youths are blamed when they do a lot of - not raiding but so many things. We blame our youth and yet it is us who do not want to engage them. What are we going to do as leaders of the district? I am here to bring the voices of the youth who even in the recent elections ran away from the NRM. They asked why they would vote for the Movement when the NRM is not giving them employment. That is one of the major concerns.

Secondly, on the issue of health, I am happy one of my colleagues talked about Moroto Hospital. From time immemorial, no health centre or even Moroto Hospital has had a vehicle, to be honest. Now we have got health centres which are about 80 kilometres away and you expect expectant mothers to walk from Katikekile to Moroto; eighty kilometres? Honestly, Madam Speaker, what do you think about this situation? So, it is my humble appeal that at least while the Government is thinking about improving the health sector, let it avail at least one vehicle to cater for these mothers. We have lost a lot of children because of that.

The other one is on the side of education. If you looked at most of Karamoja there are few students who can manage even tertiary institutions just because there are very few schools other than those ones located in the centre of Moroto. Let me talk about Tapach for instance. There has never even been any seed school and you find this is a community, which is involved in FGM as one of my colleagues mentioned. So, the children grow and at the age of 12 they go for this kind of practice and get married just because they are redundant. There are no schools. Honestly, Madam Speaker, what can we do to help the situation of these people who have for so long suffered since that time up to date? They do not know where they belong; sometimes they say they are part of Kenya because they do not know the Government that they belong to. These are serious issues. 

So, I appeal to the Ministry of Education to at least remember Tapach and give them a seed school. This is a very large sub-county with a lot of communities who do not even know how to write their names. Are these Ugandans or they are third class citizens of this country? This is a very serious matter. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy that the Government came with very good initiatives about NAADS but as we speak, the train of NAADS is taking the same direction. You will find that not everybody is benefiting. What is the problem? Whom are we going to blame? Perhaps the ministry concerned with NAADS should take measures to supervise this kind of activity; otherwise, the story will go on over and over again. So these are some of the critical issues that have made me stay since 2 o’clock to this time. I wanted to air them out. 

On the issue of hard-to-reach areas allowance, it is true Karamoja is one of the regions marked for that kind of condition but you realise that teachers and other civil servants are being attracted to the district; but more especially in the municipality you find they do not benefit and they run away. You know very well we have very few people in different fields. For instance, we do not have doctors in the hospital. When they come they are at an advantage of getting a scholarship and they go to Europe and the hospital is rendered - I am not going to repeat what my colleague mentioned that the situation in Moroto Hospital is appalling. It does not qualify to be called a referral hospital. If you go to the hospital itself I do not think any of us will manage to stay there. You will just run away -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 45 Members have contributed. I think we are making good progress. I want to thank you for the stamina and to say that the debate will continue tomorrow except that we shall interfere a bit and we receive a statement from the ministry of trade. Otherwise, the debate is going to continue. 

I want to inform the Prime Minister that some caterpillars have been tabled here. Since the minister of agriculture has left, you could let him know that Ugandans want an answer about those caterpillars. 

The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.21 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 July 2011 at 2.30 p.m.) 
