Tuesday, 29 July 2014 

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome His Excellency the Vice-President and all the Members of the House to this sitting. I want to announce that it is our intention to adjourn the Plenary on Thursday so that we can concentrate on the budget process. So, whatever work is pending on the Order Paper should be expeditiously handled and we shall be very strict on time taken. 

Secondly, I want to amend the Order Paper. I will be allowing item No. 4 to come immediately after my communication because the Commissioners are engaged in some work for the Parliamentary Commission. 

Thirdly, I want to remind the Leader of the Opposition that the alternative policy statements ought to have been in. So, I am giving you up to Thursday to lay them on the Table so that they can be used in the debate process.
 
 I also want to remind the five ministries that had not yet uploaded their information on policy statements on our intranet to do so. These are: the Ministry of Trade and Industry, Ministry of Planning, Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Please, avail the soft copies of your policy statements so that we can do the needful.
 
I also wish to report that probably by the end of September, the automated integrated security equipment will be here and installed in the House to improve our security. However, in the meantime, I have been informed that women are being checked in public and I think that this is not right. So, I direct the Commandant of the Parliamentary Police to set aside a screening room where the women can be checked, if it is necessary. It is not fair that they are checked in public; in fact, when the men are watching. (Laughter) (Interjections) Of course, we do not expect women to check men and we do not expect men to check women. So, we hope that can be done as quickly as possible. 

The Catholic Chaplaincy invites Members to attend a Eucharistic celebration at 5.30 p.m. in the Members’ lounge. His Lordship Paul Ssemogerere, Bishop of Kasana Luwero, will preside over that celebration. 

As part of the tribute to 50 years of the Uganda Red Cross - as you know, one of our colleagues is the chair of the Uganda Red Cross - there are a number of activities arranged. There is a first aid simulation exercise, which will take place here at Parliament on 30 July 2014 at 9.00 a.m. This is intended to demonstrate first aid skills and to train MPs on how to administer this to their colleagues in case of emergencies. 

Secondly, there will be blood donation. Members of Parliament are encouraged to take part in the blood donation exercise that will take place at the CHOGM gardens. There will also be a humanitarian dialogue, which will take place in the Members’ Lounge. The dialogue will focus on making a case to Parliament of Uganda for the enactment of a new law that makes it legally possible for someone to render aid in an emergency to an injured person on voluntary basis. The Good Samaritan law is intended to offer legal protection to people providing reasonable assistance to those who are injured, ill, in danger or incapacitated. So, Members and staff are encouraged to attend. 

Lastly, honourable members, this morning I received a petition from the Malagori community of Uganda; different generations came to my office today, some dating back before 1900, others born in this country after 1903 - a number of their parents were brought to build the Uganda Railway - but they are not being registered. I do hope that the minister will address that issue. I told them that it may require a constitutional amendment because they are not part of the tribes in our Constitution. So, I hope that when the time comes, we shall be able to address it. For now, I think they may be stateless. 

In the gallery, we have women councillors from Bugiri represented by hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba, the Government Chief Whip, and hon. Wafula Oguttu, the Leader of the Opposition, and hon. Baka. They are here to see their Members at work. You are welcome. (Applause)

I will now invite hon. Akol to lay papers on the Table under item 4.

LAYING OF PAPERS

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.02
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following town councils and municipal councils: 
i) 	Hamurwa Town Council 
ii) 	Entebbe Municipal Council 
iii) 	Sheema Town Council 
iv) 	Muhanga Town Council
v) 	Butogota Town council
vi) 	Rwashamaire Town Council
vii) 	Ibanda Town Council 
viii) 	Igorora Town Council
ix) 	Buvuma Town Council
x) 	Nakaseke Town Council
xi) 	Gombe Town Council 
xii) 	Wakiso Town Council 
xiii) 	Kaberebere Town Council
xiv) 	Isingiro Town Council
xv) 	Kitwe Town Council
xvi) 	Migyera Town Council
xvii) 	Ssembabule Town Council
xviii) 	Kanungu Town Council 
xix) 	Kalisizo Town Council
xx) 	Kashenshero Town Council
xxi) 	Kiwoko Town Council
xxii) 	Moroto Municipal Council
xxiii) 	Kijura Town Council
xxiv) 	Amudat Town Council
xxv) 	Gulu Municipal Council
xxvi) 	Kyenjojo Town Council
xxvii) 	Kibaale Town Council
xxviii) 	Kyarusozi Town Council
xxix) 	Lorengechora Town Council
xxx) 	Serere Town Council 
xxxi) 	Kotido Town Council 
xxxii) 	Kasilo Town Council
xxxiii) 	Luwero Town Council 
xxxiv) 	Wobulenzi Town Council 
xxxv)	Kakooge Town Council 
xxxvi) 	Semuto Town Council 
xxxvii) 	Nakasongola Town Council
xxxviii)	Kanoni Town Council
xxxix) 	Bombo Town Council
xl) 	Katerera Town Council
xli) 	Yumbe Town Council
xlii) 	Mitooma Town Council
xliii) 	Kakumiro Town Council 
xliv) 	Nakapiripirit Town Council 
xlv) 	Amuria Town Council 
xlvi) 	Bukomansimbi Town Council
xlvii) 	Mpondwe Lubiriha Town Council 
xlviii) 	Mityana Town Council 
xlix) 	Rakai Town Council
l) 	Lukaya Town Council 
li) 	Matete Town Council 
lii) 	Kiboga Town Council 
liii) 	Rubaale Town Council 
liv) 	Bushenyi–Ishaka Municipal Council 
lv) 	Kyazanga Town Council 
lvi) 	Kalangala Town Council 
lvii) 	Kiruhura Town Council 
lviii) 	Nsiika Town Council
lix) 	Bukomansimbi Town Council 
lx) 	Masaka Municipal Council
lxi) 	Butemba Town Council

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Commissioner. They will all be sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back. I also want to remind the rules committee that you were instructed to give advice on the method of handling these matters and we expect you to work expeditiously and give us a report.

MR BIREKERAAWO MATHIUS: Madam Speaker, for matters of clarity, I would like to know whether this is Kasensero in Rakai District because it seems it is not in Rakai, going by the way she pronounced it. Did she say Kasensero or Kashenshero?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the chair comes back to report, he or she will tell us whether it is in Kampala or Kitgum. (Laughter)

3.09
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Madam Speaker and honourable members, as you might have witnessed or read in the media recently, there has been an incident involving a leopard - some say they may be two - and the UWA officials are still handling the situation. This leopard came from Kidepo National Park and this is a seasonal occurrence. It comes through Alebtong in Ajuri through to Erute South and right now, it is in Kole in a sub county called Bala.

Children are not going to school because they are living in fear. The farmers are not going to their gardens, which affects the economic welfare of the people of Kole. I want to thank your office for according me this moment to raise this matter and I thank the DPC who has been on the ground for the last five days. (Interjections) 

My plea to the Minister of Tourism is that it has been one month and you have not reached on the ground; what we need is more resources because this leopard has defeated the UWA office in Oyam. Since it is a small office, we need more technically able people from the headquarters- (Interruption) Maybe I could take that information.

THE SPEAKER:  This is not a debate.

MRS ATIM ONGOM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Ebil for giving way. Whatever hon. Ebil is bringing out is not a joke; we have problems in the sub region. 

Last month, my people of Erute South, Ayac Parish in Amach Sub-county, were attacked by a leopard. In fact, I have a picture of the people that were attacked. They have many wounds and they were admitted in the hospital.

I called the UWA people of Kidepo and Murchison Falls. They came to the field and said this leopard has been with the people for a long time and they did not remove it from the population. We have simsim in the fields, we have women who are supposed to go and fetch water and firewood but they are very terrified. The children cannot go to school. It is a serious thing; it is not a joke. We feel the office of UWA should go there and take charge so that our people are in peace. Thank you so much.

MR EBIL: Thank you very much, my sister, for giving that information. Honourable members, as we know very well, even though we come from different constituencies our future is shared. Anything that affects the people of Kole affects all Ugandans. I want you to take it seriously because our destiny is shared. The pain of the people of Kole is the pain of Ugandans.

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me this time. I also thank UBC in a special way because the radio stations affiliated to UBC are –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Members of Cabinet, of course we want to promote tourism but we also want the humans to coexist with the animals. So, I do not know whether any commitment can be made on this seasonal issue. Members say it happens every year at a particular time. So, I think the Minister of Tourism should be knowledgeable about this but let me ask the Government Chief Whip to tell us what to do.

3.13
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleagues who have raised this issue. You have stressed that it is a serious issue. Yes, it is a serious issue because it concerns life. As the Speaker has said, we need wildlife for tourism and we need to coexist, but human beings are more important than animals. 

The Members have informed us that UWA has taken some steps to solve this but what is on the ground is not enough. So, I will take it up with the ministry concerned to go and make sure that everybody in that area is safe and to also make sure that there is a mechanism in place to handle this issue since they have said it is seasonal. So, on behalf of Government, we shall take action beyond what has been happening.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I invite the Minister of Internal Affairs.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.14
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Thursday 24 July 2014, this House directed the Ministry of Internal Affairs to brief Parliament on the on-going mass registration of citizens’ exercise under the National Security Information Systems Project.

Madam Speaker, I am pleased to update the Members of Parliament. On 10 June 2013, Cabinet considered the matter of multiple registrations of persons by different institutions and decided that harmonisation of related activities be made. Under the leadership of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, a Cabinet  sub-committee of Ministers whose ministries are involved in registering of persons was set up to look into the issue.  

Subsequently, a multi-sectoral national technical taskforce was set up under the leadership of the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Internal Affairs. The membership of the technical taskforce included chief executives of institutions that are involved in registering persons and other supporting Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). The list of participating institutions and supporting MDAs is at Annex 1. 

The taskforce, whose terms of reference included consideration of harmonising registration of persons, was tasked to develop a strategy and the necessary budget. The taskforce had a series of stakeholders’ engagements on the subject and carried out benchmarking studies to learn lessons from countries which had gone through this same exercise. Some of the countries that the team benchmarked included Kenya, United Arab Emirates, South Africa, Ghana, Nigeria and Rwanda.

One very important lesson the team learnt was that a multi-sectoral or multi-disciplinary approach to registering persons for the purpose of setting up a comprehensive national identification register was the way to go. This is an emerging excellent model of developing Government initiatives. The details –(Interruption) 

MS MPAIRWE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We do appreciate the statement being read by the Minister for Internal Affairs. However, is it procedurally right for the minister to give us such an important statement concerning our community and voters without any copy, even on the iPads? [Hon. Members: “It is there.”]- No, we do not have it.
 
THE SPEAKER: Let Dr Bitekyerezo show us. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I think the honourable member has generalised. I have my copy here and it is very good.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, did you send a soft copy to the House? 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: We sent, and we even made copies available to the Clerk. We made enough copies available. We did send a copy to the Clerk of this Parliament. We have enough copies. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have sent the clerk to check whether he can upload it now, but I can see a few hard copies in the room. Some Members have them. The clerk has gone to check; just give us a few minutes.

Honourable members, do not get excited. We have been asking for this statement and he has come. So, let us not get excited. Let the clerk tell us what to do.

MRS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Aware that the copies that were produced for such an important statement from the minister are quite few and actually, three quarters of the Members do not have copies and neither can we access it on our iPads, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to stand over this item so that once the copies come, we proceed for consistency? I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think out of today’s business, this is the most important and I would not want to defer it. I have told the clerk to go and check and if they can upload it in the next five minutes, we start. Okay, just hold on a bit.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your guidance. Honourable members, after thorough planning and benchmarking, the taskforce presented its findings to the ministerial sub-committee.

On 1 November 2013, Cabinet approved a strategic and purposeful project of mass registration to be done in two phases as indicated below. Cabinet approved the strategy, budget, roadmap, governance structures and the need for a harmonised law to govern the registration of persons. The strategic decision to register her citizens and resident aliens will lead to the creation of a national identification register, which will be used by all Government ministries, departments and agencies. The register will also –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, thank you. My understanding was that you ruled that the minister will hold on for five minutes as we get the document uploaded. Is the minister, therefore, in order to continue reading the statement? I have respect and sympathy for him – (Interjections) - Yes, I sympathise with him because it is a matter where he has to proceed. Is it in order for the minister to proceed to read against your order? 
	
THE SPEAKER: The minister is anxious to satisfy you and so, he is keeping you informed as we wait. However, I have been informed that it is being uploaded now and so, please, put on your iPads. The clerk has just come back. Let us hold on a bit as we go to item No.5. 

LAYING OF PAPERS 

REPORTS OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 32 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Dr Sam Okuonzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, two members of the sectoral Committee on Foreign Affairs formed part of the Uganda delegation to the 68th Session of the United Nations General Assembly, 2013. 

In accordance with rule 32 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the work of the 68th Session of the United Nations General Assembly attended by the undersigned from September 20th to October 4th in New York, United States of America. I beg to lay. The two people included Dr Sam Okuonzi, member of the Uganda delegation and chairperson of the foreign affairs committee; and hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai, member of the Uganda delegation and member of the foreign affairs committee and Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs. 

Madam Speaker, three members of the sectoral Committee on Foreign Affairs formed part of the Uganda delegation to the Uganda North American Association Convention, which took place on October 29th to November 1st 2013 in Dallas, Texas, United States of America. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation from the Committee of Foreign affairs on the activities of the Uganda North American Association Convention, 2013 as signed by the following: Dr Sam Okuonzi, leader of the delegation; hon. Peter Abraham Lokii, member of the delegation; and hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai, member of the delegation.

MR DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural point, maybe for future parliamentary delegations. The chair stated clearly that he is laying the reports on the Table in conformity with rule 32 of our Rules of Procedure. This rule provides thus: “(1) The leader of a parliamentary delegation or any Member acting on his or her behalf, shall within fourteen sitting days after return to Uganda lay on the Table a report on the activities of the delegation”. 

This is the procedural point I want to raise but now that he has already laid it on the Table, maybe it should act for future delegations abroad: You must lay the report within 14 sitting days after return to Uganda. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Obua, for reminding us about that rule. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. If I heard very clearly, the chairperson of the foreign affairs committee, who was the leader of the delegation, laid on the Table two reports, one of which was a report on the activities of the 68th Session of the United Nations General Assembly and not the report of the delegation. The same applies to the second report he laid, which was merely highlighting activities of the Uganda North American Association Convention. 

What I would have expected, under our Rules of Procedure, is for the leader of the delegation to lay a report of that delegation. What he has laid on the Table today would have been an attachment highlighting what happened in those different meetings. Madam Speaker, I request to be guided on this. 

THE SPEAKER: I have not read the report so I do not know the contents of what he has laid there. However, a date will be appointed when we can discuss them. The Clerk will assist us to synthesise what needs to be discussed and resolved on by this House. 

Honourable members, I understand now the documents can be accessed on your iPads. Let me invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to make his brief. 

GEN.  ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, for your patience. There were very important considerations before this exercise was conceived by Government. They were the following: 

    1. To minimise duplication of effort, wastage of time and resources. We are doing this by harmonising registration processes and specifying the common data elements of all registrations. We have centralised data collection while arrangements for centralised access, use and management are on-going. 

    2. Stop unduly inconveniencing the public by going back to the same person for more or less the same information - names, parents’ names, gender, date of birth, place of residence, etc. These should be going on from time to time. 

    3. Setting up a comprehensive database for creation of a national identification system that will help us create a National Identity Register (NIR). 

    4. The national identity card is slated to become the primary identification document.

    5. Providing an integrated approach to transformation of government operations by creating a platform for e-government and ultimately e-society. 

In summary, Cabinet approved the mass enrolment strategy with the following components:
a) The project roadmap, that is in Annex 3;
b) The multi-sectoral governance structure, which is in Annex 4;
c) The scope; and 
d) The budget. 

In addition, while approving the roadmap, Cabinet considered interdependencies of other Government critical activity timelines like the National Housing and Population Census and the 2016 electoral process. Furthermore, the strategy provided for making use of all existing Government structures for its implementation in order to make the most efficient use of available resources, both human and material. 

The implementation of a NIR will yield numerous benefits to Government and the public since actions taken will then be based on reliable and verified data. It will enhance planning, the country’s security, reduction of crime, enhancement of financial and social development, good governance and enhance service delivery. As the House is aware, a national identification register is a pre-requisite for implementation of e-government transformation initiatives. We, therefore, believe that we are on a correct path to transforming our country to a digitised one and therefore having technological leaps. 

Cabinet approved the mass enrolment strategy and the national implementation team embarked on the pre-enrolment activities which included:

1. 	Recruitment and training of all project staff from the national level down to the parish level. 

2. 	Setting up of national, regional, district, sub-county and parish administrative and information technology support structures. 

3. 	Deployment of staff to fill all those structures.

4. 	Procurement of additional machinery and equipment, software and enrolment materials for mass enrolment. 

5. 	Publicity, mobilisation and sensitisation of the public to support and embrace the exercise. The mass enrolment strategy has been explained and we will continue explaining it to various groups of people. We have explained it to the political, religious and cultural leaders, to many civil society organisations, and to the general public through cluster engagements, electronic and print media under the theme, My County, My Identity. We have received an overwhelming response from the citizens. 

6. 	Mobilisation of all necessary logistics, for example, vehicles to be used in the mass enrolment exercise. 

7. 	Preparation of the old set of equipment for upgrade and integration. 

8. 	Setting up of the project home and installation of machinery at Kololo, where the home of the exercise is. 

9. 	Setting up and operationalisation of a solid regionalised structure to coordinate and supervise the project. 

10. 	Gazetting and establishing enrolment centres across the country in accordance with Section 36 of the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, Cap 66.

11. Putting in place security mechanisms for the kits, other materials and project staff. Having security agencies directly participate in the exercise has also helped.

Madam Speaker, on 13 April 2014, H.E. the President launched a countrywide mass enrolment exercise in line with the strategy approved by Government. Notable form his speech, the President – 
    • encouraged all Ugandans to register; 
    • emphasised the usefulness of the national identity, for instance, enhancement of security, provision of social services, facilitation of free movement of people within the East African Community region and many other benefits;
    • emphasised authentication of true identities of people; and 
    • emphasised facilitation of access to financial services.

Roll-out of Mass Registration Strategy

Madam Speaker, registration of persons is planned to be done in two phases. This is given the varying mandates and demands of the participating institutions. Many of these institutions have to perform functions in line with set constitutional timeframes, which none of us want to breach.

Under Phase I, we are registering all citizens aged 16 and above. This phase started on 14th April this year. During this phase, the overall objective is that all citizens who will be registered will be issued with national identification numbers and national identity cards. In addition, it will enable us to respond to the requirements of Uganda Bureau of Statistics (the National Housing and Population Census) and of the Electoral Commission. The cards will be used to prove citizenship during the 2016 general elections. A detailed roadmap of Phase I is illustrated at Annex 3.

Phase II will be implemented starting from July 2016 after the general elections. There will be a gap when we yield ground for the electoral activities to take place. We will register all citizens aged zero (0) years and above, anybody who will have missed the Phase I registration and resident foreign nationals; and those aged 16 years and above will be issued with national identity cards. Resident foreign nationals will be issued with alien identity cards, different from the citizenship identity cards. A detailed roadmap of Phase II is illustrated in Annex 3.

Honourable members will note that at commencement of Phase I, this exercise met a number of challenges. These included: 

i) 	Inadequate number of kits due to delays in deliveries of additional equipment and upgrades. However, a decision to begin with a few kits was taken. Along the way, more kits were received and I am glad to report that the project is on course. Starting with a few kits led to incremental approach, which helped us manage technological challenges that came up. Solutions to technological challenges were easier to implement with few kits and even easier to pass on to the bigger numbers when all were later on delivered. 

ii) 	Enrolment officers had not gained enough experience with the kits. 

iii) 	Supervision and coordination structures were not solid. 

iv) 	The multi-sectoral approach to implementation had not taken root. 

v) 	Hard-to-reach areas presented a big challenge to the exercise. 

vi) 	Stealing of kits, for example, on 15 April 2014, a kit was stolen from one of the centres in Kole District. 

vii) 	Breakdown of kits. 

viii)	General disbursement of resources to the field staff; for example, LCIs countrywide threatened to lay down their tools and in fact, some did because of the issues related to their pay.

Madam Speaker, we immediately reorganised to deal with the above mentioned challenges. I am glad to report to this House that at the moment, because of the following interventions, the project is firmly on course and irreversible: 

i) 	More kits were delivered and almost all the districts are now operating at the planned 100 per cent kits distribution; 

ii) 	Enrolment officers have since gained proficiency and there are now fewer problems due to adequate operator knowledge; 

iii) 	We set up regional IT support centres and online real time technological response mechanisms to deal with all field IT related problems; 

iv) 	We introduced a daily performance tracking mechanism for all enrolment officers, which helps us to identify those officers that need refresher training or urgent help; 

v) 	We have sensitised LCI chairpersons countrywide and published the allowance payment schedule for all the staff involved in this exercise.

vi) 	We improved coordination and supervision mechanisms by dividing the country into more and smaller tactical and operational regional structures. We started with nine regions but we are now operating under 21 regions as shown in Annex 5. 

In addition, we created regional, district and sub-county committees with an in-built monitoring and evaluation mechanism that has helped us to manage this exercise as illustrated in the figure below. We have a pyramidal structure which shows headquarters, regional, district, sub-county and down to the parish teams. 

We also encouraged vertical and horizontal communication and I would like to report that communication has been efficient when challenges were met. The district coordination committees, for example, are in touch with the exercise on a daily basis hence the real time escalation and management of the issues. Where we had administrative challenges, for example with the parish chiefs, we enlisted the Ministry of Local Government support to direct all the CAOs to give the necessary support to the project.

vii) 	For the hard-to—reach areas, we set up a committee to map all of them in the country and in addition, facilitation was also put in place to supplement activities of the hard-to-reach areas. 

viii) 	Security of the kits was managed by requiring all enrolment centres to be guarded by police officers and storage of kits to be done at police stations or police posts at the sub-county levels.

ix) 	We have stuck together as one robust team committed to delivering this project under the guidance and stewardship of the policy, steering and technical committees. 

x) 	We have stepped up sensitisation and mobilisation.

Madam Speaker, allow me to illustrate in detail how enrolment under this project has been handled:

Enrolment Implementation

The scope of the project as approved by Cabinet stated that we expect to register an estimated 18 million people of 16 years old and above using 8000 enrolment kits. The enrolment is being done at the parish level - Annex 6 will show you how the exercise goes on at the enrolment point - with at least one kit at each enrolment centre. All citizens are expected to register where they reside or where they are born because of the following reasons:

i) 	Citizenship verification and proper identification; and

ii) 	to comply with the Electoral Commission’s requirement for registration of voters that registration takes place either where they reside or where they are born. 

In this regard, it is also important to note that all those who have registered will receive their identification cards form where they have been registered. 

Critical to identification is the capturing of proper personal data, a quality photograph and biometric fingerprints. However, challenges have been met in capturing fingerprints and facial images because of the high quality standard required by the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) standards, which we are strictly following. This has been addressed through refresher training for enrolment officers to improve on operator capability and have sensitised the people turning up for registration to clean their hands before enrolment. 

Enrolment of PWDs as a Special Case

We have come up with mechanisms of registering people with disabilities and the elderly. Where we are approached, we place mobile registration centres at their places of convenience; for example, we organised an enrolment for the school of the blind in Soroti and about 700 people were enrolled.
 
At the enrolment centres, when a PWD appears for registration, our enrolment officers are under instruction to assist these people and give them priority for registration. 

Enrolment Kits and Technology

Honourable members, the exercise kicked off with small numbers of registration kits, at 20 per cent in the first week increasing to 68 per cent by the ninth week. Since then, all procured kits and software have been received and delivered. The current kits distribution is as indicated under figure 1 below. We are now going from the 20 per cent, as stated earlier, to almost 97 per cent. Please, note that three per cent of the kits are kept at the headquarters for rapid response to emergencies of equipment breakdown. 

In the course of mass registration, we sometimes experience equipment performance failure. The effect of this is two-fold: Enrolment does not take place until equipment is repaired; the captured data is not transmitted to the centre at Kololo in time. This results in some data remaining at the districts. Therefore, the figures presented here are those that have been received at the centre. When all captured data in the districts is received, the overall picture of how the project is performing will change for the better. 

We also encountered challenges of deploying old kits procured way back in 2010 whose performance and capacity, therefore, are not as good as the new kits that we acquired. 

To ensure that we are always on top of the technical challenges – 
    • The technology team at the centre has been beefed up to rapidly respond to technical problems that are reported. Their actions ensure that equipment failure is rapidly attended to and that captured data does not stay long at the districts before being transmitted to the centre. 

    • The situation room at the centre is also continuously in touch with the regions and all the districts. They provide online technical solutions to the problems that are reported. 

    • There has been and will continue to be training and retraining of the enrolment officers and supervisors and IT field support teams to ensure that the whole team is always up to the task. 

    • Deployment of old kits to places connected the national power grid because they require constant charging. 

We have come up with a daily performance tracking mechanism where we receive daily enrolments on a particular kit and a particular enrolment officer. This enables us to track performance and ensure targeted assistance to the enrolment officers who need help. 

Further, we have allowed a level of flexibility at the local level with regard to kits distribution. Where the district enrolment officer determines that deployment of more kits to an area out of those available will help, this is done. The result has been that some areas are almost through. In cases where registration is almost complete, the kits are being redeployed to areas where there are populations still waiting for registration.
 
The mass enrolment process at parish level is in progress. Despite the challenges experienced at the beginning of the exercise, our enrolment officers have gained proficiency in using the kits and the computer enrolment software. The average enrolment per kit is now standing at 40 persons per kit per day as compared to where it was when we began - 25 persons per kit per day. We have, however, some efficient performers who are enrolling up to about 85 persons per kit per day. 

Madam Speaker, implementation of the above initiatives has improved project performance. Mass enrolment at the end of the 15th week stands at 11.4 million persons. The detailed performance per district is given in Annex 7. This does not include those registered but those whose data has not reached the centre due to technical problems, which problems are constantly being sorted out. 

Based on the above performance of week 13 at 1,235,869, week 14 at 1,347,086 and week 15 at 1,236,045, we have now stabilised at that performance level and therefore expect similar performance in the remaining weeks 16 and 17. At the end of week 17, (11 August 2014 - end of mass enrolment) we expect to have a total enrolment of 14 million people. This will leave us with a balance 4.2 million to hit the estimated target of 18 million people. 

Honourable members, if we were to continue to parish level, we would require an additional 3.26 weeks to capture the remaining 4.2 million people. However, in accordance with the approved roadmap, we shall continue registration for six months at the sub-county level, during which period the remaining population shall be registered. Considerations shall be made for exceptional areas for field outreach to parish level as the case may be in areas, which will still have high populations unregistered. 

We have the regional performance on week 15 and the figures are well tabulated, district by district; honourable members can go through and appreciate the figures. I want to thank the members. We have two categories here: category one are those who stand at 70 per cent and above and category two, 50 per cent. However, there are cases of 40 per cent. This performance, as we said, has been improving day by day. 

These are some emerging issues we got along the way as we traversed the country conducting enrolment: 
1. 	Development of the enrolment software made use of names of administrative units given to us by the Electoral Commission. It has since emerged that a few errors were made in the naming and uploading of some administrative units’ names on the enrolment software. This matter was taken up with the Ministry of Local Government so that we could sort out that discrepancy. Sometimes the name of a village in our system is not what the people call it. 

Naming of the administrative units follows a legal authorised process. On our part, it is not our fault as we have no mandate to change a name of an administrative unit unless consultation is made with the Ministry of Local Government and it has been done. Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate you for having insisted that that unit in our system be changed and I am sure it was changed. 

Naming of an administrative unit follows a legal authorised process. Where it has been found that the due process was not followed, the error has been rectified. 

2. 	A few people have suggested that due to the small number of kits used at the beginning, the deadline for registration at the parish level should be extended. 

It is true that registration of persons kicked off with a small number of kits. It is also true that the enrolment officers then did not have sufficient experience. Since then, the situation has changed. We received and have deployed more kits as indicated in figure 1. The enrolment officers are more proficient, enrolling a minimum of 33 persons per day per kit - the national average is 40 - compared to the original 25 persons per day per kit. We have intensified supervision, monitoring and coordination at horizontal and vertical levels. The technical team is always ready to solve problems that crop up. Flexibility regarding kits distribution in an area has been allowed.

In light of all these initiatives and the results we are receiving from the field, we believe it will not be necessary to extend the deadline of registration at parish level. (Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Members, please listen! 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Already, there are areas where registration is more or less complete. The few remaining will be able to register at the sub-county level. As planned, we intend to remain at the sub-county level up to February 2015 when the 2016 electoral process will begin. This is sufficient time.

3. 	A number of people have requested to be registered at their places of work. Similarly, those in the diaspora have requested to register at our missions abroad. 

We are cognisant of the fact that one of the main objectives of the exercise is to come up with a national citizenship register that will be used for various purposes - service delivery, determination of true identities of people, security, crime reduction and others. This requires citizenship identification and verification, which is best done where you reside or where you originally come from and not at the place of work, even in the diaspora. All citizens have, therefore, been encouraged to register where they reside or where they originally come from. 

4. 	People are complaining that there are no enrolment forms at the registration centres. This may be true in some cases. However, our monitoring and evaluation mechanisms have revealed that these forms are being hoarded by unscrupulous people who are selling them for personal financial gain. The vice is prevalent mainly in Kampala, Wakiso and some border areas like Busia and Buliisa. In Busia, for example, a Somali bought a registration form, successfully registered and he was intercepted in Arua. Those who sold him the form have been taken to court. 

5. 	It has also come to our attention that in almost all the districts of Uganda, there is the prevalence of cults called 666 and Enjiri sects whose religious beliefs do not support registration, for instance, of national IDs. They believe that registration is satanic and have, therefore, shunned the exercise, which is terrible.

We have on several occasions looked out for their leadership to persuade and sensitise them about the exercise but some have still resisted registration. As Members are aware, under the current national ID regulations, any person who fails, without reasonable excuse, to apply for registration as a citizen or as the case may be fails to take reasonable steps to apply for citizenship or national identity card, commits an offence and is liable to a fine or three months imprisonment or both. We may revert to charging those who are standing in the way because of beliefs in these cults.

Honourable members, we are continuing to manage these emerging issues as they come. In view of the above, we are very grateful to H.E the President, the Rt Hon. Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and all other leaders who have led by example by going to their respective places of origin to register. In the same vein, I call upon all honourable members who have not yet registered to go to their respective areas of birth and residence and register. 

I wish to emphasise that the current exercise is not a one-off. It is true that after February 2015, registration of those aged 16 years and above will stop to enable the 2016 electoral process to go ahead. Registration of all persons from age zero upwards will resume after swearing in of the new President in 2016. Therefore, those in the diaspora and some who are in prison will be able to register anytime they come home, either during the period between now and February 2015 or after the new Government is sworn in in 2016.

On the issues of citizenship, Madam Speaker, you are aware that national identification numbers and national identity cards are to be issued to citizens of Uganda only. Identifying and verifying Ugandan citizens is a big challenge. Identifying and verifying Ugandan citizenship is not easy yet all those we are enrolling must, as of necessity, be identified and verification of their Ugandan citizenship claims must be made in accordance with the set criteria under the 1995 Constitution. In some districts, the citizenship challenge is more prominent than in others. This task is quite complex given a number of reasons:

    1. The cross border communities: It is extremely difficult to identify those strictly belonging to Uganda and those of her neighbours. These include the Pokot, both in Uganda and Kenya, the Karimojong, Itesot, Bagisu and Basamia, the Banyarwanda and Twa. The western border has the Bakonjo, Bamba, Alur, Lugbara; the northern border has the Madi, Lugbara, Kakwa, Kuku and Acholi.

    2. The refugee problem and the lack of proper management of it since 1962. There is a general public outcry about the influx of refugees, for example those who have settled in very easily. These have even acquired land and may be occupying political and public offices. 

    3. We are working closely with the responsible office under the Office of the Prime Minister to compare the existing database of refugees with our database to weed out refugees who may have applied for national identity cards. The districts that host refugee camps and transit points have been sensitised with a clear message sent out that refugees are ineligible for enrolment during this mass enrolment exercise. 

    4. Many illegal immigrants from neighbouring countries have also settled in Uganda for some time.

Honourable members, with all the above in mind, we adapted a multipronged citizenship verification strategy as illustrated below: 

a) 	The Parish Citizenship Verification Committee. There is a committee at the parish level whose job is to conduct this verification. These are composed of the parish chief/elder, LCI village chairperson and the Parish Internal Security Officer. Their main role is to identify the citizen from the community where he or she resides and/or is born and endorse their comments on the enrolment form. The applicant is then enrolled by the enrolment officer and the data sent to Kololo central processing system. However, we have reports of infiltration by foreigners and this is being associated with the parish verification committees not doing what they were expected to do in some cases. Some of the members of these committees are also alleged to be non-Ugandans, especially in the border areas. 

b) 	Central Citizenship Verification Team at Kololo. This has a team of experts who have been recruited from the general public and some are seconded to the project from the Immigration Directorate, Ministry of Defence, Internal Security Organisation, Police and Prisons Services to process enrolled data. This is another check for processing citizenship. During this process, biometric identification of applicants is done to ensure that there are no multiple registrations and citizenship approval is done. For those whose citizenship is queried, the system sends back a feedback report and further clarifications may be sought from that person.

c) 	Sub-county Review Committee. This is composed of immigration, sub-county chief and the Gombolola Internal Security Officer (GISO). This is where reviews of those whose citizenship is queried or in doubt are handled with a more detailed report from this committee to the centre in Kololo.

d) 	National Review Committee. This committee is constituted by the Minister of Internal Affairs and will handle cases that the sub-county committee totally rejects after their review.

The general guidance, however, is that citizenship verification shall be continuous. Where evidence becomes available that a person issued with a national ID is not a citizen, the law provides for the cancellation and revocation of that card. This remains a safeguard to the challenges presented by the citizenship verification process and is the fallback provision.

Naturalisation of some Communities for Citizenship

Madam Speaker, since the 14th of April when we started implementation, we have come across various communities in various parts of the country that openly acknowledge to have come from neighbouring countries. These have since lived here and have generations born in Uganda. Cases in point are the following:

The Malagori Community of Kiryandongo District 

This community is resident in Jeeja village, Kigumba sub-county in Kiryandongo District. It is alleged that they came from Kenya to Uganda in 1956 on invitation of the Omukama Kabalega of Bunyoro and have since lived here with their families. They are estimated to be 5,500 people. This community wanted to register directly but have been advised to use lawful methods only, and this is through citizenship by naturalisation.

We have met this community twice and have sensitised them about the exercise and the laws on Ugandan citizenship, and they have expressed willingness to apply to be naturalised under our laws. The Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control put in place modalities of fast-tracking their applications for naturalisation through Hoima regional immigration office. After this, we shall register them and issue them with national identity cards.

Many other communities like the Alur Community in Panyamul, in Nebbi District, West Nile, qualify for this kind of citizenship. We encourage them to formalise their legal citizenship status before they get registered for ID purposes under this exercise.

Dual Citizenship 

Honourable members are aware that the country allows dual citizenship. This is the simultaneous acquisition of two nationalities, one of which is Ugandan. However, there are regulations governing this status and those who want to be recognised as such must formally apply to the National Citizenship and Immigration Board. If this is granted, they are issued with a Certificate of Dual Citizenship.

The challenge here is that there is a general feeling that since the law allows dual citizenship, one simply states that he or she is a dual national, and some even hold two passports illegally. This is illegal. For purposes of the National Identification Register, we strictly apply the legal requirement since there are offices of the state that holders of dual citizenship must not hold. 

Challenges

Implementing the exercise has not been without challenges. These are continuously being identified and solutions found to resolve them. Below are some of the challenges we have met and resolved:

i) 	Delay in acquisition of kits. This was a delayed process in procurement but it was eventually overcome.

ii) 	Partial deliveries to districts, which was also overcome.

iii) 	Enrolment Officers trained in April needed refresher training to be more efficient in enrolment and that has been done.

iv) 	Politicising the exercise; there is a wrong perception that the enrolment is solely for electoral purposes. Here, we did intensify sensitisation. National, regional and district structures were established to ensure that people understand that this exercise is for the multiple reasons that I have enumerated above as strategic benefits of this exercise.

v) 	Availability of reliable power supply in districts. This has been a challenge and we overcame this in some districts with more generators and solar panels;

vi) 	Malfunctioning of kits due to poor power supply. We set up mobile technical teams to fix faults and increased the number of technical support staff.

vii) 	Cases of some administrative units’ names missing. We have worked with the Ministry of Local Government to sort that out.

viii) 	Extortion of money from the public by unscrupulous people. We sensitised the public. The Police and Intelligence have also been on the lookout and some people have been arrested

ix) 	Some Parish Verification Committees and enrolment officers not being on duty, being absent and late coming. That has also been significantly dealt with.

Madam Speaker, the exercise has presented us not only with challenges but also opportunities. The exercise has become popular and has the support of the political, cultural, religious leadership and the media.

The emerging potential of the multi-sectoral approach to service delivery has been clearly demonstrated under this exercise. There is pride and a sense of ownership by Ugandans. There is vigilance by most Ugandans and the security benefits that are coming along with the exercise.

The vigilance has also enabled us to apprehend and deal with wrongdoers, for example: those discouraging others from registering like the cults; those extorting money from the public by selling registration forms and asking for money to be registered; those asking for money from the handicapped and the elderly despite our instructions for these to be assisted for free; and officers and local leaders attempting to steal equipment. 

I wish to make it clear that the on-going registration at parish level, which started on 14 April 2014, will go on up to 11 August 2014. After this, registration enrolment centres will shift to sub-counties. Registration of those aged 16 and above who will have missed registration at the parish level will go on at sub-county level up to 27 February 2015 when all registration will stop in order not to interfere with the electoral process. It must, however, be noted that registration of births and deaths will go on at all times.

We have adopted new strategies to enable us complete the exercise. They include:
a) 	Re-deployment of enrolment kits from areas where the exercise has been completed like the districts of Mitooma, Buvuma, Nakapiripirit and Kayunga to areas where they still have big populations to capture. 
b) 	Adopting mobile registration centres to look for places with high numbers of unregistered people;
c) 	Use of LCI registers to locate unregistered citizens;
d) 	Starting continuous registration at sub-county level immediately after 11 August 2014 -  

THE SPEAKER: Just hold on, honourable minister. I want to introduce these young children who came in when we had just started. They are from Kairos Nursery and Primary School represented by hon. Ssimbwa and hon. Naggayi of Kampala District. You are welcome. (Applause)

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Thank you. This will run up to February 2015. We believe that during this period, all the remaining Ugandans will be registered.  

I wish to state, Madam Speaker, that arrangements and structures are being put in place to ensure continuity of registration of persons. In the event that one misses in Phase I and Phase II registration, he or she will be registered using the structures being set up. No one will be disfranchised. All citizens will be registered either during Phase I or in case they miss it, during the continuous registration process that will be put in place at sub-county level after Phase I. 

The idea and the commitment is to always have an up-to-date register of persons in Uganda. The current exercise is, therefore, not a one-off. It is building a platform for setting up a live register of persons at all times. This will be achieved by the continuous registration of all births and deaths whenever they occur. 

Way Forward

In light of the above, Cabinet approved the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014. This Bill was printed and gazetted on 18th of last month – (Interjections) – There is a Bill yet to come. The Bill was gazetted in Uganda Gazette No.41, Vol. CVII and will soon be introduced in Parliament for debate and enactment. 

The object of the Bill is to harmonise and consolidate the law on registration of persons, to provide for registration of individuals, to establish a national identification register, to establish a national identification and registration authority, to provide for the issuance of national identification cards and aliens identification cards and other related matters. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, let me once again take this opportunity to thank you, honourable members and the entire public for fully embracing the exercise. People are enthusiastically presenting themselves for enrolment. The honourable members’ public support of the exercise during the regional sensitisation meetings held at the beginning of the exercise, presenting them for registration, constant monitoring of the progress of this exercise has greatly helped. I call upon all of us to continue doing so and to enrol. 

We are aware the exercise is complex and we have met a number of challenges. We are, however, 100 per cent certain that we shall run the last mile. My country, my identity! I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, for your time. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for that comprehensive brief. Our rules require that statements like this be discussed for a few minutes, but I will give a total of 30 minutes. 

Honourable members, let us not have preambles; just ask on areas you want to be addressed so that we do not use too much time. Let me start with the acting Leader of the Opposition – [Hon. Members: “He will wind up.”] – Later; okay, let us start with hon. Kaabule. 

4.20
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the General for the brief. I have two issues to raise. 

One, I was going round in my district this weekend; I actually wanted to register at one of the parishes but all the batteries were down at that particular registration centre and the supervisor was not there and it was already 9 O’clock in the morning. The officers who were there had called the supervisor and they could even trace him. They had a problem with the supervisor. 

This is a rural area with no power. We only have one generator for the whole sub-country and the batteries were not charged the whole night. The supervisor told them to wait until they get batteries from Iganga, which is quite a distance, and he does not sleep within the district. So, they had to wait until midday and that is when he arrived with one battery. People lined up and got tired. 

Two, what monitoring and evaluation systems do you use? There is nobody to monitor the supervisors. The supervisor is never there and he does not pay them. When he feels like paying them, he pays in bits and they do not even sign for the Shs 20,000 they get in bits. So, please, analyse your monitoring and evaluation system and also make sure that your people go to the villages to see what is being done there. I thank you. 

4.21
MS GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWD): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister. However, I want to bring it to his attention –(Interjections)– Can you allow me to finish? 

Madam Speaker, I want to bring it to the attention of the minister that people with disabilities who are amputees or those suffering from leprosy have been sent away because they do not have fingers for the biometric machine. So, there is a problem because these people are not going to be registered yet they are citizens of Uganda. What do we do for such people?

I also propose that the forms, like my passport, have “person with disabilities”. So, could you capture such information so that these people are also given chance? 

There is also the issue of the distance. Now that you are moving to the sub-county, I get worried. I propose that you come up with at least affirmative action on specific dates where we can have people go to register and their needs are taken care of. Thank you so much. 

4.23
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the good and elaborate report. I would like to seek clarification. 

I have seen the regions and I see Mbarara has 1,043,000 as its population. When I consider our voters, in Ntungamo alone we have about 300, and that is people who are 18 and above, but this registration is for those 16 years above. So, I need clarification on this population of 1,000,000 in the whole region of Mbarara including Ntungamo, Isingiro and others. 

Secondly, you said that it must be noted that registration of births and deaths will go on at all times. Have you started registering these, because we have never had registration of births and deaths? If not, when will it start?

Lastly, the exercise is good and there are people putting in their effort to do this exercise. We have LCIs and you talked of Shs 10,000 then eventually it was changed. We have been talking one on one and you told us that they will get the Shs 300,000 in the area where they operate. Madam Speaker, these people are operating at a parish level and a parish has so many local councils. So, when they bring Shs 300,000 they have to share it and so one might get about Shs 3,000. So, they ask, “really, an LC chairperson!” Moreover, you made them open up accounts and do a lot of things and now you are paying them Shs 3,000. (Member timed out.)

4.25
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for the presentation. 

At page 56 of his statement, the minister said that Maracha District’s estimated population of people from 16 years and above as of February is only 108. Isn’t that “under-numbering” the people of Maracha? (Interruption)

MS AURU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister because he said that registration requires all people to go to their various parishes for purposes of identification. There are Ugandans who are in the diaspora who have come to Kampala and have already registered. How is that going to be treated? I am saying this because I have relatives who were supposed to register in Moyo District in my parish but they have already been registered here.

THE SPEAKER: That is not a problem; the data is taken to the village.

MS LEMATIA: Madam Speaker, my second question is: when my husband went to register in Entebbe and he said that he wanted to vote from Maracha, the officers refused. I do not know whether that is an instruction given or it is their own making. Would you clarify that? Thank you.

4.28
MS JENNIFER NANTUME EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have two points to raise. 

The first point is about the conclusion of the minister’s statement, where he said that some districts, Buvuma inclusive, have had their registration completed. I would like to inform the minister that those islands are part of the hard-to-reach areas and especially these areas where people move on water. I suspect two things. One is that the officers carrying out registration in the islands now fear to move to other parts via water or they are deceiving you that registration has been completed. Otherwise, I want to inform you that not all people have been registered. 

Secondly, I would like to beg Government for an extension of this exercise especially at parish level. (Applause) Let me give some justification for this. When the President launched this exercise, it was a period when children were going back to school. Now the exercise will end on 11th August and the kits will be shifted to the sub-county but that is when school holidays begin. So, how will our children register? How will we facilitate our children to go and register at the sub-county level? That is why I am begging for an extension.

Lastly, due to the inadequate forms that you talked about and the experience that was lacking in regard to the officers registering citizens, it is an indicator that even the time that had been estimated was short. That is another reason I am begging for an extension to enable everyone to register. Thank you.

4.30
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for presenting this report and I thank him for the improvement that he has made to the exercise. However, I would like to inform the minister that in my district, only this week I went around and got to know that the kits could register only 9 to 10 people per day. So, I am wondering which report he is getting that indicates 30 to 40 people per day. In my district, each kit only registers 9 to 10 people per day. In view of that, Madam Speaker, I also would like to join those that are asking for an extension of this exercise.

Madam Speaker, the minister has talked about the existence of a monitoring group at the districts. Only yesterday, the district chairman of Masaka was appealing to me to report all these shortages in his district of operation. So, again, I wonder where the district monitoring is supposed to report to if they are appealing to report to you.

The third point is about what the minister mentioned on page 12; he said that after 15 weeks, they have registered one million people and so on, but he adds that he expects that by week 17 they will have registered 14 million people. Somehow, I am confused about the mathematics – (Member timed out.)

4.32
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first point is that the minister advertised the rates of payments where it was made clear that LCI chairpersons would earn Shs 300,000 per month. Honourable minister, you need to come out very clearly on these rates because they are causing confusion amongst the LCI committee members. Many of them think that that money is supposed to be shared.

Two – (Interruptions)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to the House is that when the LCIs were being inducted on this exercise, they were told that they would be earning Shs 10,000 per day worked. However, as we speak, some LCI chairpersons are earning as little as Shs 3,000. So, can the minister clarify that to the House?

MR BAKA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I also stand to provide information to the House. When the message was passed on that they would earn Shs 300,000 per month, many people in my area went on to sell their goats and chicken to open bank accounts.

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: I thank all of you for that good information. 

Honourable minister, I want to clearly understand this issue of the registration database. Why are we having so many registration databases in Uganda? Can’t we have this one as a one-stop centre for registration? I am saying this because in your report, you are saying that you are supposed to give this information to UBOS but UBOS is going to generate another database during the census, and  there is also the Electoral Commission doing a similar thing. Why should we waste all this money?

Mr Minister, I am an IT guru, for your information. I do not see why we should be having so many national databases with similar information. We can have one with all the information. Thank you.

4.36
DR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to request the minister to clarify. On the forms that we have been filling for passports, there is citizenship by descent but in these ID forms, there is no descent. Why is this? I am sure the issue of descent comes from the Constitution where we know by 1st Jan 1926 when Uganda became a country, all these people who were living in these areas became citizens by descent. Why is there no descent in these registration forms? 

Secondly, the picture the minister has given us that the exercise is doing very well may be true but the figures that have been sent to whichever centre, I am sure, are not correct. First of all, Members have already intimated that the population that is indicated is not correct. You cannot claim that Kibaale has 346 people when we have a population gross of 5.2 per cent, the highest in the country. So, I think there is a problem somewhere which must be looked at. 

The problem of selling of forms is very serious. I am told that there is only one company, which was mandated to print those forms. For security reasons, it is okay but they should have been made to make as many forms as possible so that they are available. People have taken advantage and they are getting money from the wanainchi. 

Madam Speaker, during the exercise of getting officers who would participate, many civil servants were taken on including teachers. The teachers have been moved away from the classrooms to enrolment and schools are getting a problem with the pupils. I am told they are trying to remove them so that they go back to the classrooms but the officers to replace them are not there. - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: That was an important one, I am sure, about withdrawing the teachers. 

DR KASIRIVU: That is why there should be an extension of the exercise because there have been disruptions and we should have an extension so that the exercise is done. I thank you.

4.38
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Fort Portal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the point of Ugandans in the Diaspora, the minister stated that they should be able to find time and come for registration. The situation of the Ugandans in the Diaspora is threefold: There are those who are officially representing the country abroad, there are those who have gone for greener pastures and they have got employment, there are those who moved with a hope of getting something and they are lost in there, in different parts of the world. At the same time, as a country, our economy has been receiving money through the remittances from the Ugandans abroad because they leave relatives here and they send them money that adds to our economy.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is about the status of Ugandans in the Diaspora. A bunch of them have run away from this country due to political reasons and they cannot come back and register. (Laughter)

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, maybe that is the fourth point, but the point I am emphasising here is that when you are out of your country and you are living in a foreign land, you really search and yearn for a sense of belonging. However, when your own country through the embassies cannot provide a service that connects you to your own country, it is unfair. That is why it is my prayer that in these embassies, we should deploy officers to register Ugandans. 

There are Ugandans who have lost their passports but they still feel that they want to come back to their country. So, let us have parishes in these embassies and get Ugandans feel they belong to this country and get the right they deserve –(Member timed out.)

4.40
MR JAMES BAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. First, we are aware of what has been happening in the Rwenzori Region where people are living in fear and in the report of the minister on page 23, he indicated that he will redeploy enrolment kits in the areas of Mitooma, Buvuma, and Nakapiripirit but he excludes Rwenzori Region. I just have a simple question: is he comfortable that in the Rwenzori Region, where we had clashes and with all the issues happening there, people are registering?

Secondly, this would be a request to you, hon. Minister; looking at the long queues that are normally at these registration centres, could you have a consideration for the elderly and PWDs - an old man of 80 years old and above standing for over three hours, some of them are not comfortable with it and have kept on dodging this.

Lastly, with my experience at my parish in Kasese, they keep shifting from village to village but the timetable is not communicated to the people in that region. How are you going to handle this so that people are informed because this depends on the person registering? Thank you very much.

4.42
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, apart from Kampala, the minister reported that registration forms are over. There are upcountry districts such as Alebtong, in Lango sub region, where as I speak some stations have run out of registration forms. When does the ministry intend to roll out beyond Kampala to upcountry districts where registration forms are over? Secondly, in the detailed performance reported by the minister, my district, Alebtong, received 20 kits and the performance within 16 weeks is 60 per cent. 

Hon. Minister, we are remaining with two weeks before you zone to sub counties. Do you think that the remaining 40 per cent with all the 20 kits - Mark you, 20 kits in Alebtong District would only serve Ajuri County because my county has 20 parishes, so that will leave out Moroto. The entire district has received only 20 kits, which is more or less a half. Do you think in two weeks, we can achieve the 40 per cent before we zone to the sub counties? 

Thirdly, there are upcountry districts like Alebtong where we received registration kits a bit late. If you are saying you are not extending registration at parish levels before you zone to sub counties, do you have any special plans for giving us some special considerations to extend to cover the period that we missed? Thank you.

4.44
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appeal to the minister to extend the registration at parish level for one more month. I have 186 parishes in Manafwa and I received only 72 kits. With the terrain in Manafwa and the rains that pour on a daily basis, we cannot register all the people. When you look at the figures reported in Manafwa, we have registered only 41 per cent.

Hon. Minister, my appeal to you is to extend by at least one more month. Maybe for those areas where registration has reached 100 per cent, we can get those kits and re-deploy them to other areas where we feel registration is not going on very well.

Madam Speaker, I am from a border district and I have shared with my colleague here, hon. Huda Oleru; there are many people from across other countries that have registered as Ugandans. Hon. Huda has given me information that in Kei sub county in Yumbe District, Sudanese have come and been registered. The minister hinted at this but he never gave a solution as to what Government is doing to stop non-Ugandans from registering.

We have LDUs or police constables that were deployed at parish level to monitor or secure the kits you sent. In Kampala, it seems in every ward, municipality, or parish where the kits were, payment was sent at once and people received the money. In my district where I had only 72 kits, when you sent money for a sub county, for example, which has 10 parishes, all this money came at once. Even when these police constables did not monitor or give security to the kits in that month, they received the money and now, as the kits go to their parishes, they are demanding for more pay. 

Hon. Minister, you are aware that you were paying these constables Shs 220,000 to give security to the kits you sent. You sent this money at once even to areas where there were no kits and these police constables received this money. Now that the kits have gone to those areas and there is no money to give them as they have already eaten, they are not working and they are not there. When we go to those areas, they are saying, “This month we have not received the money”. Kindly, talk about this.

Madam Speaker, on the finger print issue, the women in the villages who use firewood and charcoal to cook, those who dig, the men who are welders and those whose fingers are not very smooth and clear when they go to have their finger prints taken and their hands are not smooth or clear, the machine does not capture their finger print. So, I am appealing to the hon. Minister –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. My district is an agricultural district and many of our men normally dig from morning to sunset. Many men who go for registration are being rejected because their finger prints cannot be detected by the computer. What does the minister say about those men who are rejected and not registered?

MS NETALISIRE: Madam Speaker, it does not only stop at those who have got rough hands. The computer or the cameras are not capturing the elderly people who have wrinkled faces. So, hon. Minister, if you have grey hair, you have issues. (Laughter)

4.51
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the detailed report. The minister, in his report, said that they have received reports and are trying to address some of the issues mentioned. I have an issue with the enrolment officers. Since the exercise started in Buliisa District, some of the enrolment officers have been arrogant, abusive and they are chasing away the citizens who want to register.

In addition, since the exercise started, some of the centres in Buliisa have only registered people five times. Also, the Minister for Internal Affairs ordered some of the kits to be relocated from Buliisa to Hoima. What plans do you have for some of those centres like Nyamutete parish, Nyamasoga and Biso, which have not registered people because of failure of machines, which worked for only five days? I request that the minister returns the kits to Buliisa because we also need our people to register.

The last one is on non-Ugandan citizens. We have people who have been staying in this country for more than 50 years and they are able to nationalise their stay in Uganda. What plans do you have for them? Thank you.

4.54
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I would also like to thank the hon. Minister and his team for this report and for the several visits that he has made to Tororo to implement this project.

Madam Speaker, you know that billions of shillings have gone down the drain and we had nothing on paper. I am glad that at last, we are now discussing results and we are discussing progress on this matter. So, congratulations to you, hon. Minister, and your team.

Madam Speaker, I have two points that have already been raised. I would like to just enumerate from my angle, the issue of extension of registration. On page 10 of the report, the minister conceded that the first few weeks were difficult and by week nine, we had 68 per cent and week eight we had 44 per cent coverage of kits. Now, if you have sent only less than half of your kits by week eight, which is the mid-point to week 16, then we go to the tabulation of results and like hon. Obua said, by week 16 in his constituency, there will be 40 per cent left. In Tororo, as well, there will be 59 per cent coverage. The problem is that we lost eight weeks at the beginning. I would like to, therefore, urge the hon. Minister to consider extension for a proportionate period of time; we conceded the failures. 

I would also like to reiterate my second point, Madam Speaker, on the matter that hon. Netalisire raised. It is a problem because people with one eye and those with facial deformities are rejected by the camera. People with skin problems on the hands, especially the peasants, are being rejected by the computers. So, I would like that this period is utilised to correct those errors – (Interruption)

MS ONGOM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank him for giving way. I want to give justification for extending this registration at parish level. 

The minister is aware that people registered and pictures were not taken for several weeks. Many forms have been filled but no pictures have been taken and nobody is willing to come to the station again to take the pictures. So, there is high need for those who registered to come and take their pictures and they need to be mobilised.

Secondly, some of the kits were delivered very late. One of my parishes received a kit just on the 8th of July and today is 29th July. How dare you remove it from parish to sub-county level? 
Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tanna, conclude.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, while the team has done wonderfully well and we are all aware of the flaws that have been registered by colleagues, we are all aware of these flaws. The team led by the minister, at least in my own case where I have been to Tororo a couple of times have tried to resolve this issue. However, the issue of facial and finger print recognition is still a matter that is pending on the ground and it is an issue that is constantly raised –(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, hon. Colleague. I would like to give you information. In certain cases, a certain clan has been rejected by the machine and I really do not know whether they are sensitive to blood so that the blood type of those clan members is rejected. It is a challenge because whenever they go back, they are bounced and they cannot be captured and it is strictly that clan.

THE SPEAKER: Who has been rejected?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: A clan. People that belong to a specific clan are being rejected – (Interjections)- 

THE SPEAKER: No. Really! Please, conclude.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to wind up by once again expressing gratitude to the Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, and his team for doing such a wonderful job to-date and for making possible what many of us thought was impossible. Thank you.

5.00
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): I just want to look at the figures that the minister gave here. From the data that the minister has given, you do realise that the achievement so far is about 63 per cent on average and so, we are remaining with 37 per cent. So, your request of having to extend to the sub-county level definitely is something that we can accept but not in the near future. 

We request this from you because of the deficiencies, problems and challenges that we faced. Just look at the number of elders that missed to register during those first weeks. Now, if you decide to extend and push it to the sub-county, these elders and disabled cannot move to the sub-county. It is because of these reasons that we find some of your staff have been asking for money in order to transport the disabled and elderly.

Two, we cannot achieve 37 per cent in the remaining two weeks and so, my request to you is that we extend by another eight weeks, which is equivalent to two months, to enable us move and have everyone on board. I know there are challenges of logistics but bear with us and have us sort this matter.

You have even raised the issue of names. There have been challenges with the issue of names. Where I come from, for example, I found the information regarding a number of people in a centre in my village where we have had over 1,000 voters and they have only registered 24. There has been an issue with the name of the place and now you say that you are consulting with the Ministry of Local Government. It takes time to sort this matter and can you, please, sort out this issue. 

Even on the issue of naming, I was looking at your statement and you also have a problem; there are no people in Teso called Itesots. We are called Itesot and not Itesots. (Laughter) So, even your statement has such a problem. When we give you the names, you end up writing differently. So, please help us to sort that problem. On page 8, you are talking of 21 regions but on page 13, you are giving us 20 regions. Can you, please, sort out those issues? I thank you very much.

MR SSEGGONA: Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us listen. Members have different problems. So, let us listen, please. Two minutes for hon. Alaso, hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Ababiku, hon. Lubogo and then I come here.

5.02
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the Prime Minister’s Question Time, I actually asked for these extensions and I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for bringing the justification for the extension that I requested for. (Applause) He has given us a litany of anomalies that justifies the need for extension. The first two months were without kits, the third month the forms ran out, in the fourth month some people had problems and the exercise was in bits and pieces. I hope that by now, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who was responding to questions, will advise the Minister for Internal Affairs that this justification is enough to extend the exercise.

Madam Speaker, I am a fan of the Uganda Cranes and that is all I know about football. Even in football, after the 90 minutes are over, they will give five minutes –(Interjections)– No, the injury time is given. In a matter that is almost mere entertainment as football, they give five minutes for injury time; how about in a serious matter like my right to vote, my citizenship, my right of access to treatment –(Interruption) 

MS ADONG: Thank you, for giving way. Madam Speaker, even here in the House, if we fail to conclude on a point, you always give us some half a minute. (Laughter) 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, in the interest of injury time and half a minute, I would like to move a motion that Government considers extending the ID registration exercise at parish level for a period of only one month. (Applause) I beg to move.

5.05
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, if the minister could only listen to us and let the Prime Minister address him later – 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, you are engaging the minister’s ears –(Interjections)– This is the first time we have had an opportunity to discuss this exercise, let the minister hear what Members have to say. I am sorry, Prime Minister, let the minister attend to the Members’ issues.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The process of ID registration is at advanced stages that no one in this House should sound like we are trying to deter it. It is a process worth commending because in the past, people have even stolen bicycles, which are visible and weighed in kilogrammes but the ID registration process is going on smoothly. 

I have only one concern, hon. Minister. It looks like the hurry is for us to register those who are 16 years before the two years to election so that by the time of 2016 election, the persons would have attained the voting age. Is the minister aware of a proposed constitutional amendment being moved by hon. Kafeero and a view, which is very popular in this House, to consider extending the next elections beyond 2016? (Laughter)

5.08
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I have listened to the minister carefully and I would like to say that on his proposal to shift from sub country to parish level, he has not achieved his plan, which he was set to accomplish before the shift. So, there is no other justification for him to move to the next level. You talked about the work plan, the road map, but you did not successfully achieve the first plan that you set for the parish level. 

Secondly, on the issue of the kits, you said that many districts have been provided with more kits. Adjumani District has got 64 parishes and we were allocated 32. When you were presenting, I sent a message to the registrar and the LC V chairperson and they said they never received any extra kits. So, it is a lie; Adjumani did not get any new kits. Therefore, not every district got extra kits. 

On the money promised to facilitate the LC I chairpersons, it is a source of many conflicts in the districts. Many of the LC I chairpersons have laid down their tools especially in Adjumani District. The first information we got was that each LC I was to get Shs 10,000 per day. They opened up accounts and now, they do not want to cooperate with the registrars, the RDCs and LC V chairperson because they feel these have compromised their status. They have connived with your office. Can you find time to go and explain exactly what you meant when you issued that statement? Otherwise, it is affecting the project.

5.10
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable minister for the detailed statement, which he has presented. I have three issues for the minister. 

First, hon. Minister, you are aware that most of our LC I chairmen do not hold bank accounts but you imposed a condition upon them to open up accounts in a specific bank and in opening these accounts, they had to deposit money, between Shs 17,000 to Shs 20,000. If you take the whole of Uganda and multiply that with the number of LCs we have, the bank collected over Shs 1.3 billion from these people and it is freely trading on this money. It appears little, but cumulatively, it translated into more than a billion but nobody has ever been paid through those bank accounts, even these people who are operating in this process have not been paid through the bank. So, I am wondering, hon. Minister, was it deliberate to benefit the banks when you said these people should open up bank accounts?

Secondly, we have heard from the report that chairpersons of LC I are supposed to be part of the verification committee at the parish level. Ideally, it means that every LC I chairperson would be entitled to some sort of payment because they are there to identify the people. Why is it that some chairpersons at village level are not getting this payment?

Lastly, I believe that with this exercise moving very well, the Electoral Commission shall not bring a huge budget here for voter registration and register verification because if it is part of this, then we expect that the budget for Electoral Commission shall actually be greatly reduced due to the exercise we have had. I thank you.

5.12
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County, East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to join other Members who are advocating for extending the registration period. A number of challenges have been cited in this exercise and I do not know whether the minister has got information that some people have to get letters from LC I chairpersons to confirm their stay in certain villages and they have to pay money. We have received reports on this especially in my constituency. 

Also, some sub counties, for example, Bukakata, have three parishes but when you consider the distance from one village to another and that to the sub county, it is quite long. The elderly and disabled cannot move that far. I do not know whether Government has made arrangements to ensure that these people who are unable to move fast can be catered for. What we want is to see that every Ugandan benefits from this exercise. 

I have a sub county called Buwunga where in one of the parishes, to go from one village to another, you walk through another sub county along the lake shores. You would have to go through Kyanamukaka to go to Kanywa village in Buwunga Sub County. So, hon. Minister, there are areas that you need to look at and address so that every Ugandan benefits from this exercise – (Interruption) 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, hon. Colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give has two points. One is that there is confusion by Government. We have to distinguish between a resident of Uganda –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, are you informing hon. Namayanja or you are smuggling in a contribution?

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I am only giving information to the colleague.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, she did not talk about that. Hon. Ssemujju -

5.16
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The urban areas have unique problems. In the village where I stay, the last time I checked about 10,000 people had been registered but they had only registered them by issuing forms that had been filled and returned, and I also noticed that they had taken photographs of only 3,500 residents. Can I ask the minister; in situations like that, where the inefficiency is not on the part of the population in failing to turn up to register but because the kits cannot capture their data within the time you have provided, what do we do? 

In Kasokoso, in one village the officers had issued forms to 20,000 Ugandans and they had been returned but the exercise of taking photographs and data processing had been done for only 5,000 people. Because these are urban areas, almost every village is equal to more than five parishes, for instance, in a place in Kanungu –(Laughter)–  you will go there and the officials doing the registration have tried to be innovative in moving from one village to another. However, given the figures that minister is providing, at least in the case of Wakiso and other areas with similar population numbers, I do not think you have registered even half of those eligible to register. The reasons are partly because of what you said about the kits coming in late or some other reasons.

In a place like Wakiso, we are supposed to have more than 360 but by week nine, we had only about 180. So, you can now understand that the problem is about the population. Therefore, why would you punish the population that has been turning up, only not to be served by the kits but you now want to load them with an extra duty of having to go as far as the sub counties for registration?

Secondly, you are talking about a law on registration of citizens coming at the end of the exercise. Probably, that is the NRM way of doing things, that you first act and later bring a law. I would want to get a justification for doing that because the Leader of the Opposition and several other colleagues here asked you about why you did not first bring the law before starting on this exercise. You now want to bring the law after the exercise has ended but to regulate what, including the establishment of a registration authority when the registration exercise has been completed! (Member timed out.)

5.19
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting this report. Hon. Minister, I would like to report to you that by the beginning of this month, Kasese District had only 50 per cent of the kits. However, you are all aware that May and July have been bad months for the people of Kasese. In May, there were floods and many people could not access registration because they had to save their lives first and then at the beginning of July, they were still in problems of the attack.

So, at 50 per cent of the kits, I am not sure that they will be in position to have completed registration by end of the period stated. Therefore, like many other colleagues have done, I request that we extend the period by two months. (Interjections) Yes, give my people enough time to register.

Madam Speaker, time and again, I have been asking – it has taken me a number of years since we got those cards here in Parliament –(Interjections)– the ones that were eventually cancelled. Time and again, I would ask you when I would get the proper records on my identification. Until the exercise was cancelled, I had not got an answer to that question. So, may I know how long it will take those people in the villages whose data will be captured wrongly to have it corrected? If in my case, it took four years carrying that card with errors, how long will it take the country to correct data for those with wrong information running on their cards?

5.21
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A week ago, I was in my constituency and I moved from sub-county to sub county to supervise this exercise, to see how the exercise was going on. At the end of the day, two major weaknesses were identified, which have not been mentioned by colleagues who have already contributed to this matter.  

There is the issue of mal-administration and mismanagement of the resources in this project. In this project’s write-up, every sub county is supposed to be provided with six litres of fuel every day for charging the batteries. However, when you go on the ground, this is non-existent. The registration officers move from home to home looking for people with solar systems to charge these batteries. That is already a very big problem. I communicated this information to the RDC and the registration officer of Arua to find out why this money had not reached the sub counties timely to provide the six litres of fuel every day for charging these batteries.

On top of that, in the project write-up, every machine is supposed to be allocated Shs 10,000 per day for moving it from the sub county headquarters where it is kept for safety to the parish, where the registration exercise takes place. But on the ground, there is nothing. Registration officials struggle carrying these machines either on their heads or on bicycles to move these machines from the sub county to the registration centres in the parishes. This has caused a setback. For example, the data that I have from Arua shows that by 17th July, Arua District had only covered 41 per cent of the registration exercise because of the problems I have just talked about. So, you need to address yourself as to where the root cause of these problems is. Where is this file supposed to convey these resources blocked? Can you unblock it so that service is rendered?

The third issue that you also need to very seriously consider is the issue of the disenfranchisement of the people. Even when at a later stage after you have granted us extension that we are asking for, even if you were to take this registration at the sub county level, let me tell you, you are in Government and you know this very well especially under the Ministry of Local Government – there are sub counties that are very big. For a person to walk to their sub county headquarters – I wish the hon. Kabwegyere who was once the Minister of Local Government and with whom I one time went to field was here to attest to this; he would tell you that for some people to get to their sub county headquarters, they have to move between eight to 10 miles –(Interjections)– not kilometres but miles. So, the moment you get this exercise centralised, I am sure you will have disenfranchised many citizens.

So, my appeal to you, hon. Minister, is that you should seriously consider extension of this exercise so that registration continues at parish level so that you can also address some of these bottlenecks that are actually hampering the otherwise good exercise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.25
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I registered last Monday, in my constituency, in Kitgum District. However, before I registered, I was subjected to taking photographs eight times and the computer, for one reason or another, rejected and said the mouth is closed, the mouth is open and the like. In addition to what colleagues have already highlighted, we have problems with this camera issue because in my constituency, you are aware that due to the war, some people have part of their faces and mouths cut off and they are really being tossed right, left and centre. I have also looked at the issue of the acid victims we have in the country. My question to the minister is: what arrangements are you making to ensure that this category is catered for and dully registered? 

According to the figures the minister has presented, not even half of my people have been registered. As I moved around last week - I came back last night from Kitgum - what is really here, like registering 20 people per day, is not viable. What they are able to register per day is a maximum of nine people, and there are a lot of people turned away because you have to wait. Personally, I had to stay there for one hour to have myself registered, and this is hampering the registration in some areas. If the problem is the fuel as my colleague is saying and that is what is also in my constituency, why can’t you replace this with solar? At least in my part of the country, we have enough sunshine that can enable the solar to work rather than having the fuel money disappear and these people are moving from house to house to charge the gadgets. 

Lastly, if you are now going to make corruption part of registration then let it be supervised by the police. Who is crosschecking to ensure that they themselves are not in the racket of the same corruption you are trying to check? 

5.28
MS FLORENCE IBI (FDC, Woman Representative Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We thank the honourable minister for the statement; I think it is elaborate this time, worth the wait. 

On page 1 and 2, the minister mentioned the question of multiple registrations. I wonder what you are going to do about this at the end of the day when you finish the exercise, because it will have direct implication especially during voting time. Secondly, I am also interested in knowing which subcommittee and ministers are involved such that in case of failure, we know who to contact. 

On page 37, the issue of the distribution of kits, you mentioned at least Kaberamaido is standing at 80 per cent in the distribution exercise, and at 16 weeks you had performed at 66 per cent. I attest to this; most people who come from upcountry have found it easier to register than in the urban centres. I got a very nasty experience. The day my husband registered here in Wakiso where we reside, he went at 6 O’clock and waited. By 10 every day, in fact it is 8 for the case of the health centre IV, in my residence where the exercise takes place, a maximum of eight is registered every day. By the time, he was the 2nd last to be registered and it took a task to have the pictures taken. I do not know what process you went through to procure these machines because we are prone to this exercise of procurement process - faulty processes. Could you explain what really happens, especially when it comes to taking pictures?

When you look at the registration paper, it is too detailed and the same information is required over three times. I do not know what happened in the process of collecting the data, whether you got the right information that you wanted to be captured because in the case of the upcountry centres, you would even expect to get a lot of difficulties with it but it has ended up to be a little tedious, not as tedious as one would have expected. But in the urban centres, it has consumed a lot of time and that is why you end up having a line. It is the longest line almost, far longer than voting; you get the line very long. Once you see any long line, much longer than the immunisation line that the mothers go through in the process of immunisation-  So I think if you have eased the tension from upcountry, maybe more of the machines would be returned to the urban centres to beef up the centres where there are problems, otherwise registering in the urban centres, in the municipalities, is becoming very tedious.

5.32
MR MEDARD SEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking the minister not for the work done but for the statement delivered. Why I am thanking him, and before some Members exclaim, is because I can appreciate that the minister is working under the most difficult circumstances. It is very difficult to work in a haphazard manner without a legal framework in place. 

I raised this on this Floor but the government has continued to ignore it. Now the minister laments at page 3 that Cabinet approved the strategy, budget, roadmap, governance structures and the need for a harmonised law to govern the registration of persons, but the same minister continues to tell us that there is some national ID registration which creates an offence and if you obstruct, you are liable to imprisonment for three months. Who empowered you to make that regulation? Who empowered you to create an offence in a regulation without a properly functioning legal framework? 

Secondly, who even empowered you to set those timelines you are talking about? Actually, the recommendations from my colleagues about extension should not even be coming to you as a recommendation; it should be an instruction to Government to extend because in the first place nobody empowered you to set those timelines. 

The minister talked about the LC register. Under what law is this register made? For 15 years, you do not have legally functioning LCs; in some villages you are going to find two to three chairpersons each with a stamp – 

THE SPEAKER: I think those will be answered when the law comes.

MR SEGGONA: Which is the very point I am making, Madam Speaker; our core function as Parliament under Article 79 is to make laws for good governance of this country and we are now being bulldozed by the state to jump onto their band wagon and we keep approving - it is disheartening and disturbing! I can appreciate the hot chair in which you are seated, Madam Speaker. A few weeks ago, we read in the papers that the chair was saying the quality of debate in this House is bad. It will not improve if we are going to continue discussing for two minutes or three minutes. I can appreciate and we are dealing with legalities and illegalities in this House, but I think we need to do something about this. 

Finally, what is Wakiso 1 and 2? I did not want to concentrate on the constituency but on broader national issues. Can you address us on the legal framework? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will not allow that to go without a comment. If you want to speak for several minutes, the whips and you will have to agree on who is going to speak on what subject and we give you time but if everyone wants to speak, I will give you two minutes.

MR SSEGGONA: I will still thank you.

5.35
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I particularly want to go to page 6, the second paragraph, where the minister is talking about phase one of the registration exercise. Madam Speaker, you very well know that in the month of August, we are going to have another national exercise - the housing and population census. I would have loved to see Government operate in a coordinated manner, not only to be seen as Government but as one which is coordinated. When you have more than one national exercise running at a go, you may end up being confused and creating confusion. So, I do not know how the Ministry of Finance together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs are going to ensure that these two activities run concurrently without any confusion.

This report highlights only the generic aspects but does not give the financial aspect and yet this exercise actually has a finance component. I do not know what the minister should really give us because he has not told us the monies that have been disbursed so far and how much money has been disbursed to each district. This is because there is confusion as to who and how much each person has got and how much each one should have got –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for giving way, comrade. I reported to Obongi District and after a monitoring exercise, I came to the National Secretariat in Kololo. While there, I discovered that the people working in that office are living in fear of the Army and there are 2,500 computers, which are defective but were procured and they are here. That is why you do not have enough kits. So the minister should tell us, in addition to the issue of finances, about the issue of planned procurement and realised procurement. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I also wanted the minister to furnish this House and Ugandans with information as to how non-Ugandans penetrated the exercise of registration. First of all, the Ministry of Internal Affairs should have conducted due diligence to make sure that Ugandans are the ones who man a Ugandan exercise - (Member timed out_)

5.39
DR MICHAEL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, the minister has made what I would call sweeping statements because the framework which he is using did not have evaluation frameworks and it becomes very difficult for him to assert that so much has been done within this time. Therefore, even the Members of Parliament who are debating here are simply making certain observations on the basis of what they are seeing but without a legal framework for their participation, which makes it difficult for this process not to be haphazard.

The minister should know that there are forms, which are being given in a “to whom it may concern” manner here in Kampala and people are registering. In our constituencies, and I know even in Kamuli, people are registering but you do not know them and you do not have any mechanism to check them. People are being ferried to certain constituencies because this registration is going to be part of the voters’ register and therefore those people will be voters in those areas where they are not known. The minister is not making a comment on this, even in this big paper he has presented. Members of Parliament who have not followed up this may not know that this process involves the update of the voters’ register for 2016 and there should have been the participation not only of the political leaders, including you and I, but also political organisations that are affected by the voters’ roll, which is under preparation. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.42
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to thank the minister because for some years as a government and a nation, we have been yearning to have this exercise and it is now on. I thank the minister in that docket who has done a good job.

Madam Speaker, I have two issues and one is the issue of underutilisation of kits in Kampala. In Kampala, only 100 forms are issued for all the kits in each parish and if you have nine kits, that means every kit is going to register nine people before the forms are finished. So, I request the minister that instead of underutilising the kits in Kampala, let us have enough forms so that the kits are utilised to the maximum and we conclude the exercise.

The other one is about students in boarding schools. We have head teachers, even in day schools, who do not allow students to go and register. I know the exercise is going to end after the term has closed but I request that as we ask for an extension, can this extension last through the holidays so that students in secondary schools also get a chance to register because they are 16 years and above?

Lastly, it is good that hon. Lulume has brought up the issue of ferrying people to register in constituencies and it is good that it is being talked about. I know that in my constituency it is being done. What is good for him is that it is his party doing it, so let him also suffer where he is because - (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, Dr Lulume and I belong to the Democratic Party. The Member for Makindye East has said that our party is ferrying people –(Interjections)– If you were listening, I said Dr Lulume and I belong to the same party, which is the Democratic Party. This is a party which his father belongs to actually. He has said that the Democratic Party is ferrying people, which is an illegality, and he is not substantiating by giving us the list and names of people ferried by the Democratic Party and to which station but simply blindly and boldly accusing a registered political party operating within the laws of this country. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not know whether you are saying that there is a Christmas party where they ferry people to. Which particular place and how do you identify the “ferriers”, if I can call them that? 

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, I did not know that hon. Sseggona belongs to DP but to answer your question, when I see people moving and waving flags showing green and white, to my understanding it is DP. This has happened in Bukasa Parish and I want the minister to take it up with the registration office in Bukasa. It has also happened in Ggaba and I want the minister to take it up –

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Ssimbwa, are you suggesting that in Makindye East there are no resident DP people? 

MR SSIMBWA: If they were there, I would not have been the Member of Parliament for Makindye East –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please withdraw.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, I withdraw as directed.

5.47
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a problem with the national ID exercise in my constituency in Abim. First of all, the minister lied to me that the kits – not only to me but a regional committee meeting - that we have kits in all the parishes but it is not true. Abim has only 14 kits out of 32. The biggest problem that I now have in the district is that the RDC and the acting district registrar do not want to deploy machines where they think that I am very popular –(Interjections)– Yes, they are fighting hon. Juliana Auma and I politically. 

These teams called the District Coordinating Committee, the Sub-County Coordinating Committee and the parish committees do not want to deploy kits where I am popular. They even hide kits. There are some people who are grabbing land in Abim and they want them to register as residents and once they register as residents, the land of the people is gone. That is what somebody was saying, that how can you allow some people to come and grab the land of the people and then you register them as residents because the land of the people will be gone!

Actually, if we are not careful, this exercise is going to cause us problems because there are non-nationals who are buying land in Uganda and they are now going to register in this exercise like Ugandans and the land will be gone. We should also be careful with the RDCs who are doing the registration. So minister –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, comrade. When I was doing monitoring in Obongi, I moved from station to station and I got something there. At parish level, there is a cadre called PISO who is the equivalent of the sub-county GISO but in reality, that person, in the case of Obongi, is an NRM cadre whose job is to identify whether people are coming as members of the NRM party or as the Opposition – (Interjections) - Yes, that is in Obongi. There is data being collected there –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, have you registered? 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Have you registered yourself?

MR FUNGAROO: I have not yet registered because –

THE SPEAKER: Did you go and you were turned away?

MR FUNGAROO: No, even the ones of the Opposition are not turned away but what they do is that they take note – there is data being collected separately for the NRM. It is done! There is dual registration. There are many things taking place in the same station. Please, take note.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if you had been turned away because you are FDC, you would be able to say that here. Do not just make wild allegations and you should know. You should withdraw it.  

MR FUNGAROO: I apologise. I stand with my statement that those of the Opposition are turned away but what I saw in Obongi is that –(Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the Speaker has ruled that you withdraw and you are still debating on the Speaker’s ruling. Is the Member in order to continue engaging the Speaker when the Speaker has ruled that the Member withdraws?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, what you have said is serious. Please, withdraw it. You have no proof that people who are not NRM are not being registered.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I have withdrawn what I have said but it is not that those who do not belong to the NRM are not being registered. 

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My kind appeal to the minister is to take more kits to Abim and to consider the extension at parish level for two months. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nauwat, hon. Xavier Kyooma, hon. Mutyabule – but I will now have to go to one minute so just go straight to the point.

5.51
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When this exercise started, there were a lot of challenges in as far as facilitation is concerned. The minister has just informed us that they have been having replacements due to one reason or another. I do not know whether there is a possibility of giving these enrolment officers some kind of advance so that at least they can buy a bottle of water and some biscuits so that they can concentrate on their work. 

On the extension, I also join colleagues to say that there is need to extend but it should be at parish level because in a place like Amudat, the villages are very far from the sub-county headquarters and there are no vehicles. So to ask people to go all the way to the sub-county is quite tedious and expensive. 

On the issue that was raised by hon. Netalisire, I was at the constituency and some old women came and they told me that they have suffered going to the centre and that they told them to go and scrub their fingers and it was the third time that they were going. So, I do not know how the minister can help these people so that they do not get disappointed. Something should be done. I thank you.

5.53
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From my observation, while the minister stated that a few people were suggesting an extension, we are representing people and the majority of us are saying that an extension is inevitable. I have been traversing my constituency most of this period but there is no single day when the registration officials have served the people up to the last person. So, there are always people who are not served. When you consider the number of 4.2 million people, this is 23 per cent, which is very immaterial and therefore, an extension is inevitable. I beg to move that we actually extend the period for a month.  

Madam Speaker, the minister mentioned some challenges. May I add some more challenges - Enrolment officers, specifically in my constituency, have not been paid for two months. These computers also seem to be funny because they cannot capture a person wearing a white cloth and also if a person has grey hair, they cannot capture him. I am worried that if the minister was registering from my constituency, he would not be captured. People have been sent away and have had to dye their hair –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR KYOOMA: People who have grey hair cannot be captured by the computers and they are told to go back and either dye their hair or they do not get registered and this is a fact.

Lastly, in the minister’s submission on page 6, he talks of two phases. The first phase is registration of Ugandans aged 16 and above. The second phase shortly after two years, which will be in 2016, will be registration of all Ugandans from zero years onwards. Madam Speaker, this is really wastage of resources –(Member timed out.)

5.55
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the report that he has presented. Honourable minister, I want to draw your attention to what we call a village activities calendar. The period which we are using to register the people in the North especially is a very busy one where people concentrate most on farming. Therefore, as I talk, it is a period for planting cereal crops and other oil seed crops like sim sim, moreover they consider this very important to them. Therefore, I urge you to consider that matter because Agago is only at 34 per cent, although there is slight improvement from the time you decided to improve the system.  

Secondly, we have registered some demobilisation from the people; they are not encouraging people to go and register. For example, there is a village in Lamwu Sub County where people were forced to go to another neighbouring sub-county to register. Once they contacted me, I said, “You know your sub county, you know your village and your parish. For that matter, make sure you register in the name of your parish, your village and your sub county.” They were not happy because of the force that was used on them, but they took my advice although some others refused saying they want their village and territory to be recognised. 

Lastly, some sub counties are too big; for example I have a sub county called Wol which has eight parishes and 100 villages that are recognised but there are other 70 sub villages – (Member timed out.)

5.58
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to emphasise the issue of grey hair. I was approached by one elderly person, a man, who told me that the registrar told him to go and dye his hair but he did not have the money to dye the hair, so he used charcoal before he was eventually registered. (Laughter) So, the issue of grey hair is inconveniencing our people. My mother has failed to register because she cannot dye her hair. 

Secondly, there is one lady who was dressed in a flowered Gomesi and that was her best wear. The registrar told her to go back and change into another wear. So, she was wondering what to wear. Is it true that when one puts on flowered clothes they cannot be photographed?

5.59
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I also wish to congratulate the minister and the staff for carrying out an exercise which had failed before. However, there are some issues. 

As hon. Ssimbwa pointed out, in Kampala there seems to be a problem of forms. My wife and daughter tried to register on Thursday and Friday last week in Ggaba but they were not successful. Each time they went there, they found no forms. So they called me - I was in the constituency - and they said, “Bring some forms from Kiboga” and indeed I picked some forms from Kiboga for my family to bring to Kampala for them to register. 

The second issue is that while I was in the constituency, the chairperson in one of the villages reported to me that a number of people in the village had filled the forms but had not gone to complete the exercise of taking the photographs and having their details entered in the computer. He told me that the reason why they have not gone to complete the exercise is that they were being asked for bribes of between Shs 15,000 to Shs 20,000. He said he has a heap of forms in his office. 

Lastly, hon. Minister, on the way forward, how is the registration database going to be shared with the National Information Technology Authority which –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, close on that statement. 

MR KABAJO: How is the database going to be shared with the National Information Technological Authority, which is supposed to set up a national database for Uganda, which will be used not only for this exercise but even for other purposes in the country? That issue does not seem to be clear in the way forward; and how will those authorities you propose to set up work together with the existing National Information Technology Authority to maintain a national database of Ugandans? Thank you. 

6.02
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to know from the minister; one of the major challenges that have been highlighted is lack of forms. I want to report to the minister that in Apac District, I talked to the registrar and he said, yesterday they received only 10 reams of registration forms and they distributed on average 45 forms for every sub county. Most enrolment officers had used up the forms by the time I talked to them in the afternoon and so from tomorrow, they will stay without forms and they have been without forms for the last one and half weeks. Now, my question is, we are given enough money to the ministry to ensure that everything runs without any problems but the forms are being printed at Kololo and there is only one centre and it takes so long to print them. Why don’t you ensure that even at the regional level you print forms? My registrar is now talking of coming to Kampala on Thursday to look for forms. 

6.03
MR STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like hon. Alaso stated earlier on, the minister in his statement has brought all reasons for us to extend our period for registration. I also want to add that last week, I was in Bukedea. My district has so far registered 67 percent registration, which is fairly good. Therefore, the extension of one month, I think will lead us to 100 percent registration. You have sufficient resources like my colleague has stated. So let us extend this registration period. The benefits accruing from the identify cards are clear to our people and they are excited about this process. So, let us not constrain them. I think as politicians, we have done our work of mobilising the communities and they are really interested in this exercise. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.05
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this very good report. I have four concerns but I will be very brief. One, I want to ask the minister about communities which share borders. For the case of Moroto, the registration is at 49 percent which is still very low. Now, how will your office ensure that these communities who are pastoralists – by the way this year there has been a lot of draught in that area and I am sure these people will return after registration - so, how will you ensure that these Ugandans are registered?

Secondly, extension of the period is good but in your presentation, you never gave us the summary of funds that you have utilised so far. In the case that we give you more, are you not going to come up with the same stories yet knowing that Uganda has a lot of things to be done? Many – (Member timed out.)

6.06
MR SAMUEL SEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kyankwanzi District has registered a certain percentage above 50 percent but I request the minister not to withdraw our kits because they are very few. You have threatened that you will withdraw them to Kiboga yet we have only 42 kits for 84 parishes. So, leave our kits. Let us register our people. Let us extend the registration period for two more months for us to do a good exercise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.07
MS KAAHWA TOPHACE (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister, my concern is about the size of sub counties and parishes in Hoima District. We still have the colonial or traditional sub counties. A sub county is as big as some of these newly formed districts and a parish is as big as a sub county. This has affected our people because some of them can’t move longer distances. My request to the minister is that as you plan to extend the period, consider those areas. You maybe formulate other centres rather than going to parishes.

Madam Speaker, Hoima is a border district with the DRC. It is true that many foreigners have been registered yet our own people have been rejected. I even wonder whether these people were verified by the LCs or any other team that was instituted.  We need to take this matter very seriously by wiping out these people because –(Member timed out.)

6.08
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The problem we have in Nwoya is that the new kits that were given have got very weak batteries that take only a few hours. So, the officers have to constantly walk around to look for how to charge them.

Secondly, two parishes in my district have not yet even started registration. So, hon. Minister if you are stopping the exercise maybe you will have to carry all the kits in Uganda to those two parishes.

My other concern is about women who walk for about 20 kilometres to register but the officers tell them to change their clothes. What do you have in mind? I want to propose that if there is an extension, the officers have to provide some standby clothes –(Interjections)– yes, they have to get at least a dress for women and coats or shirts for men to avoid sending people back to their homes to put on other clothes.

On the population, I still wonder whether you set a target or you are just using the data for the previous census because –(Member timed out.)

6.09
MS STELLA NYOMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to ask the minister on the estimated population. I am so worried because in Karamoja we are really doing so badly in terms of expected performance. In Napak District, so far from the expected 103,842, only 24,000 have registered at 20 percent only. But the minister has not provided the justification as to why registration is not progressing.

I also want the minister to avail us with the source of this data because this could help us understand – may be some people have crossed to Kenya or somewhere else so that we can track them to come and register. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.10
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is now that the minister recognises that this is not an easy exercise. You remember we wanted this House to pass a law to help you and to give you the time and basis on which you would base to prosecute the people who are doing multiple registrations. Now under what law will you charge these people? 

Secondly, Mr Minister you talked about gazetting and establishing enrolment centres –(Interjection)– Mr Minister, are you listening? I just wanted to draw your attention, hon. Minister. In Mbale, the established areas you talked about in your statement – some people have commandeered the equipment to certain schools, progressive schools to go and register people there illegally. Are you aware of that?

Mr Minister, you talked about Ugandans in the Diaspora and you said they will be registered from there. Are they also going to be allowed to vote as well because all along Ugandans in the Diaspora have been asking to be allowed to vote from wherever they live? So, are they going to be allowed to do that?

Hon. Minister, every Ugandan should get an identity card because that is their entitlement as Ugandans above the age of 16 years. Why are you rushing this exercise? Why don’t you let people get registered? When you rush this exercise, you won’t allow Ugandans to vote in 2016, an issue that is likely to cause us a lot of problems. The Electoral Commission usually goes, after registering people, and does the exercise again but –(Member timed out.)

6.12
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a comment on the content on page 8. When you look at the structure laid down, the personnel in this structure are people from the security. Even the words that are being used, “strategic, operational, tactical” as if the hon. Minister is still in the bush! Why use only security personnel? For example, what does RITO, DISO, DPC and so mean? You left out the good players like the teachers, religious leaders and even we, Members of Parliament, are not part of this structure. Why don’t you involve these people yet they are stakeholders? Even the civil society was excluded.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the minister on page 7 said that all the districts are now operating at the planned 100 percent kits distribution. But I want to inform the honourable minister that in Rwakabengo Ward I South Division of Rukungiri Municipality – actually this is the ward for the former party President of FDC, Col. (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye - the kit was withdrawn about three weeks. People in that ward are not registering and I don’t know whether you have got that information. In that area, we don’t have a kit. 

Lastly is about the plans you have for the people who have been hospitalised for a long time. These people are in the hospital and can’t walk to the registration centres. What are you going to do for such people?

6.15
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister, the most proud natives of any country are the citizens by descent, which part if excluded on the registration form – actually, in some countries these are called the true owners of the country. Now by excluding this type, you are excluding the true owners of Uganda, the descendants of this country. 

The statement falls short of telling us the mechanism of verifying the citizens of Uganda. Local Council I can only verify a resident and there is a difference between a resident of Uganda and a citizen of Uganda. Now in the whole statement, we don’t see anywhere a non-Ugandan can be identified. These are the people with money and you have not facilitated the committee there. What they do to get lunch is to sell recommendation forms and verifying non-Ugandans as a Ugandans. A Somali can be a resident of Uganda but may not necessarily be a citizen of Uganda. Thank you very much.

6.16
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to first draw the minister to page 13 of his statement. You don’t categorically distinguish – for example, for Jinja you are showing kits distributed at 100 percent. The reader would get the impression that they were all distributed at once. Next time, for clarity purposes, you need to separate so that we know when you brought the first batch and then other batch.

Secondly and most importantly, the importance of this exercise is not about the election in 2016 as the minister seems to be charged. My understanding is that if we did this exercise not in a rush we would create web portals for URA and for every sector where we know that actually instead of grappling with taxes - it is a fact and I know that many people don’t pay taxes in this country because we don’t even have data about the people in the country. So, if we do extend this exercise and make sure that we captured everybody it would be very easy to know that this person has carried out this transaction, the money is in the bank, you just have to use this identity card and see how you can generate revenue.

There is a lot of confusion like we have seen. We have Ugandans of Somali origin and when they have turned up at these centres, the people at the centres are not very sophisticated, they normally tell them, “No you are not a Ugandan” even there is one person who they asked: what is your tribe? Of course, we need to take very keen interest on these issues; that they turn away people who are actually Ugandans –(Member timed out.)

6.18
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has not clearly taken note of the simcard registration process. I suspect in this last week we are going to get a huge influx of people who have not registered and the numbers which you are targeting of 30-40, you will need to be able to do about 300 if you are to be able to operate. I myself intend to register on Monday and I am not going to dye my hair. (Laughter) 

On page 17 (ii) you write that the refugee problem and the lack of proper management of this since 1962, there is a general public outcry about the impact of refugees, for example, who have settled very easily. These have even acquired land and maybe occupy political and public offices. In my case I wish to ask, what has the NRM Government done since 1986 to deal with this particular concern? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.20
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are cases where some husbands have refused to register their second or third or fourth wives yet the wives have already registered these men as their true husbands, and most of the wives fear that may be their data will be disturbed somewhere somehow in the future. What do we do? I also support the idea –

THE SPEAKER: That is from his side, let us listen. 

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, the honourable colleague has said that the men have refused to register their wives but there is nowhere in the guidelines that men are supposed to register wives. I want the honourable colleague to tell us the guidelines that say that the husbands must register their wives because this would disfranchise the women. We have a right to register as women.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am also wondering because I went to register as an individual; so, that wife can give her own information. Who has stopped her from giving that information because she is an individual who is being registered as a citizen? You mean they have told them not to put their names? Explain to us. 

MR LUBEGA: Madam Speaker, my concern is her point of order because there is somewhere where you have to give information about your wife and it may not be very harmful to a man but when a woman who is part of the husband is denied there and then, she is concerned -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we want to understand this point. Is it that the husband instructs her not to talk about him in the form? Is that what you are saying? That “don’t name me”?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, yesterday I registered in front of St James Ruharo Cathedral in Mbarara. Right down below the form they ask you to give the name of your spouse and you can even add others that you may have added. So, the information the honourable member is talking about is right. The man is saying you must indicate the wives you have. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think what he is saying is that some men tell the women not to mention them as their spouses. Isn’t that what you are saying? Yes that is what he is saying. 

MR LUBEGA: The issue of extending the registration is undebatable but the issue of transferring from parish to sub county, in Kassanda where one sub county is bigger than one of these districts of ours it will become very impossible unless you are going to provide us with transport. So, I don’t want that one. Let us extend the project but at the parish level.

6.24
MS LILLY AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong) Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I have two concerns to make. One is about the Ike community. I join the rest of my colleagues who say this exercise must be extended. It should be extended; for example, in Kaabong where the Ike community lives up on the mountain and where you hardly see a vehicle going there or where it can take a month to pass. And as I talk, in my district, the district registrar has no vehicles; he keeps on moving in offices in the district to ask for transport so that they can take those enrolment materials to the Ike community. So my appeal to the minister is that the extension must be given especially for hard-to-reach areas like the communities, which live up there. Hon. Minister, you have reached there before and you know what it means to be in the Ike community.

My Second concern is about the karacunas. Madam Speaker, you know very well that in Karamoja, most of our karacunas stay in the kraals and as we speak, some of the kits have not reached some kraals and these are citizens of this country and we need them to get registered. So hon. minister, the kits must reach the kraals where these karacunas are so that - (Member timed out.)

6.26
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (Independent, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mbogo, can you adjust that microphone, please?

MR MBOGO: I want to thank the hon. Minister for the exercise he is trying to undertake. I believe this exercise started with a lot of challenges right from the Muhlbauer and NITA(U) but finally, we are somewhere and we are seeing some results. I have two questions and the first one is, hon. Minister, is it true that you are giving out a few forms or is it a creation from the headquarters? Are those forms also supposed to be accounted for and in which way are you accounting for these forms?

Two, in Budaka where I hail from, the new consignment was received last week but according to you, the exercise is likely to be closed on 11th August at the parish level. We have just received that second consignment, if I am not mistaken, and even some parishes where I come from have not even registered 10 percent –(Member timed out.)

6.29
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am an advocate of this project and I have already registered. However, the Electoral Commission and indeed the ministry emphasised that registration is at the residence or at the area where you are born. Two and a half weeks ago, I encountered a registration exercise at the Golf Course and I was told that it was an arrangement for special people. Who are these special people? I can bring evidence that people were registered at the Golf Course playground but it is not where they reside; they just go to play golf there. So, who are those people and who authorised that?

Two, have you learnt any lesson from all the failures of this project that have been happening? The failure of equipment – actually, I cannot differentiate between those failures that happened in the first registration exercise; the poor equipment and in this bid for the procurement of this equipment. Hon. Minister, can you lay on Table the design of this project and the bills of quantities? We will then find that you procured wrong equipment.

Three, is the money involved here. Look at the ministerial policy statement you have submitted to this House for the year 2014/2015 and I can read for you. You want an additional Shs 21 billion to enrol virgin cards of four million people but you are saying the obligational contract is Shs 17.9 billion. You go ahead to say you have already given 49 million Euros to Muhlbauer out of the 64 million Euros and you are saying the total tax on this equipment is Shs 57.8 billion. The contractual obligation is Shs 17.6 billion with an addition of Shs 21 billion for the virgin cards. We have lost money on this project and the exercise is not moving. Where is the value for this money? How can we pay so much in taxes and we are producing nothing?

The last question concerns the first eight million people who were registered. Most of their data was destroyed because of failure of the equipment and they have not been notified. We do not even know who they are. How are you going to clear that? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo and then hon. Olanya and I will ask the Committee on Defence to say something.

6.31
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To save time, I would like to pick from the direction of hon. Nalubega, my sister. I am a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. We had a report of that committee, which talked about the procurement system of the ID kits, the rivalry between government departments with Internal Affairs saying, “Let me do it”, Immigration saying, “Let me do it,” the Police saying the same and the Army saying the same and how the Army has actually secretly taken over without announcing this. Up to now, these government departments are rivalling.

I went there myself and saw this when I came with information from Obongi. There is no collaboration between government departments in the proper sense. The Army is bulldozing others. They feel small and they are not talking about this.

Madam Speaker, let me close by saying that I requested that the name of Gofele parish, which is a parish in Obongi, to be put as Gofele parish. They referred me to the Ministry of Local Government but when I went there, the people in the ministry displayed helplessness and up to now, Gofele is named differently and the people are saying, “Why do you register me to be identified wrongly by place?”

I appeal to you, hon. Members, to open your eyes to see the rot in the whole system. This is a scheme of stealing money.

6.33
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is the advert playing on all radio stations in the districts. The advert is in English and I would like to appeal that we have particular districts translating those adverts into local languages? For Acholi sub-region, let it be translated into Acholi. For West Nile, let it be - that is my concern.

Secondly in your report, you made mention about those taking care of the security of the equipment but you did not talk of the UPDF. In my district, it is the UPDF that is taking charge of the exercise. The police officers are very few but majorly, it is being controlled by the UPDF.

Finally, hon. Minister, there is no tribe in Uganda called Abacholi. In most of the forms I saw, under tribe they were indicating Abacholi. We have the Acholi as a tribe not the Abacholi. Thank you.

6.34
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I have two issues to put across. Four or five months ago, based on the challenges that were faced in this project, this House did direct the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to go to the field and carry out an assessment and report back to this House. I think that report has been overtaken by events because most of the issues that the committee had picked have been raised here. But permit me to request and ask the General who is also the Minister for Internal Affairs to get the concerns of the Members because the issues that they are raising here are some of the issues that we picked on the ground, especially the issue on the need for extension of the registration exercise. We should operate a symbiotic system whereby the people who were patient - you remember that we all went in April and mobilised for this exercise and people got excited. 

In conclusion, none of us is interested in suffocating this exercise as we are interested in it but now that the people have been patient and interested in this project, the fault was on our side as Government because we took long to deliver these kits in time - the people were there on time interested in being registered. 

So on the request and appeal of this session, I want to request that we push for an extension of a month - [HON. MEMBERS: “Two.”] - to be fair to our people because most of the districts have not attained that percentage as the interest was there more so – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, 55 Members have contributed and we have taken two hours and 45 minutes on this matter. I allowed that because of the importance of this subject and that we have never had an opportunity to discuss this. Hon. Minister, I will ask you to make a written response but the matter that I want you to address now is the question of the extension. We want you to address that one now and for the others, you can respond in writing. Having listened, Members are not satisfied that you can close the parish registration.

6.37
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. We have listened and heard. There are options to look at and one, we did not at any time pretend from the word go that this exercise would not have challenges. But we also knew that these challenges would be met and would be fixed and I did with particular mention of one submission – an honourable was talking about a litany. We also outlined the strategies to deal with the challenges. Challenges have been encountered and they have been fixed both organisationally, technologically and logistically. We have made significant progress.

Now, since there are quite a number of different cases or situations that have been outlined of hard-to-reach areas, incompetence of individuals in the exercise, the merging of the two technologies because the Government had already acquired 4,000 kits of 2010 elections and we had to acquire another 4,000 to make 8,000 and there was a big challenge in integrating the two but finally, the integration was done. So, with all that and having heard what was submitted, my plea is that we are going to examine case by case in the different areas and regions. We will therefore be coming back here with a study that we have made so that we carefully consider whether a month, two or three or none – it is very important that this Government having undertaken this exercise, having committed resources and we, committed as we are to delivering this exercise, let us come here and recommend whether a month or two but we accept the case for extension but to what extent and then we come back here. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: In principle, you have agreed to extend the duration and you will come and tell us whether it is a month, two or three. Thank you very much for listening to the voice of the population. I thank you so much. So shall we hear from you after August?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Well, as you know the structure of Government, I will come back here through Cabinet about this matter. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: But we cannot address everything. The important thing was to get an extension so that all those things that you are raising can be addressed – no, we cannot exhaust everything – okay, hon. Ogwal, two minutes.

6.41
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): There are two issues that I feel we cannot ignore. First of all, the minister talked of bringing a Bill to this House. I want to know what that Bill will be helping us to do because we had wanted to put into place a law to manage the process but now, what will that law help us to do in the exercise?

Secondly, the minister talked of people being fined and taken to jail if they fail to register. Now under what law will they be tried in court before they are put in? I think these are important issues. As members of Parliament, our people will now be arrested for not registering. How are we going to defend them? So, we cannot ignore it. 

Madam Speaker, one of the things that is very central to me is the concern of Ugandans about our children who are serving in foreign countries. We have the UPDF in Somalia and South Sudan and we have police officers spread all over in the region. How are we going to handle the registration of these people? It did not appear in the minister’s statement. 

So, I may be wrong but I think that it is important that the minister should go back and reconcile his statement with the statement that Minister Baba read on the Floor of Parliament. The two are contrary to each other and completely different. Even the technical person - the Permanent Secretary of the ministry brought out a statement totally condemning the system and even went to the extent of saying that there were some members who were involved in the exercise and ready to down their tools and quit. The minister has not told us how he has been able to handle those challenges. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, are you going to respond? Under what law are you arresting those people – the ones you want to charge? 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Speaker, now that we have been given time to go and consider a way forward and then come back here, I request that all those matters of legal nature and the service personnel who are abroad become part of the report that we are going to return here to this House. I thank you. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much minister. Let us go to the next item. It is a very short statement. The Minister for Security.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EVICTIONS OF RESIDENTS OF LUBAGA AND KAWEMPE DIVISIONS

6.44
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. This is a statement on the eviction of persons in various areas of Kampala.

Let me begin by providing a reasonable background to this scenario. The Government of Uganda in a bid to enhance the transport and energy infrastructure in the country, embarked on an ambitious exercise to improve the road and railway network and the electricity infrastructure at the beginning of the last decade. 

Whereas the reconstruction and development of the road infrastructure has been very aggressive and the development of the road has been very aggressive and consistent year in year out and the construction and redevelopment of the electricity infrastructure, particularly the dams has gained momentum at Karuma, Isimba and other areas, the redevelopment of the railway network has been stunted by the question of funding, political considerations, encroachment of the railway reserves particularly in the greater Kampala area, which includes the jurisdiction covered by the Kampala Capital City Authority. Prior to the concession of the railway operations in November 2006, the Ministry of Transport and the Privatisation Unit in the Ministry of Finance commissioned an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). It was a study in 2005.

Due to space encroachment mainly confined to the markets at Ndeeba, Katwe, Kireka, the RAP boundaries were limited to those areas. The affected persons at that time amounted to 205 and they were subsequently compensated by the Privatisation Unit. Between the years 2007 and 2011, the Uganda Railways Corporation and the Rift Valley Railways endeavoured to evict new encroachers that had gone to the railway reserves but this exercise was thwarted by local politicians who mobilised the population against the exercise. 

After the restructuring of the concession in 2010, a full RAP study was commissioned by the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Uganda Railways Corporation, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Rift Valley Railways. 

The private operators of the railway network: The RAP study boundaries covered the 10.4 metres operational corridor, 60 metres railway reserves and the level crossings and included a verification exercise of the project affected persons (PAPs), survey of the railway reserves and valuation of resettlement amounts due to the PAPs. Several community engagements were held to ensure that the society appreciated the need for the redevelopment of the railway line and the need to promote safety along the railway lines. 

The resettlement action plan cut-off date was 22 January 2011. That means that whoever showed up on the railway reserve after that date could not be a beneficiary of the resettlement package. The record of the beneficiaries is available and the beneficiaries have also been given identification enumeration slips for purposes of any resettlement action. 

The Uganda Railways Corporation through its parent ministry has in the last three years submitted budgetary requests to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for purposes of the Resettlement Action Plan. However, this request is yet to be honoured. 

In the greater Kampala area, 267 mobile vendors within the corridor were enumerated with a total number of 302 semi-permanent movable structures. A total of 70 permanent structures were valued. In 2013, the Ministry of Works and Transport was directed by H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda to revise the concession agreement between Government of Uganda and Rift Valley Railways to include passenger transportation services to enhance public transportation. The process is on-going. 

In May 2014, the People’s Republic of China and the governments of Uganda, Kenya, South Sudan and Rwanda signed a formal agreement to redevelop the railway network from Mombasa, Malaba-Nimule-South Sudan, Malaba-Kampala-Kasese and Rwanda, and establish the standard gauge railway line. 

Following the signing of the said agreements, the major stakeholders - the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Uganda Railways Corporation, the Kampala Capital City Authority and Rift Valley Railways - have consistently engaged in the execution of an activity schedule to facilitate the timely implementation of the obligations bestowed upon the signatory nations, one of which was the clearing of the railway reserves to engender the handover of a railway corridor devoid of illegal and unauthorised human activity. 

There are physical planning issues, Madam Speaker, in this matter. The Kampala Capital City Authority conducted an assessment of the kind of structures developed along the railway reserves and concluded they were illegal with most of them in a dilapidated sorry state. 

There are safety concerns as well. The KCCA, the URC and the RVR and the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd being mindful of the safety of persons who had set up residences on the road reserves noted that the redevelopment of the railway lines and the re-launch of the passenger railway services shall raise safety issues which need to be avoided by ensuring that there are necessary setbacks from the railway line and these setbacks do not exist. 

There are safety concerns from a railway transportation perspective and from the electricity power transmission. A number of trains will be carrying hazardous material and this will be on the increase. The safety risk to both the train crew and the encroachers within the railway corridors would significantly increase. A number of the high voltage lines run parallel to the railway line and these are the areas where there has been a lot of illegal settlements. 

As development increases, it needs to be matched by available reliable bulk power. The Uganda Electricity Transmission Company is licensed, under the Electricity Act, to transmit and dispatch bulk power in Uganda and the transmission is enabled by use of high voltage lines. Some of these high voltage lines run metres away from the railway line corridor but parallel to the said railway lines. 
The electricity lines require vacant land space of specific width measured from the centre of the line referred to as wayleaves. Wayleaves around high voltage lines are required to ensure public health and safety and to enable easy access of the transmission lines during operation and maintenance. The high voltage lines are supported on pylon structures. 

Kampala City is traversed by the 132 KV and 220 KV transmission lines and the wayleaves corridors of these lines are 30 metres for the 132 and 40 metres for the 220 KV respectively. No activity is supposed to be conducted within the wayleaves corridor without approval. The concerns of the KCCA and the transmission company are:
    1. Environmental and hydrological concerns since some of the encroachments are in delicate zones in the city. 
    2. Public health and safety concerns. There are serious risks of electrocution in case of accidental contact with live conductors by way of hosting and lifting things or in case there is a collapse of the equipment. 
    3. Risk to the transmission business; encroachment of the wayleaves limits access to the transmission line which may result in delays in restoring power in case of faults. Any delay in restoring power supply is a cost to the customer and the transmission company. 
    4. Revenue penalties due to failure to meet contractual obligations in cases of power outage. The electricity transmission company is in the transmission business where it faces penalties for failure to dispatch power from the generating companies and for power not delivered to major customers. The risk of power outage due to accidents is higher if the wayleaves are encroached upon. 

The KCCA physical planning committee pursuant to the Public Health Act Cap. 281, the Public Health Building Rules, 281 (1) (a) and the Physical Planning Act, 2010, resolved that an enforcement notice be issued notifying all persons with illegal and dilapidated structures on the railway reserves to demolish them lest they are demolished by the Kampala Capital City Authority. The said notice was issued and placed in the Daily Monitor and the New Vision newspapers both of which are newspapers with wide circulation on 1st July this year and on the 4th July respectively.

Following the said notices, the Minister for Presidency and Kampala Affairs received several petitions from local leaders including members of Parliament representing the persons to be affected by the physical planning exercise. The honourable minister and the KCCA engaged the local leaders of Makindye Division led by the hon. John Ssimbwa on 21st July this year. The KCCA, URA and RVR met the same Member of Parliament on 23rd July this year and clarifications in the petition he addressed to the Minister for the Presidency were made. The KCCA in turn met the local leaders again on 24th July this year to reiterate the need for voluntary compliancy during the exercise. 

On 20th July this year, the KCCA, URC and RVR together with the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd embarked on an eviction and demolition exercise of structures along the railway reserves and the exercise largely went on smoothly and in a lot of cases with voluntary compliance from the population. A large scale of the railway reserve has been recovered. The stakeholders shall continue with the exercise until the railways reserves are fully restored to what they were or what they were envisaged to be.

Finally, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, it should be realised that most of the encroachments on the railway reserves were illegal and any purported sale agreements executed in respect of the same are really void and unenforceable.

On issue of eviction of various previously operators along the roads in Mulago, Wandegeya, Makerere, Lubaga, Kawempe, it must be understood that those notices that were issued were done in accordance with the law, in particular, Section 54 of the Public Health Act. This section, Madam Speaker, requires the residents of Kampala to maintain their business in proper conditions. Likewise, any unauthorised structures can be refused from the frontages of the buildings and road reserves pursuant to Section 72 of the aforesaid Act.

In this regard, Parliament should support us to have a hygienic and beautiful city by removing all these illegal structures and businesses.

There are possible gains out of this exercise. One is that we are likely to have an enhanced public transport system through the passenger railway service and it is hoped that by October this year, the passenger railway service shall be operational on the line between Namanve and Kyengera.

There is also likely to be enhanced economic development. The aforesaid railway service shall generate a lot of economic activities since the various stations along the line will have attendant business to cater to the needs of the passengers including but not restricted to food and beverages.

There will be of course job creation through engagement of CBOs. All along the railway line, various community based organisations have been engaged by Rift Valley Railways to maintain the railway reserves thus we are creating a lot of jobs. 

And last, but most important, there shall be public safety for the community. We need not fear people suffering accidents going forward in the event of train accidents since the reserves will have been cleared.
Madam Speaker, we do hereby seek Parliament’s indulgence; we seek Parliament to support us in this exercise in the interests of public safety, the spurring of economic growth and the promotion of overall development for our country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us start with the Kampala members.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Procedure, Madam Speaker, with all due respect.

THE SPEAKER: No, why don’t you let the members from Kampala speak first?

7.01
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent Makindye East and I have eight zones that have been affected by the demolition exercise. Within these zones, I can say that around 8,000 people are homeless as we talk. It is not true that the people who were evicted are against the development of the railway infrastructure. They support it so much. The problem is with the methods that are being used. These are the ones that are causing a lot of havoc and suffering to our people.

There are some lies in the statement of the minister. One is that there were no stakeholders’ consultative meetings about this eviction with the people on the ground. I only approached the minister – I wrote a petition after we had invited the KCCA people to go talk to the residents to understand the whole idea on what was supposed to be done. So, in the first place, the consultative meetings he is talking about did not take place. The only meetings that took place are when I led the leadership to the minister after these orders had been issued. 

We had issues that we wanted to be addressed. One of these issues was about the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Hon. Members, you may not have the details but the issue was – as he put it – that between 2005 and 2007, there was the first RAP that handled whatever he is talking about. But in that first resettlement exercise, it was only the Privatisation Unit that made their own list and paid people on those lists. And Madam Speaker, before I sit, I would like to request the minister to lay on Table the lists of those people who were paid in the first RAP, the procedure that was used to value their property and the monies that were paid to them.

Why am I saying all this? Honourable colleagues, I want to inform you that in the RAP, there were issues that were agreed upon and the hon. Minister, you can shake your head but this is the truth. The issue was that Government agreed to compensate property, not land, of those individuals who had settled on that land. That was a condition within that first resettlement exercise.

Two, they agreed that – (Interjections) - that is what they agreed on and it is in the RAP by Government, RVR and URC. They agreed to pay facilitation to people to move wherever they could. That information is contained in that first Resettlement Action Plan. So, I want to know how many people were paid, the process of valuation and the monies paid to them.

Madam Speaker, in the second RAP that they say covered the other areas - what happened at that time is that at first RVR had been given 5.2 metres as operational line. Then when the second RAP came up, URC only considered the 15 metres – the 5.4 on one side and the 5.4 on the other was the concessional width that had been given to RVR. During the second RAP, they added 10 metres on the other side to make it 15 and whatever they called the second RAP only covered 15 metres on each side. When the new order came, it came for the whole 30 metres on each side which makes it 100ft on this side and 100ft on the other side but the people within the last 15 metres had not been considered in the 2nd RAP. So, even when URC took up that obligation to pay or compensate, the people who had been affected and were outside the 15 metres which were evaluated could not be paid. 

But even then, the exercise that was done by URC in evaluating or revaluing these people was done haphazardly and there was no stakeholder involvement in that exercise. What happened is that they hired a company of their own; they got students who just moved around taking pictures and that is what they call the numbers. So, Madam Speaker, in the first place, the RAP that is to be considered was not satisfactory and our people do not believe in what was done. 

Secondly, we have been here debating for two hours requesting the minister to give time or extend the time for the registration exercise. Government has been looking for money to pay for three years and it has not got the money but the people were given 28 days and when I requested the minister to extend the period so that people can move their property without destroying it, the minister did not consider that extension and what happened as some of you might have seen on your TV screens, many people lost their property and those in my area are sleeping down in open space. The ones in hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s place in Kabowa - that is what our people are facing. 

Lastly, I request that when talking about these issues of demolition - the minister’s statement has two types of demolitions. One is about the railway reserves but again there is another one which affects Kawempe, Lubaga and other areas. When we talk about being fair, how do you make some body pay a trading licence and then tomorrow another department in KCCA comes with a demolition order? KCCA comes to ask for a trading licence and you pay and tomorrow physical planning comes from KCCA and demolishes. This one has taken your money and this one is demolishing. That is what is happening; it is really annoying to see our people suffering. People don’t have a human heart. If hon. Kwizera was here, he could have told you what happened because he was there but it is very annoying.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssimbwa, you have delivered the concerns of your population.

7.10
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga South Constituency, Kampala): Hon. Ssimbwa has spoken for more than three minutes. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the dimension you have recommended in how to begin response in this debate. If I had rushed into speaking first, I would have missed a great deal; so, I would like to thank you for that.
 
The elaborate story the minister is giving should have come yesterday not today. Why am I saying so? Why do we come to know about the involvement of the Rift Valley Railways and the Uganda Railways Corporation only after the notice has appeared in the New Vision and this notice is too brief to encourage people to do what they did to our people? I would like to thank hon. Ssimbwa for articulating the concerns of our people. The story given by the minister apparently in the case of Rubaga South is irrelevant to the petition I brought here on 22nd July. You hardly tackled the sentiments, the expressions, the conviction I tried to deliver in the course of my presentation. 

Therefore, I smell a rat because I expected hon. Minister Tumwebaze to have responded because he has been in the limelight in as far as commands associated to KCCA are concerned. However, I can understand the responsibility he may be shouldering. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, we would like to thank you for doing us well to enable us speak. When he cried, I was equally crying. My constituency from Kibuye, Ndeeba, Nalukolongo, Nateete, Busega, were invaded late in the night on the Eid day and were subjected to torture with brutality in open defiance of Article 24 of the Constitution and in open ignorance of the petition which Parliament had extended to the Physical Infrastructure committee so that in 45 days they give a response. Madam Speaker, you left that on the Floor. 

Most of those people have nowhere to sleep; they have no food. Their working capital was destroyed and they have destroyed everything that is within reach. Many of them had acquired loans from SACCOs, from the banks, and have children going to school and I have got data here to demonstrate to you that even his Excellency the President participated in directing some of them - the Twegatte women group in Ndeeba market - to work in those places and earn a living. 

Madam speaker, I am very worried and it is unfortunate that colleagues in this House have kept away from this concern. There are many people whose constituents were affected by this disaster but they are keeping away and keeping mum not knowing that they should not be here without those people who are suffering. This is our country Uganda and when these people suffer, you equally suffer. President Museveni and I equally need those people. The railway area should be declared a disaster zone right from Kibuye to Nateete in my area. There are many people who are likely to die of hunger and under Article 98 of our Constitution, His Excellency the President, who is the Chief Executive should do something by way of visiting that area and see what is going on. The situation cannot be narrated; it is inexplicable. People are crying here and there. 

As I speak, I don’t have a penny because the money I had, I had to extend it to those people. What is the legal aspect we should address that was not addressed by hon. Ssimbwa? The legal aspect we are addressing is in regard to the notice which was published on 4th July. In this notice, the publishers accepted that far from what we are used to, the railway was leaving 15 metres on one side, 15 on the other. On this particular occasion, they would like to capture a greater distance amounting to 30 metres on either side. 

In law, one witness can damage the evidence of nine witnesses. Why am I saying so? The greatest stand in law over those people is in regard to the summary immediate extension of that distance, which encroaches on new public land and which also encroaches on the new landlords who are going to be affected and because of that, I would like to maintain, with respect and dignity, that KCCA acted singly.

I would have expected the minister in charge of Kampala to have come here and given a statement backed by the Ministry of Works but as I speak, the activity which was carried out directly defies the following provisions of the Constitution and I quote them:

The Constitution says Government can acquire land anywhere provided it carries out certain requirements namely, compensating those people and giving them the natural right to be heard. These people that hon. Ssimbwa and I represent were never heard. They wanted to be heard through the petition I presented so that the appropriate Committee on Physical Infrastructure could listen to them.

The second concern of a constitutional nature is Article 28(1), which intimates that every disgruntled person is entitled to natural justice. You cannot do anything you want in this independent and democratic country without listening to people. What I am saying is that on behalf of these people who are suffering, let us handle this matter squarely and responsibly. 

I would not mind if that Committee on Physical Infrastructure continues with the assignment it was given. Otherwise, hon. Minister, what explanation can you have to create a precedent of acting in open defiance of that petition we all read and which was presented here in the limelight? How could you have acted out of context in regard to that petition? What precedent are we setting for so many years in the struggle for peace and justice in Uganda? We should look closely at the demands of those people instead of acting unilaterally on our own.

In your presentation, you never responded to the queries in the petition. In your explanation, you never explained to us what happened recently. Ken-Lukyamuzi is an ex-officio member of KCCA but the information I got from my people is that KCCA organised a meeting at State House, Rwakitura and met the President who talked to them and said, “You councillors, help me. Many people are now crying over petrol, which has gone up and they cannot afford to go to Kampala. I would like to establish a kayoola arrangement so that they can reach their places of work in good time.” So, they decided there that very shortly, the railway must begin running. We are not opposed to the railway, it is a good development but a railway line is not something you can re-design in a twinkle of an eye. 

Finally I beg you, hon. Members, to examine the concerns of our people; the poor people. They do not know where to go and I appeal to His Excellency, the President through the Leader of Government Business that as we speak, many of them do not have anything to eat and we should do something as we act. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, three minutes please. No, there are two issues one raised by hon. Ssimbwa and another raised by him.

7.20
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I thank the minister for bringing the statement. Three minutes is okay, Madam Speaker, but I am part and parcel of the people who brought this to Parliament. Why? Some of us have been chairpersons of divisions. If anything, apart from the name that has changed to KCCA, I was the chairperson of Kawempe Division for three years but one thing I learnt is to walk with the people and that humbled me. 

That was my first time to deal with things like managing society but what I see today is a bit saddening and that is why you see some of our colleagues shedding tears because the way we are treating our people is unfair. Yes, we want the development, even I want the development but we should walk with the people and let all the stakeholders in this city be involved. I think that will be the most important aspect of all development in this city or in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, what does it say in the Local Government Act? It says that if you develop a function, Government must also develop the money. Now a problem has come where people have been evicted and they are in disarray and are being taken to the municipalities. How are the municipalities going to help these people? What is Government going to give to help the people who have been on the streets? 

What is happening in Kawempe South is that about five zones are going to be affected. What has KCCA done? It has given the people - Madam Speaker, you have taken that route before. These are people engaging in carpentry and joinery as their livelihood and most of them are youth. Remember from our demographics that 80 per cent of our youth are not employed; it is only 20 per cent and even the 20 per cent is questionable. 

People who have good degrees and diplomas in vocational training are engaged in carpentry and joinery. What have they done? They have been given notice of 28 days to put up permanent structures with approved plans or they face eviction and that is over 300,000 people who are going to be affected plus what has affected the constituencies of my colleagues.

Madam Speaker, yes -

THE SPEAKER: Which place is that?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: From Wandegeya going to Mile Two up to Kavule and then part of Mulago. They want permanent structures and there are so many youth who are doing a lot of work there. They are telling the people who are helping these youth to put up permanent structures with plans. I talked to the landlords because some of these people who are helping the youth are tenants and the landlords are not ready to tell these people to make plans and put up permanent structures.

Madam Speaker, you have constructed a building before and you know that you cannot go for a loan or even a plan in KCCA and you get it within one month. Council must see it and to approve that plan, even to get the money to mobilise - we are in economic doldrums and as I speak, some banks are being closed and others have cut salaries for their workers.

We want development, we want progress. Go to Shoprite where there are power lines. If anything, they are in the wayleaves. Go to Centenary Park and Kampala Parents School. Recently, I talked to the Deputy Speaker about Makerere College School. They want to demolish Makerere College School, which has been there since 1922. I smell a rat like my colleague smelt a rat because there is a building there, which has been constructed - Ham Towers - which is in the road reserve. They want to save it and they are now pushing developments further to a school that has been there since 1922. So what are we saying? Are these laws favouring only the well-to-do and doing away with our people? We should stand up and be counted.

Members, most of your people come from up country –(Member timed out.)

7.25
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Madam Musisi for her administration. We are beginning to see what a city looks like. She has tried so much to put Kampala right and I know that it is not easy but she is doing a lot which, is harming people. My only problem that I have identified with Musisi’s administration is the workers she is working with. I am one person who moves around by walking. I go up to Owino to buy my things and greens there but what the workers are doing is not correct. Like right now, they do not want these vendors to sell on the verandas. These men appear from nowhere and start disorganising these people; they grab their properties and these properties do not reach where they are supposed to reach. Just stand there for a few minutes and you will see them coming back to collect money from these people. I am not so happy because these are people who are just selling ground nuts and in a whole day, a person can only be able to get Shs 5,000 but these people who are well paid, take the money. That is a problem that must be addressed. 

I wanted to hear from the minister that we are going to have a modern railway system in this country. I do not want to hear about these traditional and colloquial systems that cannot help us. We have been waiting for this railway system since long time ago. South Sudan, which is just a year into its independence, is already doing far much better than Uganda. They are already trying to put their structures in place but here, we are still dillydallying. 

Madam Speaker, for the time being, I want to blame our own Government. These are people who have settled in road reserves. All these Government institutions saw people building the houses, saw them putting up the structures and they waited for them. What is Government really doing? Now we are here organising money to pay people on our own land. What are we doing? This is wastage of resources. We would have averted this problem if we had not allowed these people to settle on the reserve. This is purely a problem of Government. This is lack of coordination.  

Madam Speaker, now the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company have put high voltage lines which are already a problem. You talk about URC and KCCA which are all government institutions that are doing parallel work and are not coordinating and in the end, it is all lost to the Government and the taxpayers’ peril. Why can’t all these government institutions coordinate so that we do a better thing for this country?

Lastly, I know that the minister in his statement said that they have given notice of eviction in the papers. Even I, as a Member of Parliament, have not read these papers. How do you expect that these people can have Shs 2,500 to buy papers everyday so that they will read all that? Why can’t we use other means? Maybe for Buganda here, you could use CBS or Bukedde because that is where they are 24 hours but not your New Vision or Daily Monitor. Why can’t we make the information reach the people? Those are some of the challenges that as a Government, we have to look at. 
Madam Speaker, I am happy that we are going to have our railway system and I know that it is going to improve. Just a month ago, I got – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Close your statement, please.

MS OLERU: Okay. Thank you. One month ago, I was involved in a very serious accident and I knew that if I had used the railway system – it is very rare that trains get accidents like the cars and they are even much cheaper. But here, we are sacrificing ourselves travelling long distance yet if I had a railway system that reaches up to Yumbe – not that it must only stop in Packwach and hon. Minister, you have heard that this railway station must reach Yumbe and must not stop in Packwach or it should be in your plan where you just want it to go through Gulu and leave West Nile out. We, the people from West Nile, will not be very happy if you divert the railway system to go to Gulu and Sudan and leave West Nile out –(Member timed out.)

7.31
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the economic progress in the country as listed by the minister. But as my colleague has just said, these people are said to be illegally there and they have been there for some time and that is our mistake that we need to own and say, “Yes, these people have been there for so many years and we have not chased them.” 

I remember we had a similar problem when we had the vendors who were being evicted and at that time, I was chairing the Committee on Trade. We called the KCCA people and I saw people cry. Someone will tell you that they have been living and working here and I have not been tampered with. So, as Government, we need to be proactive and not allow people to settle and later evict them. Let us see them coming and stop them from coming from the onset. That is for the future anyway.

Secondly, on the compensation issue, there are those that the minister has just told us about - those who were legally there and are going to be compensated. But compensation in this country takes centuries and remember, you have evicted someone and he or she has nowhere to go. So, I would implore the honourable minister and the ministries concerned to be proactive so that those people are given their money in time such that they settle elsewhere. 

Madam Speaker, we should again avoid corruption in the process. Whenever there are compensations in this country, it is common knowledge that there is connivance. Let us avoid it this time round.

Lastly, equal treatment and hon. Muwuma has just talked about it. There are people on the road reserves along Entebbe Road and we have commented on those illegal structures but since CHOGM time, they are still there. Then why are we going for the poor and leaving the rich? If we are to do anything in this country, let us have equal treatment to the systems of this country. (Applause)

I am really very mindful of what is happening in KCCA. People are doing very good work but if we are doing very good work, let us avoid corruption because we know that there are some activities that go on behind the Executive Director and other people. There are juniors who go and get money from people and do illegal things. Otherwise, we are very appreciative with what is happening but let us treat people equally. I thank you very much.        

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before hon. Bitekyerezo comes. Just to touch on what hon. Kagwera has said, when these fellows are evicted, what forwarding address do they have? They just go and so no one will compensate them. If you go back to Mbarara from here, how do you come back to follow up the money? Those are lies! 

7.35
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want first of all to appreciate the work done by this wonderful woman, Jennifer Musisi – [HON. MEMBER: “With the team!”] - with the team of KCCA. I was in Kampala for the first time as a very young boy in 1983 sleeping in Namirembe. I was travelling by train from here to Kamwenge where my grandmother was. So I enjoyed the train – (Laughter). Today, for the first time, I wanted to ring Madam Jennifer; I travelled from Nakawa via Game to here. I saw the roads and appreciated them; I am now in a very wonderful country and city. 
Madam Speaker, in Mbarara Municipality, where I come from and I hope they are watching me, I have agreed with the Mayor and the council that anybody in Mbarara Municipality that erects a building in the road reserve will lose it. I wanted to build a house in Mbarara and they delayed me for about three months but it was worth the delay because I wanted to comply with the law. 

As a scientist, I know what we mean by high voltage. If somebody builds under high voltage lines, that person is going to die any time things go wrong. So if you want to save that person, you have to remove them and if you do not want to remove them because they will start crying, they will die and you will bury them. And once life is lost, it is lost. 

There are people who just build in the middle of roads just because they want to be compensated. We must learn to respect the law; we must stop people from constructing buildings in the middle of roads and railway lines; whether poor or rich, you cannot – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, make your closing statement. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, I was staying in your constituency near your house, in Nalukolongo. I saw you – I didn’t know you much because I was a young boy and I was also complaining. You should have told the people in Nalukolongo not to construct in the middle of the road because you had been in Parliament for so long. (Applause) 
Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, you cannot say that people should build in the middle of the road; do you see what is happening now? I want to say that I partly blame you as a leader to have left your people to build in the middle of the railway line. 

7.38
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the minister for bringing this report. I am among the people who have observed the events in Kampala and seen its merits and demerits. On the issue of railways, we would appreciate it being constructed but this time, we want the standard gauge railway. I am one of the people who sponsored themselves to travel to Malaysia and the UK and when some people go there, due to the railway system, you may not want to leave that country because the infrastructure is efficient. 
So if that one is coming to Kampala, then our people will also benefit and they will appreciate the government. So, we appreciate what Madam Musisi is doing. We also appreciate that it can only be done by a person who is not a politician. If Madam Musisi was a politician, she would be headed for disaster but let her help us, the politicians, and we will use it as a benchmark for success. 

Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the people who endorsed the plans in the physical planning office. Currently, near Bukoto, there is a big building coming up but it is below the high voltage lines and those people will turn around and also claim for compensation. 

I have other two concerns. The minister’s report shows that the deadline for compensation was 22 November 2011. Government committed itself regarding the number of people who were to be compensated. We should also stop people from encroaching on government land which limits development because within five years, they will need compensation. 

Lastly, our prayer is that if the passenger train is to continue, let it complement the East African Community understanding of a standard gauge railway which will be using electricity because those are fast trains. 

7.41
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister. I am a resident of Rubaga and I descend from Makindye and Kawempe. I desire a city that is clean, safe, with good transport and good communication and all the benefits that a city comes along with. For the past 20 years, I have lived in the city, I have been wondering if we will ever have a city but somewhere, there is hope now and I want to commend the work of KCCA. 

I do not support demolition by force neither do I condone people who are in the habit of building in reserves and occupying land that is not meant for habitation. I saw on TV and so many people were crying, children were thrown out of the houses in the wee hours of the night, at 3.00 a.m. and so, I wonder, these people were warned and were supposed to be evicted but why on earth would you do it at 3.00 a.m.? Why didn’t they go at 2 O’clock or even remove them by force during the day so they can have somewhere to run to. But at 3.00 a.m. on Eid day; it was so painful for me as a Muslim. 

I support the idea that the city must be cleaned up; I abandoned my house in Kawempe because I had no road leading me to that house. People were not adhering to the laws and the physical planning regulations; I abandoned it very painfully but what I am condemning is the act of demolishing people’s buildings without compensation and without prior knowledge in the late hours of the night. I saw mothers stranded with their children at 3.00 a.m. and as a mother, I felt hurt. So Madam Musisi, the minister and the government should respect the rights of our people and especially those of children who are innocent. 

7.44
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and I thank the minister for coming up with such a report. I have a few questions to the minister. You have begun the process of recovery of the land for the railway. I want to know if the process covers the whole country or whether it is only around Kampala. I know that as far as Tororo, up to Kasese and other areas which you earmarked for the development of the railway system, people have encroached on that land. So tell us whether you are leaving out the other places – because we will come back here with similar complaints from members of the communities of those areas. 

Madam Speaker, I was able to watch on TV the people who were affected yesterday morning and I really felt so bad. I felt so bad on the aspect that authorities were not able to notify these people in time. We can appreciate the minister’s comments that they were given notifications and whatever, but the truth is that there was a petition pending, which the minister was aware of. They would have engaged with these people to allow them even a second warning. That would have been enough for us to give justification that it was better for them to be evicted and I believe that was not good.

Then, hon. Minister, you have not given us the distance that the railway reserve is supposed to cover. I am a landlord somewhere in Tororo and my land neighbours a railway line on the other side – (Interjections) – yes, because I have acquired it. But on the other side of the road, it is 30 metres across that is 15 metres either side but we have now heard that it is now 30 metres, which now makes it 60 metres. Tell us whether that is the standard for the whole country where the railway passes or whether it is just a standard existing within a particular area like –(Member timed out.)

7.47
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to appreciate what the minister has done in terms of the development of the city. For some good time, I didn’t know whether we had a city or just some advanced slum but somehow, KCCA is trying to do something. I want to say, thank you.

However, Madam Speaker, I have a challenge when it comes to evictions. Of course we need development. We may not count other countries but when you go to Ethiopia, you can see how they are moving. The railway system is working and we also want it. The challenge is in the way we evict our citizens. Recently, we had evictions that happened in Naguru, Nakawa and Nsambya and the problem was transferred from those areas to Kasokoso. I happen to be a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and I can say that to date, it is still a battle that we haven’t resolved.

I want to ask the minister what plans have been put in place – because from what hon. John Ssimbwa said, there are thousands of people being evicted. Where are we resettling these people? Have we planned for that population because, Madam Speaker, whether you want or not, these people will come back to disturb us.

We are evicting the youth from there and if we do not have any plan for them, they will turn into thieves. They will become a problem to this city and the country. Much as we will be sleeping in very beautiful places and traveling comfortably in the train, but as you leave the train, you will meet people who will waylay you on the way. So, we must have a plan for these evictions. 

Another issue that I want to ask the minister and KCCA to handle is: recently, when KCCA was demolishing petrol stations that had been constructed in the wetlands in this city – yesterday, as I drove from Ntinda joining Nakawa, around Spear Motors, there had been a petrol station that was demolished in that place but I was surprised to see a wall being erected in the same place. So, what happened? It makes me believe that when it comes to the poor people, we can evict and throw them out yet when it comes to the people with a lot of money, we pretend we are evicting them and we keep quiet and after some time, they come back when they realise that the situation has cooled down because then, what are we doing? Madam Speaker, I recall we asked on the Floor here that if we are demolishing, for example, a petrol station from a wetland, what then are we doing to reclaim it because demolition and leaving heaps of murram and concrete does not help us? 

Madam speaker, I think the best thing for KCCA to do is that where there is demolition or where they have evicted people from a wetland, that wetland must be reinstated either by that person who destroyed it or on KCCA budgets for its restoration but not to just demolish today and later we see people coming back to construct in the same places. Thank you.

7.51
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for this statement but it raises some concerns because it appears that when the General had finished fighting for the peace and people are able to sleep in Kampala, the government and local administration equally fell asleep. As my honourable colleague from Mbarara Municipality said, there was a commuter train operating in and around Kampala back in the days, which people can describe as dark days, it was operational.
At this moment, we seem to have suddenly woken up and we are now rushing things without due concern on what has happened over this period where as Government was sleeping people were building. Currently, Kampala is probably the worst capital city as far as access is concerned. When you go to all cities around, you realise that access in and out of town is either dual-carriage way or even four lanes. In Kampala, all the routes out of Kampala are basically single lane. That is why we have that traffic jam that also prevents Kampala from expanding.

As far as the train is concerned, I am equally concerned about the distances that the minister has given because the railway line passes through Lira Municipality and while there might have been peace in Kampala, there was no peace in the North. During that period, when there was lack of peace, so many people came into the town and settled. As you enter on the railway track into Lira Municipality, one of the first structures you come into contact with is a market, which crosses the railway line. There is so much that has been built and if we are going to clear houses in 60 metres, we will have a disaster in Lira. Adyel Division is the most popular in Lira Municipality and I fear that expanding to 60 metres will take us into a crisis.

Lastly, Government should realise that extending the railway line to Pakwach was not done just out of the blue. Part of the plans that were considered in extending that railway line was the construction of the Hima Cement Factory to deliver cement for the second dam that had been originally planned in Ayago. And if –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude about the plans of the UPC Government. (Laughter)

MR AKENA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I was saying is that the movement of heavy goods is normally done by railways and the construction of the second dam had taken that into account to tie in Hima and other goods which are supposed to go without destroying our roads. At this moment, if we are going to build Karuma Dam, we are going to destroy the road from Mbale to Soroti and the one from Lira to Kamdini yet we have spent a lot of money building them. To build a dam, we will lose these roads. So, please consider the railway, work on it and utilise it as it is supposed to be done. If you want to benchmark on the old plans of the UPC Government, please I have them available. Thank you.

7.54
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasiro County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard Members give the pros and cons and supporting evictions and they are only condemning the manner in which it has been done. But I invite you to read the definition of the word “eviction” and you will get to know whether there can ever be a peaceful eviction. The definition of the word eviction itself means it can never be peaceful; it has to be forceful. So, I think the blame falls on both sides; the people who encroached on the railway reserve and also the Government. Now what is the way forward on where we have reached and I think that is what we should be looking for. 

We have been in this Parliament, we have been in the Executive and we are seeing this happening. Some voices were being raised that can we stop this encroachment and some people were supporting it. Now time has come and we have seen what is happening and that is the message to the people in Government, the people who have encroached on the road reserves, and those potential encroachers on the road reserves. Time will come no matter how long it takes; you could be a powerful person today, you could be a rich person today. You go in those swamps - time will come. We only want to appeal to KCCA; can they put a human face when carrying out the evictions? I think that is what we should be asking for now but we all erred; can we have a human face when doing the evictions? That is what we ask for.

There are those who have already been evicted; how do we handle them? But there are those areas where they have not reached. How are we going to evict them from those areas? Can we have a human face when we are evicting them? I think that should be the way forward for us to help the minister, Government and KCCA but also help ourselves. It is not until - (Member timed out.)

7.57
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. To improve on the mass transport in the city is most welcome and for our city for the first time to also have a facility like that is most welcome. I hope definitely we are not going back to the kayoola of UPC where cattle borges turned into carriers for people. We should have proper trains - (Interruption)

MR AKENA: Madam Speaker, I am at pain to put the Leader of the Opposition in order. He is the leader of the party with the largest number in the Opposition, the FDC. Can the Government Chief Whip please revise the understanding of the rules? The Leader of the Opposition has said that the service which the UPC Government was providing to the citizens of this country was basically kayoola, which is not even a word in English and a cattle truck. Is the Rt. Hon. Leader of the Opposition in order to berate or to undermine services which were serving the people in a situation where we have not had a train moving for a number of years? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that train provided an efficient service for the poor of Uganda.

MR OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know I used the word kayoola because actually it was called kayoola. These were borges which had been used previously for bringing cattle from Teso region and because of transport problems, I think it was the idea of the late hon. Ateker Ejalu and he introduced it. They were not trains as such. They were borges –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, as a young man, I did use the train from Kumi to Teso College where the Leader of the Opposition went and my experience at that time is that there were passenger wagons and cargo wagons. Is he in order to reduce the people of Teso to the level of saying they were provided with an alternative cattle wagon yet as a student even at the time in Teso College, he was using the train to come from Busoga to Teso College? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please leave the issue of the descriptions. That train was providing efficient services to the poor people of this country.

MR OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, the first time I travelled out of Uganda, I went by train to Mombasa and I was sleeping in second class - a coach of two people and when I went to Teso College, I went in a passenger train. But it was for people. In Kampala, there was no passenger service for Kampala alone. It was introduced in the 1980s. They put up some funny borges to carry people in town but I am saying that if we are going to introduce a proper system, let us make it a mass transport system which is modern and we welcome that. 

What I see is that the city council is doing well but it should not use Machiavellian dictum of the end justifies the means. I know it is good for us to have mass transport but they should not just force people and make people cry. Governments don’t make people cry. People were crying on television; we watched from our sitting rooms. I saw a picture of a woman in a wheel chair with children and her property there; Government should not make people suffer like that but plan for them. Some of these people were doing business in these sharks. What are they going to do now? They have no livelihood; this is not what Government has sworn by the Constitution to do for the people. They swore to help people and not to make them suffer. In any case, let us not have double standards. I would like to see bulldozers bulldozing houses in wetlands of rich people. I would like to see all these buildings along the road reserves being bulldozed down. I will like to see buildings without parking being bulldozed. Then we shall say you have the same law. Madam Jennifer Musisi should know that. She should not punish the poor people – being very vicious on poor people and sparing the rich. Have the same law for all Ugandans and this is what we are saying. 

Madam Speaker, we want planned development and we want consultation. When you are going to seize somewhere, consult people. Let them buy what you are doing. The Minister of Internal Affairs was talking about registration here and I saw in Busoga we were 77 percent because we agreed and we have been consulting people and we have been talking about it because we agreed it was a sensible thing to do but don’t just wake up one day or one night, at 3 O’clock in the night on a holiday of Muslims and you go and evict people. It is very painful. So, let us have one law and let us be with everybody. If you break the law, we must deal with you using the law. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

8.04
MR XAVIER KYOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sincerely sympathise with my colleagues, the MPs from Kampala, because you are doing what you are supposed to do especially when your people are affected. However, we must make a choice. Do we want a developed city or we want a ramshackled city? Once we define what we want, which definitely is a developed city, then sometimes transforming a ramshackled city into a developed city involves taking decisions which sometimes are not popular to some class of the people. One may say how can you evict people at 3.00 a.m. but we have also seen circumstances where evictions have taken place during the day and KCCA motor vehicles have been burnt. 

Painfully, these are our people - relatives and friends but we must develop the city. We have been travelling to other countries and whenever we come back, we say Kampala City is not well developed, is not planned and we do not have any master plan. The time is now.

I do not have any problem with evicting people here but provide for them means of transporting them outside the city. I will not concur with anyone who says they have evicted our youth who have been making furniture here. You are in the city centre but you are simply seeing makeshifts. This is not the city that we want. We must provide for this city. We should support what is being done and as they have said, we can have these people out humanely.

Before I came here, I was a Speaker of Nakawa Division Council. Madam Speaker, these people have been waiting for the eviction because I remember between 2007 and 2010, there was a looming eviction and people had already got notice. What they would do is one would put a small building here and have another building somewhere waiting for when they would be evicted. Others would actually send those who would not fear the risk. So, it has been long awaited and the time is now. Definitely, development must go with costs.

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much and I support the evictions but let them be done humanely. Thank you.

8.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I have never been short of words and this moment should not be an exception. In Nigeria, when they identified Abuja to be the capital city of that country, everybody including ministers and MPs rushed there and acquired plots in a haphazard manner. The President then, I think it was Gen. Obasanjo, appointed a Minister for Abuja, El-Rufai. He went in and swung his best and evicted everyone. Up to now, El-Rufai has been on the run but when you go to Abuja, you appreciate what muscle that person brought in Abuja and Nigeria.

Why do I say this? The job that KCCA has is an enormous one. It is a very big challenge and it needs a person with guts. I want to tell you that I am a Member for Nakawa and there are many things to consider. There is the law, there are our people and we need a good city. There are many factors to balance. At the end of the day, when you go through KCCA now, you appreciate the work of the Executive Director and her team. On the other hand and on a rather selfish note, among the people who have been affected are the people I lead. There are options and interventions I had undertaken. There is no way I can actually say that KCCA did not do its work within the law. It did but the challenge is on us. I think as leaders, there are three things that bind and bring us together. Whatever our political or religious affiliation, we all want peace, we all want development and we all want unity. The rest are a means to an end and they lead us there. DP, you want to have all of those. The same applies to UPC and the NRM. When it comes to these three things, we should always work together as they normally say, for every dark cloud, there is a silver lining. Let us wake up. 

You have talked about lack of interaction with KCCA. Yes, maybe we have actually denied these people a platform through which we can dialogue with them. In the Eighth Parliament, we used to be active in our parliamentary caucus regardless of our political affiliations. We had some meetings - hon. Sebuliba, you know that very well. The other day, we were together at a workshop organised by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. You lamented about what is happening in the wetlands and I did the same. Now, tomorrow when they swing there to evict them, we will come here.

You see the challenge is for instance if these people are left where they are and these trains begin operating and they crash land amongst these houses, for lack of a better word, you would be back here with a motion asking, what are these people doing?

I think the challenge is that as leaders, we need to re-direct our people. We need to go to where we feel there is a problem and we go together without the influence of politics. We need to go together to champion the common good and Madam Speaker, I undertake to call the first meeting for Members of Parliament for Kampala and we dialogue with KCCA for the betterment and welfare of our people. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister and MP for Nakawa. Hon. Members, before we conclude this matter, I will allot 30 minutes tomorrow because there are three questions I want the government to answer. The first one concerns the allegation that unilaterally and arbitrarily, the railway reserve was extended to 60 metres instead of 30. So tomorrow we want the minister - I do not know whether it will be the Minister of Works - to tell us by law where the railway reserve is. Is it 15-15 or 30-30? If so, did you do it arbitrarily? Is there cause for action?

Secondly, we would like to know - I think two budgets ago, we allotted money for Jua Kali shelters for the youth. We want to know what happened to that money. If these young people are just being evicted, what has happened to the money which we budgeted for in this House and it was especially for Kampala? Kamuli did not get it and Jinja did not get it. It was especially for Kampala. We want to know where that money is.

The third one is; I want to concur with the Member who said – Yesterday, I was also driving towards Ntinda and I found a wall going up. I said, “Is this a wetland? Is this Government?” Tomorrow, we want to know who is building that wall opposite Mercedes Benz and IOV. There is a new wall coming up. We want answers tomorrow. We want to know because we evicted one person but there is somebody building. If it is Government, we should know. If it is a new rich owner, we should also know.

Hon. Members, tomorrow after 30 minutes, we should conclude that matter. (Mr Ssimbwa rose_) - Hon. Ssimbwa, we have addressed your issue.

MR SSIMBWA: No, about those people who the minister -

THE SPEAKER: Oh, about the RAP? Please bring the Resettlement Action Plans tomorrow.

MR KAGWERA: Madam Speaker, about the compensations for those who were there legally.

THE SPEAKER: That’s the RAP. Okay Members, thank you so much. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 8.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30 July 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 
