

Tuesday, 17 July 2018

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, the operations of Parliament are centred on its committees. Last week, my office had intended to have sectoral committees constituted but the concerned parties reported that they were not ready and deferred their consideration to today. 

According to the Order Paper, this item is the last today and I would like to comment on it, given the importance it deserves. I am not certain whether consultations have been concluded by the Government Chief Whip but from what I gathered before coming here, the Government Chief Whip called me and said they are not ready because they have not finalised with the final consultations that she is required to do. That means that even today, we will not be able to consider this item of constitution of committees.

Honourable members, you know the implications. When there are no committees, this House becomes almost dysfunctional. Therefore, I am hoping that the necessary consultations will be concluded today so that tomorrow, we can and finalise with the constitution of committees so that we can become fully functional.

Honourable members, I am in receipt of a communication from His Excellency the President on the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018, which has been returned to Parliament for reconsideration. Rule 142(1) provides thus: “When a Bill passed by the House is returned to the House by the President with a message requesting that the House should reconsider the Bill or any specific provision of it or any such amendments as are recommended in his or her message, the Speaker shall read the message of the President, or if the House is not in Session direct that the message be published in the Gazette.” 

Accordingly, I wish to read verbatim the letter of His Excellency the President. It is dated 22 June 2018 and addressed to the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker, Parliament of Uganda. 

“Return of the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018 for reconsideration. 

The above matter refers. 

In accordance with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution, I hereby return the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018 to Parliament.

Section 20(6) should be reconsidered and deleted. Incorporating it in the Act will encourage non-compliance by taxpayers as regards the filing of annual returns. The current tax system, which compels taxpayers to pay their taxes on time through self-assessment, has been effective.

The proposed amendment will further deter Uganda Revenue Authority from charging interest on tax arrears it would have discovered hence creating revenue leakage.

Yoweri Museveni, President.” 

Enclosed is the assent copy of the Bill for our reconsideration.

Honourable members, the rules say that the Speaker will commit the Bill to the committee, as appropriate. Therefore, I hereby commit the Bill to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for reconsideration and report back to Parliament within the timeframe that is provided for in the rules.

Honourable members, we have previously had the Bill on Bio-Technology and Bio-Safety returned but up to now, we have not been able to process what the President had sent the Bill back for. This should not fall in the same trap because these are urgent matters of taxation. This matter is accordingly referred to the appropriate committee for handling. As you are aware, we should receive the motion from the responsible minister and that is what will propel the committee to work.

Honourable members, you will recall that during the sitting of Wednesday, 11 July 2018, the Right honourable Speaker informed Parliament that His Excellency Narendra Modi, the Prime Minister of the Republic of India, will address Parliament on Wednesday, 25 July 2018 in the morning. This is now to inform you that the time for his visit has been confirmed as 10 a.m. on Wednesday, 25 July 2018. I therefore wish to urge Members to arrive early enough and sit in the Chamber before the arrival of His Excellency the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and his guest.

Further, I wish to request that we turn up in large numbers to accord the visiting dignitary the warm Ugandan welcome and hospitality. Honourable members, hosting a visiting head of state in Parliament is not an ordinary event. I call on all the Members to exercise a lot of caution in their conduct during the said sitting of Parliament to reflect the dignity and honour, which is commensurate to the Parliament of Uganda and its Members.

Further, this is to inform you that Parliament will not sit on Tuesday, 24 July 2018. That day will be set aside for the Clerk to Parliament and the organising committee responsible for hosting the event to handle some housekeeping matters. By implication, the car parking facility on the ground floor will not accessible on Tuesday, 24 July 2018 for those purposes already mentioned. 

I wish you a pleasant week and may the week bring outcomes and outputs, which will benefit the people of this country. Thank you.

2.15
MS SANDRA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

We have a problem in Kamdini Subcounty, Oyam District, and this is the frequent crossing of elephants from the national park to the villages in Kamdini Subcounty. Out of the five villages, the elephants are crossing into four villages, thereby affecting the livelihood of the people.

Mr Speaker, this problem started in June and since then, we have had elephants crossing into the surrounding communities and even beyond almost on a daily basis. The affected parishes are Juma, Pukica, Ocini and Bombay and the people are living in fear. 

On one of the occasions, the elephants attacked a young boy - a son to the LCI chairman - and destroyed his testicles. As I talk, the boy is still admitted in the hospital. Our laws are very weak in the sense that they do not handle the issue of compensation. The hospital is demanding for Shs 400,000 and the parents of this boy cannot afford treatment to the tune of Shs 400,000.

The parishes faced with this problem also need food because all their crops were destroyed by these elephants. Mr Speaker, when about 20 to 50 of these elephants come, they cause a lot of destruction. Yesterday, 29 of them came and destroyed all the crops in a particular community. They have developed a trick of crossing roads, including the main tarmac road going to Gulu and Ocini Parish. 

It seems that the elephants have become cleverer than Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA). Therefore, we call upon Government to do more than they are doing. Our prayer is that the Bill on human and wildlife conflicts is expedited so that the issue of compensation is addressed once and for all.

Secondly, we have only two rangers on the ground and they have only two bullets. When they shoot the first one, they remain with the last one to protect their lives. As a consequence, the communities improvise local ways of scaring the animals, by beating drums, saucepans and shouting. The Government should rescue us from these traditional methods.

Now that crops have been destroyed, I would like the minister in charge of disaster preparedness to respond because the situation has become disastrous. They should tell us what Government is going to give us to address the problem of the food that has been destroyed. In addition, what is Government going to do about the boy who is hospitalised? 

Finally, Government should train the rangers and give us an adequate number of them. Two rangers cannot help as they sometimes run away. The minister concerned should address these issues so that our people are seen to be valued more than animals. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to thank the honourable member for her vigilance; she even established the number of bullets in a gun. (Laughter) That is not ordinary; so, well done. 

On the issue of the Bill, I thought that we had the Bill in Parliament - Oh, we are still reconstituting committees.

MR KENNETH LUBOGO: I was a member of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and the amendment Bill was brought to the committee. The process awaits the constitution of committees.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Had it been handled? This is because constitution of the committee is one thing and a report being read is another.

MR LUBOGO: The process was not started because there were other Bills that were being handled. The Bill was brought in the last Session.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, the issue of elephants destroying crops and killing people is happening all over the country and has been brought on this Floor a number of times. However, Government has simply ignored it, instead of fencing around national parks so that elephants do not cross into communities to destroy crops and kill people. Is it procedurally right for Government to ignore an issue that is brought up on this Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not right. I am waiting for the ministers to respond to this matter.

2.22
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Unfortunately, I am not the minister in charge of wildlife. However, I promise to apprise the minister of the matter so that the minister can come here next week to make a statement. Thank you very much.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. We have been talking about elephants but every time we come here, the ministers say they will update us and yet people are still suffering while others are being killed. 

Mr Speaker, I would like you to direct the minister in charge of tourism to come here right now and tell us - We always talk about this to the extent that people are tired of listening to us. If it is procedurally right, Mr Speaker, please instruct the minister to come and give us a permanent solution. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please alert the minister responsible for the sector to be in the House this afternoon to deal with this matter. (Applause)

2.24
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance in regard to the fluctuating crop prices in the country. 

Agriculture is known as a major source of income for many communities in Uganda. However, there is pain, frustration and hopelessness among farmers due to crop prices that have drastically fluctuated in the whole country while Government is quiet on this matter.

Bugangaizi and Mubende are the leading producers of maize in this country. Last year in July, a kilogramme of maize was being sold at Shs 1,700 but today, in Kisita Town Council, a kilogramme of maize is at Shs 200. The state of hopelessness among farmers is worsened by high commodity prices for basic needs against low prices for farm crops. A farmer in my area, for instance, is required to sell 20 kilogrammes of maize in order to raise Shs 4,000 to buy one bar of soap. Our farmers are making losses.

I pray that Government comes out and explains to farmers the circumstances surrounding crop price fluctuations. If possible, Government should buy this produce from farmers at a fair price and store it for disaster preparedness in the future, instead of seeking relief items from China in times of food scarcity. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is a similar issue from Kyaka.

2.26
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka South County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to add my voice to that of my colleague. In Kyaka South Constituency and Kyegegwa District, we are facing similar problems. Maize is currently being sold at Shs 400 and there is no market for it yet it could have boosted our income. 

More importantly, we have a refugee settlement known as Kyaka II Refugee Settlement, which currently has 80,000 refugees. Unfortunately, the rules are such that we are not allowed to sell food to them. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is importing maize when our own people in the refugee hosting areas are suffering with maize because we have no market for it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.27
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will recall that in 2016, Uganda was faced with serious famine, and I remember standing on the Floor of Parliament urging Government to set up silos so that bumper harvests can be stored for use during times of famine. This is the time to do that. 

Recently, farmers received seeds from Operation Wealth Creation. Ugandans are hardworking people; we have now got the yields but we are failing to utilise them. It is my humble request that you direct the minister to buy off this bumper harvest so that we can use it in the future. Otherwise, we are having a bumper harvest today but in January, there will be no food and Ugandans will be urging Government to provide food. 

It is my humble request that we direct Government to buy maize from the people of Bulambuli where – (Interjections)- That is my request. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is what needed to happen. When there is a huge crop output, there should be a system of capturing it within so that we can use it in times of scarcity. 

It is also in Uganda where we talk of floods and drought in the same country. We know that immediately after floods, there will be drought but we do not prepare to store water and use it when it is dry. Honourable minister, what are we doing about these issues?

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was asked to stand in while my fellow minister was contacting the Minister for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.

Mr Speaker, I am aware that there are efforts by Government to deal with the challenge of storage. I believe that a loan request was brought to this House and we hope that it can be processed so that the issue of silos, which is being raised by Members from our various constituencies, can be addressed. 

However, Mr Speaker, allow us to reach out to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come up with a comprehensive statement on these issues that have been raised by the Members. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, could you get in touch with the ministers responsible for agriculture so that they come and speak to us now instead of tomorrow?
 
MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I have actually sent a message – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For today and not tomorrow?
 
MS OPENDI: Yes. 

MR MACHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I note that honourable Members of Parliament are bringing out issues of national importance that would necessitate our ministers to listen. 

Many times when I go to Kenya, the Senators there keep joking that we have the biggest Cabinet in the East African region, which is true. It is however unfortunate that our Government has reached an extent of sending messages to a Cabinet of almost 80 ministers. This shows that there is a problem. 

I therefore request that our ministers show interest in their dockets. I know that every Member of Parliament who will rise with a matter of national importance will have that matter referred. That is why I sympathise with the Minister of State for Water and Environment who is running in and out of Parliament because he is calling ministers. Whenever you refer a matter, he runs out. 

I do not know whether we are proceeding in the right way to discuss matters of national importance when we have almost 80 ministers in the august House - Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have talked about these matters, especially with the Front Bench. We even said that there are key ministries that should be here and we know them. When there are floods, we know the ministers that should be here. When there are health issues, at least the Minister of Health should be here. We know the issues that affect Members and the ministers should be here to deal with those matters immediately instead of deferring them to the next day. 

Honourable ministers, please assist this House so that we do not create a backlog of work. Things that should have been handled today are being deferred to tomorrow and next week. We should not work that way. We should be able to clear these urgent matters as they come. That is my plea to the Government. I have done this a few times; I am only repeating myself.

We are waiting for the ministers responsible for agriculture as well as the one in charge of game parks and elephants to come here this afternoon to talk about these matters.

2.34
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the acute shortage of Septrin in all hospitals in the country. Septrin is used as a supplement to Antiretroviral drugs (ARVs), which are taken by people with HIV. 

We would like to get a comprehensive statement from the Minister of Health on why Septrin is scarce in all hospitals in the country. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The same matter was coming from the honourable Member of Parliament for Butembe County, Jinja.
 
2.36
MR NELSON LUFAFA (NRM, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Shortage of Septrin tablets is a problem in all health facilities in the country. I have realised this in my constituency and people are crying. 

Septrin is a brand name for a combination of antibiotics called co-trimoxazole, which is the main drug used to treat and prevent a type of pneumonia called PCP. People living with HIV are at risk of getting PCP if their CD4 cell count goes down. Septrin is the most effective drug for preventing PCP, especially when a person’s CD4 count goes below 100. It also reduces the risk of toxoplasmosis, an infection that can affect the brain. It should be noted that this drug is also vital for pregnant mothers. As such, an estimated 1.3 million people are at risk because of this shortage. I beg to submit.

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it was in April, before we broke for recess, when this matter of lack of Septrin was raised. I recall that I informed the House that it is true we had a shortage of Septrin in the country. The problem was due to lack of adequate funding. We had to get resources to procure the most effective drug, and that is the antiretroviral drug. I also assured Members that we were going to get additional funding from the Global Fund and we will have these other drugs availed. 

However, since this matter has come up, allow me to come with a proper statement tomorrow. I will get the position as of today –(Interjections)- No, people cannot die; we have the ARVs. That is the first line of treatment for people that are living with HIV. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since the minister intends to bring a comprehensive statement tomorrow, I would like to seek clarification. Is the local knowledge among Ugandans sufficient? They are using Septrin and ARVs for fattening animals, especially pigs. Their argument is that these drugs make the animals grow fat at a fast rate. Therefore, there is need for you to delve deeper into this and let us know tomorrow if that is not one of the reasons as to why we have shortages in the country. 

People are giving ARVs and Septrin to their animals in the name of fattening them. Please inform this House what the Ministry of Health can do to demystify that strategy in the minds of the ordinary farmers. Thank you so much.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, that information is not new to us. I actually stated sometime back that we are aware that there are some Ugandans doing this - not all but just a few isolated cases. However, we have asked our District Health Teams (DHTs) and District Health Officers (DHOs) to be on the lookout for such farmers who may misuse this drug, so that the necessary action is taken against them. However, these are isolated cases; it is not really a big problem and we are aware of it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.39
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regards to the increasing cases of road accidents between Kafu and Karuma, along the Kampala-Gulu Highway. 

Mr Speaker, we continue to register increasing cases of road accidents along the Kafu-Karuma stretch. The black spots on that stretch are known; for instance, there is a black spot in a village called Nanda. However, from April up to now, we have had several fatal accidents taking place there. 

There was one accident involving a taxi and all the 14 people died on spot. It was in that accident that the former town clerk of Amolatar died. Another prominent accident was the Gaaga bus accident. There was also another one that involved our own Member of Parliament. Also last Friday, there was another one in which a Gaaga bus overturned at that same spot. 

Mr Speaker, the people of Kiryandongo have demonstrated because of this issue. The House has debated on the same issue and passed resolutions. However, nothing is being done. Due to the increasing cases of accidents, Kiryandongo Hospital is faced with constant shortage of key medical supplies like intravenous (IV) fluids, gloves, cannulas, sutures, among others. 

The people of Kiryandongo pray that the traffic police step up their operations on that stretch, in order to improve on road safety. We also pray that the Ministry of Works and Transport clearly marks the black spots and if possible, also put humps at those spots. We further pray that the Ministry of Health gives Kiryandongo Hospital adequate medical supplies to cater for the emergencies happening on that road. Lastly, we pray that Government considers enlarging the narrow sections along the stretch between Kafu and Karuma and also prioritise the reconstruction of Karuma Bridge. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are issues concerning the police -Ministry of Internal Affairs; the road surface – Ministry of Works and Transport; and then Kiryandongo Hospital – Ministry of Health. Can we have these responses.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, first of all, we would like to convey our condolences to all the families, friends and Ugandans for the various loses that have occurred, not only on the road but all over the country. 

Mr Speaker, accidents are caused by many issues. Sometimes they occur due to human error, in terms of the people that are driving, or as Members have correctly said, sometimes the road itself can lead to an accident, and also the condition of the vehicles. Therefore, it is not easy at any given moment to know exactly what has caused an accident until an investigation is carried out.

Having said that, since the last accident where we lost 23 people on the spot, we have deployed mobile traffic police on that road, right from Karuma up to Kafu. Those who have travelled on that road will notice that almost every five to ten kilometres, you will find a traffic vehicle with a traffic officer. However, some drivers avoid speeding around the areas where they know there is a traffic officer. How do they get to know that? Many times, it is the drivers themselves who inform their friends using signs and other means that there is a traffic officer in a particular area. 

Mr Speaker, we will do everything possible in our various teams to ensure that our people do not die. It is a joint responsibility that also includes companies that operate these services, which must take the necessary action. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. When people died in Kiryandongo District, Members of Parliament expressed concern and asked that your ministry should consider installing speed governors in all the buses. This is because the police cannot be everywhere. Even within a stretch of 100 metres, a bus can reach the speed of 180 kilometres per hour. 

Can the honourable minister therefore tell this House what the fate of the speed governors in those public buses is?  Are there speed governors? Have you installed them? What is the maximum speed a bus should move at, according to technology? This is what we want to hear. What are you talking about? (Laughter)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much Mr Speaker. Thank you for giving way, honourable minister. Most of these accidents are caused by human error. These drivers are not qualified at all. When the United Nations came here to recruit people to go for peacekeeping missions in Bosnia and Darfur, these policemen failed the driving tests in Namboole. 

Mr Speaker, I suggest that we recall all driving permits from all drivers and people get tested afresh. This will reduce the number of accidents in the country. All of us should hand in our driving permits and we go for driving tests again. If we do that, we shall reduce the number of accidents on the roads.  There are some people who get driving permits delivered to their offices and the following day, you see them on the road driving. When you drive along the roads, you notice people driving very badly. That is why there are so many accidents in this country. 

Let your ministry move on this issue; otherwise, we are going to keep mourning and losing our dear ones because Government is not taking measures to reduce the number of accidents.  

MR OBIGA KANIA: Mr Speaker, it is not the police’s responsibility to install speed governors. The responsibility of licensing vehicles and inspecting them is not for the Ministry of Internal Affairs or the police. The duty of the police is to see to it that the vehicles that have been cleared by the Ministry of Works and Transport are working according to the regulations of the licensing board, which it heads.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. This is a matter that concerns saving lives. Yesterday, a media channel reported that 10 Ugandans die every single day because of road accidents, and that is becoming the number one killer in the country. I see the minister here proceeding as if he is under obligation to speak off cuff and speak aloud on matters for which he should bring concrete solutions to save life. 

Mr Speaker, this Parliament should demand that the minister comes up with concrete steps. Government should come up with joint ministerial statements from the Ministry of Works Transport and the Ministry of Internal Affairs on the steps they are taking to ensure that road users are not in danger. 

For the minister to say that it is not their responsibility and it is not their role, are we proceeding well with this matter that concerns saving lives? Just seeing the minister standing on the Floor and casually talk about serious issues - I think Parliament should demand concrete steps taken and action with penalties, if need be, for the offender. Otherwise, are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In terms of procedure, we are proceeding well, but there are gaps. Honourable minister, I heard this from somewhere, but is it really true that Uganda is number one in road accidents in the whole world? You are in charge of enforcing how we use the roads, and there is nobody else in charge of that except you and the people you deploy. If it is true, don’t you think it is a matter of concern, even if you are not in charge of putting speed governors in the cars?  

MR OBIGA KANIA: Mr Speaker, nothing is of more concern to me than the loss of a single Ugandan, whether it is through road accidents or not. I do not know what “standing here casually” means. I stood here to answer a specific question in which somebody asked that I talk about the installation of speed governors in vehicles through my ministry. That is what the person mentioned. 

Mr Speaker, I was going to conclude my statement by actually saying, as I have already indicated, that this is a multifaceted issue, which involves many ministries, and we are doing everything possible to have some of these issues resolved as a team. That is what I said. 

I fully want to agree with the position made by the Member of Parliament of Mbale Municipality, who actually gave ideas about the training of these people. This is because the human element is an extremely important factor in the cause of accidents. Therefore, what Parliament needs to know - I fully agree with hon. Kivumbi, if he so wishes for a statement. However, that statement does not mean that I am standing here casually. No; I am standing seriously. That statement will come. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think it was fair for the Member for Butambala to say that the minister was not serious because I could see the minister’s face. (Laughter) 

2.53
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, the matter for which I arise is very urgent and critical, and I would like to thank you for offering me the opportunity.

Sometime back, districts in Lango and Acholi sub region got communication from the Office of the Prime Minister to the effect that a restocking programme would be undertaken and cows would be supplied. The funding was allocated and in Amolatar District, it was projected that we would get over 400 cows. 

Mr Speaker, a stakeholders meeting was held and the beneficiaries were mobilised. In June this year, 340 cows were supplied to Amolatar District. In spite of the over 400 cows that we were meant to get, we got only 340 and strangely, no explanation was given to the beneficiaries who missed out. 

More importantly, the supply method that was used meant that the beneficiaries were involved in identification of these cows. It did not matter whether you picked your own cow neither did it matter whether you picked from the neighbours herd; what was important was for you, as a beneficiary, to appear with a cow and you were given Shs 500,000.

The question that lingered in our minds is whether there was no element of connivance in this kind of procurement approach. I was wondering whether in Uganda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you be direct? Are you saying that instead of the suppliers giving out cows, they were giving out money? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: To be precise, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please be precise so that we understand what you are saying. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: You are just spot on, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) I would like to interest the Office of the Prime Minister on precisely three areas: 
1. To undertake an evaluation and probably see whether the supply of these cows is going to meet the objective of restocking; 

2. To try to asses and see whether there is value for money regarding the Shs 500,000 given in lieu of a cow – actually the budget is Shs 1,000,000. We are wondering about this because you have procured the so called cows locally, you have not incurred any transport costs and you are paying Shs 500,000; what happens to the balance? 

3. We are also interested in getting to know who mandated that kind of method that has been used. As far as I am concerned, this approach seems wrong, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to note that the NRM Government is committed to fulfilling what we promised the people of Northern Uganda regarding compensation. We have gone ahead to allocate resources - I think this year we put in Shs 20 billion - and we will continue to honour that.

I want to thank the honourable member for being vigilant. That is what it means to monitor these Government programmes as Members of Parliament. We have taken note and we will take up this issue with the Office of the Prime Minister, then we will report tomorrow in the next sitting. Thank you.

2.58
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise a very important issue concerning the people of Ngora. This is the fifth time we are raising this matter concerning the Agule-Alelesi-Ngora Bridge.

In October 2016, the Minister of Works and Transport came and told this House that this bridge had been fixed and complete. Since that time, they have been saying that the bridge has been worked on and yet there is nothing on the ground. As we talk now, if I have to go to Agule, I must use a canoe. 

I want the minister to come and tell us why they keep on deceiving the people of Ngora that this bridge has been worked on yet there is completely nothing on the ground. My people are concerned and they want answers from the Ministry of Works and Transport. Why are they deceiving us all the time? There is a document here saying that they have already worked on this bridge, which is very wrong.

Secondly, it appears as if money was released but somebody has “eaten” it. That is why I pray that we investigate this matter. There might be people who are trying to pretend that they have worked on that bridge yet there is nothing. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are waving a document; what document are you waving?

MR ABALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This one is a copy of the New Vision newspaper of 13 July 2018, page 34 – Otyo, that is where the matter is located. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you said that there is nothing on the ground; is the bridge supposed to be on the ground or on water? (Laughter) Could you be looking in the wrong place? Secondly, you said “otyo”, what does it mean? 

MR ABALA: Mr Speaker, whether it is going to be over or below, there is nothing; no investment has been done.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Alelesi Bridge, which hon. Abala has talked about, connects Ngora District to Pallisa District. However, I keep wondering why, repeatedly, the Minister of Works and Transport together with Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) keep saying this bridge has been done, it is complete and it has been commissioned. 

They have said this right from the Ninth Parliament and we keep disagreeing with them because we are the ones on the ground and we are telling them this is not true. Nothing has ever been done, but they keep bringing it up year in year out, saying that it is complete. Is it possible that someone could have diverted this money for personal use and is trying to mislead Government that this bridge has been done? Nothing has been done; the whole place has water.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has a committee of Parliament visited this bridge?

MR ABALA: No. It is the Minister of State for Teso Affairs who has visited the Agule-Alelesi-Ngora Bridge.

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, a few months ago, I was given the opportunity to visit Ngora following his invitation. That bridge that they were talking about is not worked on. I do not know the bridge UNRA says it has worked on. Therefore, we will request the Minister of Works and Transport tomorrow or at the next sitting to brief the House and the honourable member why they can say in the newspapers that they have done a particular bridge when there is actually nothing on the ground. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we need to clear this. There have been issues with this bridge and we need the minister to come tomorrow and tell the House what is happening. It is now not a just a matter for Members coming from there but a matter of telling this House things that are not true and also the public of Uganda by putting it in the newspapers that it is done whereas it is not. Therefore, somebody should come and explain why these statements are coming out and yet they are actually misleading.

3.05
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue concerns fishing on Lake Victoria. 

I used to be an agent of a Chinese business community before I became a Member of Parliament. One time we went on an expedition on Lake Victoria. There was the business of selling fish maws and they took me as an agent and an interpreter to China, South Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong. 

Ugandans have been deceived that the fish maws from the big Nile Perch are a delicacy for the Asians. That is wrong. I learnt that a fish maw of about of 1.5 kilogrammes - for a big fish it is about two kilogrammes - is eventually moulded. They put something very heavy on the table and expand the fish maw and then they cut it into strong threads. These threads are used during operations for stitching and they left inside the body. From one fish maw, they can make about 600 threads, and each thread costs between US$ 300 and US$ 400. Imagine one Nile Perch is floating with one and a half kilogrammes of gold. It can go up to US$ 40,000 to US$ 50,000.

I asked the minister in charge of fisheries in Uganda if he knows what is going on with this business or not? Uganda has lost trillions of dollars; not only Uganda but Kenya and Tanzania have also lost trillions of dollars. We would not be borrowing money from outside. We have a source of money here - Lake Victoria - which has fish maws. 

Apart from that, the fish maws have a certain membrane; when someone’s brain is damaged, this is the only tissue which they can use to replace the damaged part and a human being can heal. Apart from that, lenses can be made for people who have eye problems. They can cut the eye properly and put this tissue on the eye and you will be able to see again. 

All this costs thousands of dollars. Many people leave here and go to India for eye surgery yet the material comes from Uganda. Uganda has got scientists, engineers and all types of people. However, if I ask the minister in charge of fisheries, does he know the number of Nile Perch which have been taken away from Lake Victoria? 

I have more information concerning Lake Victoria. People always say that Uganda is gold but you do not know. I have been given a short time, otherwise, I would reveal too much. Should I go ahead? (Laughter) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. More information will be given next time. (Laughter)

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we would like to appreciate our colleague for the information he has shared. To the question of whether we know the number of Nile Perch which has been stolen from Lake Victoria, I think the minister in charge of agriculture will answer that in the next sitting.
 
MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable colleague raised a very pertinent issue and the honourable minister who has assumed the role of the Prime Minister has misconstrued the concern raised by the Member. 

He is saying that the issue concerning the number of Nile Perch in Lake Victoria will be responded to by the relevant minister. Is the minister proceeding well? Someone is standing in for the Prime Minister but he cannot even grasp the issue that was raised. From the undertaking he is making, it is like he was absent. Therefore, are we proceeding rightly by accepting his undertaking when it is on a wrong issue?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am beginning to hope that you actually also followed the matter, but that is beside the point. We expect a response on the issue that has been articulated by the Member. I think there are important issues that we need to deal with.

Honourable minister, please notify your colleague that this matter should come back to the House tomorrow and we have a discussion on it. Thank you. Can we now go to the Order Paper. 

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure concerning the national rollout of the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), a programme that concerns our elderly people. 

First, allow me to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Last time, we were pushing for the release of arrears worth over Shs 15.3 billion which had been pending for over three years. I am very happy that the money has been released and as Parliament, we appreciate. We would also like to appreciate the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development because they have done their job, and the entire Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, as a team, we resolved here that let SAGE be rolled out, which was very good from this House, and the elderly people have been expectant. The whole country, from the east to the west, has been waiting and people are really “pregnant” with the expectation for this money. 

Mr Speaker, we learnt through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development that Cabinet directed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be the one to champion the rollout of this programme. The Speaker directed here that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes to this House with a report and tells us what is happening with the rollout - what the status is, where we are and what we are doing. 

Therefore, I stand here to find out whether it shall be proper for us to really proceed without getting this report from the minister concerned. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member rose on a point of procedure. I need guidance from the minister before I rule on this matter. It is true that those statements were made in this House and a decision was taken by this House. Therefore, where are we on this matter?

3.14    
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we agreed in this House and appropriated Shs 15 billion in a supplementary, which we released. We have also budgeted for some activities under this programme for this financial year. We agreed that Government should look at a plan to roll out. We are discussing this and will come back to this House on how we would like to roll out.

However, as per now, the resources which Parliament appropriated are available and it is what is catering for the people at the moment. We have not finalised the plan for the rollout. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you so much, hon. Bahati, for accepting this information. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that when the pilot of SAGE was successful, it was resolved in this House that every financial year, we should begin taking on more other districts. Every subsequent year, money has been provided under SAGE for the rollout to happen. 

I can report, and possibly give information to this House, that in October 2016, the state minister in charge of gender went to Kasese. While attending the coronation function, she read out the amount of money that was coming to Kasese District under SAGE and the population was so excited. She quickly added that Parliament had agreed that every year, we shall be rolling out. 

Mr Speaker, many more districts were put on board. In 2017, we agreed that the whole country benefits from the rollout. That is the reason as to why even the age was raised a little, so that all old citizens of this country can benefit from SAGE. 

Honourable minister, I can remind you that we have been providing money for SAGE. We do not know why the rollout has not happened. When we passed the supplementary, the question was: “Is there money in this supplementary that is going to implement the rollout as suggested?” The answer was, “Yes, we are going to roll out.” Therefore, the question as to whether they are implementing the rollout should not be coming up again. It should simply be a matter of saying, “Yes, we are rolling out; the money was given and this is how we are going to do it.” 

The other question that is being asked was why in some districts you are paying only to the first 100 while in other districts it is all the aged. The matter was not being applied in a similar manner in all districts of the country. In one district, they are saying only 100 elderly persons per subcounty while in a neighbouring district they are saying all the people in the district that are 70 years old and above will get the money. Can we know the real stand? After informing you that we have passed the money and the elderly persons are waiting to receive this money, what is the problem?

MR BAHATI: Let me just clarify this. I think there should not be an impression created that the resources we appropriated for this financial year are enough to cover SAGE across the country. That is what is in question. Parliament wanted us to roll out to all the districts but the resources that we have appropriated are not enough to cover all the districts. What we are studying is how best we can phase this programme because it is not possible to do it in one financial year.

We need around Shs 317 billion to roll out to the entire country, which we did not appropriate this financial year. The resources that we have are to cover those districts that we considered. What Cabinet is doing now is to study how to phase this programme. We are looking at this in the context of next financial year, not this one. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What the House must know is that we have people who are willing to support this country. They are going to create employment, pay salaries and the like. It is now up to Government to give a portion so that the rollout can be completed. 

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda talks about discrimination. Right now, one district is getting SAGE money and the neighbouring district is not getting it. I would like the House to see the implications of this on the elderly persons in the other districts. As Parliament, we should not be seen to be practising discrimination when we are the lawmakers.

Minister, is it very difficult for the Parliament of Uganda to put this money in the budget so that the elderly persons are supported and they do not die as a result of things they were not supposed to die of? I think the House is just reluctant. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development likes to yield to pressure. If there is no pressure, then they do not act, but if they are put under pressure, then they yield. I would like to assure you that the elderly persons deserve this money and we have to put it in the budget. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, there is no doubt that this Government supports the elderly. It is however important to know the constraints involved in debating a budget after it has been passed by this Parliament. 

We are the ones who appropriated these resources for a number of districts and we are saying, let us handle those districts now. The other districts in the entire country require Shs 317 billion and this was not appropriated for this financial year. We are now planning in the context of the next financial year. I think this message should come out properly

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I can see Members here bringing old information of 2012, 2013, 2015. Therefore, I think the right person to respond to these matters with the latest information is the chairperson of the gender committee. I remember the day the budget was read, the Speaker and all the Members asked what happened to SAGE. There were issues raised, like the World Bank is committed to do a, b, c, d, what is the counterpart funding of the Government side? We passed a resolution here. 

Mr Speaker, procedurally, if we could allow the chairperson of the Committee on Gender to give us the latest on what will solve this, it would help us to guide the discussion. I see the minister is trying to take us back with old information. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ALEX NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, the issue we are talking about here is nothing new. We have made recommendations for the last seven years that there must be a national wealth programme. We have made it clear to all and sundry that you cannot sustain a programme without political support of Members of Parliament. We have made it clear that the majority of MPs are of the view that no countrywide rollout, no SAGE. Therefore, what we should demand from the minister is that he should produce a costed plan and framework for the rollout within the next two or three weeks and bring it to this august House.

The minister has promised next year, but this is not the first time he has said this. This reminds me of the old story of tomorrow never comes. We have heard many times in the past the honourable minister saying, “next financial year”.

Mr Speaker, my request is that we demand the finance minister to present to this august House a costed plan and budget that will be handled in the next financial year to cover all the districts. We need to get this out for discussion. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is going to be important for us to understand what the real meaning of “next financial year” is. There has been reference to “next financial year” for the last five years. Is there a new definition to “next financial year” only understood by the Minister of Finance? 

Honourable minister, two financial years ago, you said, “next financial year” and today you are saying, “next financial year” and in 2020, you will say “next financial year”. So what is “next financial year”, honourable minister? (Applause) 

Honourable members, let us be fair. This programme has been piloted in 20 districts and then I think it went to 25 districts. It is now in 41 districts. There are 121 districts in Uganda. Is it fair to the rest of the country that the national budget of this country can only support a few pilot districts? Really, honourable minister; please, can you say something a little more serious than “next financial year”? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the financial year I am talking about is the one of 2019/2020. However, I also would like to remind Members that the responsibility of appropriation and priority setting is a shared responsibility between the Executive and Parliament. We brought a budget to Parliament with priorities and Parliament decided to apportion money only for a few districts – (Interjection) - yes, it was passed here!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What had you proposed for SAGE, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the point I am making –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are saying it is Parliament that appropriates but the question is: what money did you propose for this Parliament to appropriate for SAGE? Proposal is not by Parliament. 

MR BAHATI: Well, it is my understanding that even when the Executive proposes, Parliament has the authority to change priorities because the resources we have – (Interjection) - Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter. We need Shs 317 billion to cover all the districts. We have approved Shs 45 billion and committing that we handle the rest of the districts in the financial year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have this specific matter of SAGE looked at carefully by the committee that will be confirmed tomorrow and within a short time – because it is a matter that we already know – for it to come with those recommendations that have already been discussed several times. All the options have been looked at, for example, if age is raised to this, this number of people will be covered; it will cost this amount of money; the numbers are done. 

Can we now have the committee responsible for gender come back to this House and give us a proper recombination on how to handle this matter so that we can take a final decision where we will not again be reminded that we are the ones who do appropriation yet the monies that are proposed for us to appropriate – if they propose Shs 45 billon, is there a way this Parliament could raise it to Shs 350 billion? Parliament normally tries to accommodate what Government has proposed. We cannot go from Shs 35 billion to Shs 350 billon for a particular budget line. I think you should be fair to Parliament, honourable minister.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, for example, in one instance - and the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget is here to bear me witness - we had proposed zero resources for the roads in the districts but Parliament allocated Shs 117 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From where? Not from the same budget line and from the same ministry? Okay, tell us what you proposed in the same ministry for SAGE? Give us the numbers. Let us take the whole budget of the ministry responsible for gender - is it Shs 350 billion? Please, let us take this matter seriously. It is unfair to finance 45 districts when there are 130 districts. (Applause) I have referred the matter to the committee in charge of gender. Let them handle it so that we have a proper debate and conclude it properly.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATE OF SECURITY IN THE COUNTRY

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, this morning we had a joint security meeting of all the ministries, which are involved and we came up with a statement, which is being drafted. We had asked our senior, the Minister of Internal Affairs, to contact your office and inform you that this item be stood over today and we make a statement tomorrow, subject to availability of time. 

This is because we would like to make a joint statement covering all the departments and what the President made and discussed twice with Parliament the other time. Therefore, I kindly request that, if it is possible, we stand over this matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have this statement tomorrow afternoon. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ALLEGATIONS OF KIDNAP OF WORKERS AND TRESPASS AT THE MTN DATA CENTRE ON 7 JULY 2018 BY UNAUTHORISED PERSONNEL SUSPECTED TO BE ISO OPERATIVES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received a notification from the Minister of Security that he would not be able to make this statement today; he will make it tomorrow.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE 15 PER CENT INCREMENT IN TUITION FEES AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Mr Speaker, last week, hon. Anna Adeke raised a concern over the 15 per cent tuition fees increment at Makerere University. It is true Makerere University has increased tuition fees by 15 per cent. This time the council, management and the students’ leadership were all involved in the decision making process. Our prayer is that we give this initiative all the support possible.

You recall, Mr Speaker, that the Makerere University Council decided to raise the interim fees in the range of 49 – 91 per cent for selected programmes but the proposed reviews were still far below the unit cost recommended by the Rwendeire committee. This was an interim measure, pending Government position on unit costs for the academic programmes.

Mr Speaker, the new fees structure was widely advertised in the media. The students’ leadership, through the guild representative council, resisted the university council decision and requested the council to defer its decision, pending further consultation and students’ input. The university council accepted the idea by the Guild Representative Council (GRC). It deferred the implementation of her decision to allow for consultations. The guild representative council set up a committee mandated to study the university council’s decision and make an input. 

The committee setup by the GRC, benchmarked one regional university in the East African Community country - Nairobi University. They established that Makerere University charges fees that are much lower than fees charged by Nairobi University. The GRC committee also noted that it was not feasible to charge the unit cost as proposed by the Rwendeire committee, as most students would not afford the proposed rates.

Mr Speaker, tables 1 and 2 below depict differences in fees structure between Nairobi University and Makerere University in selected disciplines. For example, Bachelor of Medicine & Surgery at Nairobi University costs Shs 17,538,000 while at Makerere University, it cots at Shs 2,688,000. Bachelor of Laws, at Nairobi University costs Shs 6,529,000 while at Makerere University it costs Shs 2,520,000. I will not take you through the details.

The committee submitted a report to the chairperson of the university council with the following key recommendations:

    1. That instead of increments ranging from 49 to 90 per cent on selected programmes, fees for undergraduate programmes should be increased across the board by 15 per cent, for the next five years, beginning with academic year 2018/2019;
    2. That each cohort of students would maintain the same fees structure for the duration of the study;
    3. That the new fees structure would not affect the continuing students; and
    4. That the university council and management put in place measures to ensure that service delivery is improved. 

Mr Speaker, the university council accepted and endorsed the recommendations made by the GRC committee on the new fees structure.

Mr Speaker, there is now a consensus between the Makerere University Council, management and the GRC, a body that represents the students community at Makerere University. However, as I said at the beginning, our prayer is that we give this initiative all the support possible. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports notes that the university needs to issue admission letters to first year students as soon as possible, to enable parents and students prepare for commencement of the first semester of academic year 2018/2019. I beg submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Technically, this question arose from urgent matters; it was raised by specific a Member and so, we are going to treat it as such. Can I have the Member who raised this matter ask any supplementary questions, if any? 

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, before the Member comes, may I lay on the Table, the statement that I have just presented?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We were hoping that you had already done it because it was already uploaded. 

3.41
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for addressing Parliament about the 15 per cent tuition fees increment in Makerere University. However, there are still many issues in contention. One, the minister as a representative of Government, has not told us how this increment is going to affect Government’s subvention to the university. 

Mr Speaker, time and again, Makerere University is being run by private students. Government’s subvention has remained constant; 15 per cent is being put as an increment on tuition for private students. I would like to know whether Government will also increase the 15 per cent for each Government sponsored students aware that the budget has already been passed. We would like to exercise equity between Government sponsored students and private students.

Makerere University is still a public institution of higher learning. Therefore, why must private students shoulder the entire burden? The minister should tell us where the 15 per cent increment is in the budget for Government sponsored students for the next academic year. Otherwise, short of that, it is not justifiable at all, in terms of equity, for Government to stand here and support the 15 per cent increment, which has been done on a wrong benchmark. How can Government benchmark with Nairobi University in Kenya.  Kenya funds its budget by more than half per cent; it is domestically funded. How much of our budget is domestically funded?

Mr Speaker, the Kenyan economy is stronger and so for anyone to compare its tuition at Nairobi University with that of Makerere University is not justifiable in any way. Therefore, it does not make the decision that Makerere University took correct and we are here to correct - (Interruption)

MR ABBAS AGABA: Thank you very much, hon. Adeke for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to my colleague in three forms. 

First of all, honourable minister, there is nothing democratic about increment of fees. Whether students agree or not, if the university is going to increase fees, they will do so and so, the students have little right in the decision to increase fees even when they are consulted. Anyhow, this Parliament would like to know the cause for the increment of the tuition fees. 

Makerere University is the oldest Government University we have. Secondly, the reason we have Government universities is to enable education for as many as possible, meaning that Government shoulders responsibility for as many Ugandans as it can. In fact, our argument has been that we should widen the coverage that Government sponsors as many students as possible and that we even reduce the number of private students in Government universities. However, the moment we increase the fees, it means the proportion of private students in Government universities will increase.

Mr Speaker, the role of Government is to shoulder the bigger responsibility to enable many people access education.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought you rose on point of information but now you are debating.

MR ABBAS AGABA: Sorry but let me say the final piece of information. The comparison between Nairobi University and Makerere University or any other university in the region does not arise as cause for increment of fees. Otherwise that would mean that you will have to compare the salary of Members of Parliament of Uganda with that of the Members of Parliament of Kenya and increase their salaries accordingly yet Uganda is totally different and our setting is different. 

Therefore, we would like to be convinced by the reasons Makerere University is giving to increase tuition fees when the sample space from which they got students comprises children of very poor parents who cannot afford the fees. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member has to allow you to give the information. You cannot just say, “further information” and you stand up. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give - the minister has put it perfect that the increment is not going to affect continuing students. 

However, I would like to inform the House that the Makerere Guild Council today does not represent the guild of the future generation of Makerere University. It therefore, has no obligation to determine the fees structure of the generation that is not yet in the university.

The second piece of information that I would like to give is that the strikes that we have had at Makerere University and other public universities have always arisen out of the present situations. Therefore, you cannot say that because the guild council has accepted this increment, the next generation will automatically accept the same.

Lastly, whenever we benchmark, we should also put other factors into consideration. For example, hon. minister –(Interjection)– yes, this is good information to you. When we were considering the constitutional amendment of Article 102 (b), we never benchmarked Kenya. Why do you think we should benchmark Kenya today on this? Thank you.

MS ADEKE: Mr Speaker, it is really unjustifiable that Government should let this decision be taken by Makerere University alone, honestly. The Ministry of Education and Sports must remain in charge. 

What I am seeking your indulgence on and this entire House to do is to require the Ministry of Education and Sports to stay that 15 per cent increment until they justify the reasons. The ministry should give us the proper reasons, other than just comparing this university to Kenya and also indicate Government’s subvention and non-increment thereof, regarding the same percentage. We know that the budget has already passed and we have not made any allocations to the increment of Government -

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Anna Adeke, for the information. First of all, it is important that you realise that Makerere University is a public university. For much of the resources that support that university, Government pays much more for its students than the private universities. In fact, Government supplements otherwise it would be much more than what I have quoted. I have the figures. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the management – (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hate to recognise that I am making this. Honourable minister, you are aware as a scholar and a former professor at the same university that Makerere University continues to struggle with issues of subvention. You will recognise that the time Government sends this money is not the right time. You further recognise that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you rose on procedure. You should be addressing me. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, the minister recognises that the money that comes from Government never gets to the university on time. In so doing, it disintegrates the planning system of the university. He is also aware, as the minister in charge of Higher Education, that Government support per student is up to about Shs 4,000 a day. 

Mr Speaker, would we be proceeding well to take in or welcome the minister’s position when in actual sense it contradicts the planning or the existing reality in Makerere University? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, that is why I was trying to guide you because you really did not have a procedural matter to raise. (Laughter) You wanted to challenge the minister’s position but you are trying to use that prerogative right of procedure to do that. You should have just asked for clarification from the minister. I am sure the minister would have obliged. 

However, now that it is a procedural matter, those are factual matters that are not within my knowledge. I am unable to rule on it. 

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much for that ruling. I would like to end by pointing out that the reason why they had to increase the fees was to improve on service delivery. Definitely, they have even agreed on where and what this money is going to do. The most important thing this time is the involvement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why it is really important for us to use the rules properly. If you have a matter this substantial and you bring it as an urgent matter, in which case the response will be the way it is, then we lose the debate. 

This matter is so important and should have been discussed by motion so that we can have a full debate. Now, we are trying to debate on a housing that cannot accommodate a debate. Honourable minister, please wind up.

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much. All that I wanted to say is that the current leadership of the students, management and the Council are sitting and talking the same language this time. We must appreciate this. You know that this has not been happening before and that explains why we have been having ‘wars’, strikes and battles, which will not happen this time. I would like to pray that you support this initiative and we see our university moving very well. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PROCEDURE FOR SIM CARD REGISTRATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the honourable minister here? Well, the honourable minister should have been here but he came and said that the housing of this statement could have been better handled by a person in charge of the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). The requirement for identification, identity cards and the requirement that they should certify comes from NIRA and NIRA is not within the docket of this particular ministry. I do not know why the minister is not here.

I am now directing that the minister under whose docket NIRA falls should come with a statement and handle this matter tomorrow. If there is need to have a joint statement, so be it but the issue should be properly handled by the Minister for Internal Affairs, under which NIRA falls. 

A supplementary statement or a joint statement can be also made, together with the Minister for Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance. That will be tomorrow. Minister of Internal Affairs, please pass on the message. Thank you.

Clerk, extract the minutes and transmit to the minister this evening so that the minister comes prepared for this statement tomorrow. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE AVAILABILITY OF POLIO VACCINES IN HEALTH FACILITIES IN THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I understand there was another question on circumcision of children. You could use the chance now to present both statements and we see how to proceed. 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that on, I think, Wednesday, hon. Okoth Othieno, Member of Parliament for West Budama North, raised an issue of concern of forced circumcision of male babies in Busolwe Hospital and Butaleja as a whole. 

Mr Speaker, allow me inform the House that we have a Safe Male Circumcision Policy for 2010 which is still in force. This policy is very clear that circumcision should be promoted and it is available amongst all age groups. 

However, for males below 18 years, it is carried out with a written consent of their parents. So, children must not be circumcised without their parents’ consent. Those above 18 years are considered adults and therefore can make decisions on their own on whether to get circumcised or not.

The information I have is that in October 2017, we had only two circumcisions of babies after clinical diagnosis was carried out and it was established that they had a condition known as phimosis. Phimosis occurs where male babies are born with foreskins closed, resulting into difficulty or painful urination and increased risk to Urinary Tract Infections (UTI). Of course, this prompted babies, with the consent of the parents, aware of the condition that the babies were in, to be circumcised. 

We have, therefore, no information of children being circumcised without the consent of the parents. I, therefore, would like to request the honourable member, hon. Okoth Othieno, if he has any additional information regarding these children and their names, to pass it over so that I can do the necessary investigation and take action against the health workers if it is proven they were forcefully circumcising babies. Otherwise, the records that I received from the hospital do not indicate so. Mr Speaker, that is the information I would like to give the honourable member.

Mr Speaker, I now move onto the Polio but before I read this statement, I tried to consult the National Medical Stores (NMS) and I have been informed that we now have adequate Septrin in the country. However, because of challenges that I am going to state regarding Polio, they were unable to deliver them in time.

So, allow me move to this statement regarding the non-availability of Polio vaccines in the country. It was last Thursday when the Member of Parliament for Rubanda, hon. Prossy Akampulira, raised an issue of concern after she had taken her baby for vaccination at Nakasero Hospital where she was informed that there were no vaccines. She then moved to another facility and she was informed that this was a general problem all over most of the health facilities in and around Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, I tried to make a follow up with the National Medical Stores and I have been informed that we have adequate quantities of vaccines at the National Medical Stores and vaccines are delivered once at the beginning of every month.

The last deliveries were made in June and in July the National Medical Stores has not been able to deliver any vaccines upcountry because of the directive from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Mr Speaker, allow me inform the House that in a letter dated 27 March 2018, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury wrote to National Medical Stores, informing them that effective 2018/2019 Financial Year, the National Medical Stores was to operate as all the other Ministries, Departments and Agencies. The implication of this is that the National Medical Stores now has to wait for funds to be released from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development before they can carry out the operations.

They have been operating their own accounts and there was a lot of flexibility in that even before the Government releases are made, they were able to finance, fuel the medicine trucks, service the vehicles and make deliveries as and when desired.

Therefore, whereas the National Medical Stores has funds on its accounts at Standard Chartered Bank and Stanbic Bank, including Bank of Uganda, the Accountant-General on 4 July 2018 also directed the National Medical Stores that payments can only be made on the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS). So, they cannot touch this money that is in these accounts.

The National Medical Stores cannot operate as the Ministries, Departments and Agencies and effectively deliver on its mandate which we all know is to efficiently procure medicines and medical supplies and distribute them to various health facilities across the country. 

The National Medical Stores operation and supply chains operations are now delayed because of this stringent condition that has been placed on them by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Allow me, Mr Speaker, inform you that for the supply chain of the essential medicines and health supplies to run smoothly, there must not be any interruption in the flow of resources especially funding. 

The system, therefore, imposed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on NMS is partially responsible for the current stock out of the polio vaccine and the other medications that are delivered on a monthly basis to the various health facilities.

Mr Speaker, as I mentioned before, we had anticipated this situation and when we received that letter, we actually interfaced with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and tried to inform them about the uniqueness of the National Medical Stores and why this Parliament, in its wisdom, established it as an autonomous institution. 

We also appeared before the Committee on Health while it was scrutinising the ministerial policy statements of the health sector and explained the implications of implementing the directive of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury.

Mr Speaker, the committee appreciated the negative effects and agreed that the status quo of NMS finance operations should be maintained until an evaluation was done. This was contained in the sectoral committee’s report to this House, specifically page 29, if I can just refer honourable members. This report was adopted by the House.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, just to inform Members that while the House approved the committee’s report with the recommendation that the status quo remains, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development went ahead with its decision and disregarded what Parliament had approved. 

So, NMS had to comply with the directive of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury and the Accountant-General but it is expected that this kind of situation may affect the operation of NMS and we may see challenges as we move forward with the mandate of delivering medications and health supplies to the various health facilities across the country.

The development partners such as UK Aid, UNICEF and others that deliver commodities to NMS and support the National Medical Stores by paying a service charge to NMS to deliver these items to health facilities, in principle, have refused to pay the service charge to the Consolidated Fund. 

The partners have been depositing this money directly to the National Medical Stores accounts. However, this is now going to cause another challenge because NMS cannot receive these drugs from these partners and yet they are not going to get the service fee for delivering these medications to the various health facilities across the country.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we have engaged the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on this matter as seen from the letter to the Accountant-General which I am going to lay on the Table. This letter is dated 16 July 2018 and another one dated 6 July 2018 to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health. My senior colleague had a meeting with the PS/ST to discuss this matter. However, all has been in vain.

So, Mr Speaker, just to conclude, I would like to state that we have adequate quantity of vaccines in the country. We have Septrin, other essential medicines and health supplies in the country. However, the challenge is this IFMIS that has been imposed on the National Medical Stores.

I beg to move, Mr Speaker. I lay these letters on the Table from NMS to the Accountant-General and the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the member who raised this matter have a supplementary question? If she does not have, then the rules are clear. Yes, honourable minister.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We tried to engage her and probably she had gone to another meeting. However, she did indicate that she was raising this matter as a matter of concern for the House to note that there is this challenge and for me to respond. Therefore, she did not have any addition to make. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, rules are rules. Are there supplementary questions? Maybe I take the institutional chairperson - Honourable member, you press once to request and then they will act on it.

4.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information on the issue of the National Medical Stores. We got the information of the instructions from the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury to change the mode of financial operations.

From the information we heard and what we analysed, we thought it would be better for NMS to proceed as it were operating as a state enterprise and not as an MDA up to when Parliament and the committee on behalf of Parliament, completely assesses the impact of the change in operations. We thought issues to do with medicines needed special attention.

I would like to assure Members in the House that if we change from the business model, in the immediate term may be for I do not know what will happen in the long term, we are going to suffer more shortages because of the way procurement and supply of medicines is done and the way the finance ministry operates.

That is why, in the wisdom of the committee, we had recommended that we maintain this status quo as we take time to assess and come up with a proper recommendation. However, to our surprise the PS/ST went on and gave instructions contrary to the parliamentary recommendations especially on the issue of budget and appropriation.

Therefore, we are not comfortable with what the finance ministry is doing. We wish to request the House through you, Mr Speaker, to recommend that we go back to status quo as earlier approved by this House as we assess because what we are seeing now is the result of the PS/ST disregarding the recommendation of the House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. The issue of medicine in all hospitals in Uganda is a serious one be it in Oyam, Bugiri, Ntungamo, Mbale or Moyo - across the country, there is shortage of medicine.

The minister comes here and tells us that she has just checked with the National Medical Stores and there is medicine for Polio and Septrin is available. People are not interested in knowing whether the medicines are available in the National Medical Stores. What they are interested in is whether the medicine has been delivered to the hospitals.

Mr Speaker, this country’s representatives go to international conferences – the Abuja Declaration says each country should put 15 per cent of national budget to the health sector. However, is it procedurally right to go to international conferences and say we are going to do this and when we come back, finance ministry is not able to give medicine to the Ministry of Health to treat our people? Is this procedurally right?

We want a full statement from the Ministry of Health on the issue of supply of medicines to all hospitals. Mr Speaker, even in your hospital the other time I was there, there was no medicine. No medicine everywhere in the country.

Mr Speaker, if we asked all Members, even on that side, they would say there is no medicine in the hospitals. Therefore, we must take this seriously and I request that the minister comes and makes a statement on the supply of medicine to all hospitals.

Secondly, the National Medial Stores purchases -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you rose on Procedure.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I am finalising on procedure. Madam minister, is it procedurally right for the National Medical Stores to continue purchasing cheap medicines from India and when they come to this country, they do not help most of our patients? Is it procedurally right? Why don’t you get medicines from famous pharmacies in Switzerland, Belgium or England that are known to help most of the ailments in this country and you continue purchasing medicines from India? Is it procedurally right? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are making this quite tough for the presiding officer to be dealing with facts. However, the key issue is this honourable finance minister and that is why we were looking for you. The National Medical Stores has been operating a system that has apparently worked. Parliament advised that that method of operation should continue.

The Secretary to the Treasury and Permanent Secretary Ministry of Finance changes it. Now we have drugs in the National Medical Stores which cannot be delivered to hospitals because they have to wait and apply the IFMS that finance ministry likes to use.

Parliament recommended that they go with the old system.  Procurement and supply of drugs cannot be treated any other way except like a business. However, you have now said it should be treated the same way like those who are doing other things other than supply of drugs.

Why did this happen? What is the justification for this change and why was Parliament ignored in its recommendations? Can we go back to the system that worked? That is the issue.

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, it is good for Government agencies to operate from one portal. It encourages efficiency, transparency and accountability. However, that should not guarantee or mean that we should be inefficient.

It is possible for the National Medical Stores to operate on IFMS and achieve the same objective of delivering services on time. It is very possible. 

However, I will check this evening and tomorrow morning, I will come back to the House and tell the situation. However, it is possible to operate the system we are operating now and achieve the same objective of delivering services to the people of Uganda. IFMS actually improves payment systems and does not do the opposite. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are coming tomorrow with clarification, why should I extend this now? Honourable members, the sticky issue is whether the system that has been changed has affected the delivery of medicine to the health centres and hospitals. Hon. David Bahati is going to consult and come back tomorrow.

Let us have this matter tomorrow. Okay? If the National Medical Stores is behaving in a funny way to show that the system cannot work, it will also come out. Then we shall deal with it.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg your indulgence because I am raising a matter of procedure that concerns the docket of Ministry of Works and Transport given that I have seen the minister here. 

MV Kyoga II, a ferry that has been constructed to transport travellers from Amolatar across Lake Kyoga onto this side of Nakasongola - Mr Speaker, when you visited Amolatar last year - I do not quite remember the date it is now one year - you saw the ferry yourself; it is still stationary to-date. I visited your office and you had the kind intervention and talked to the honourable Minister of Works and Transport about it. Where Government has committed a lot of tax payers’ money but there is no intervention.

Last year, I took personal initiative and wrote to the Minister of Works and Transport inquiring when the ferry would be commissioned but to-date, I have not received any response and I keep wondering how I should communicate to a minister in Government to support me a Member of Parliament to adequately communicate to my people in Amolatar.

This ferry is still stationary and yet, its construction caused a lot of anxiety amongst all the travellers. I had the opportunity to host hon. Obua, who can attest to this that the ferry is still there.

People want explanation but I do not have the capacity to give it. I am stuck.  What could have happened to the ferry?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since you cannot explain, why don’t you now ask the minister to explain? (Laughter)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Exactly. The minister should be able to tell us and the nation what could have happened to this ferry. 
And lastly, Mr Speaker, you recall that even the water weed that invaded Lake Kyoga in 2013 has now taken five years.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you rose on a procedural matter and you have said that you cannot explain it. Let the minister explain.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO:  Mr Speaker, is Government proceeding right? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, help the people of Nakasongola and Amolatar and handle the issue of the other bridge, which your report says was complete. 

4.21
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba Ntege): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg for your indulgence; I was not here when Members talked about the bridge. Could I be apprised on that issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed with MV Kyoga as they bring information on the bridge. 

MS AZUBA NTEGE: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to thank the Member of Parliament for Kioga County. I wish to come back tomorrow with all the details. About him not getting a response from me, I will come back tomorrow because I know I respond to all letters addressed to me.

The Member of Parliament called me about this bridge and when I looked at the papers, I realised that it was not under UNRA. I took it up with the authority and regrettably, it was reported that it does not belong to UNRA and had not yet been done. It is being managed by the Ministry of Works and Transport and as we are all aware, with all our finances we go –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, she has not even made a statement. 

MS AZUBA NTEGE: This bridge is under the Ministry of Works and Transport. We have got finances over three years doing these bridges and this is one of them. UNRA has never done anything about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the actual position of the bridge? Is it finished as it is being reported there, is UNRA acting properly to say that it has finished the bridge, which is not in its docket and secondly, has not done anything about it? Is it proper for UNRA to publish such facts? 

MS AZUBA NTEGE: Mr Speaker, it is not proper; I have taken it up with UNRA and we have discussed it with them. The status is that the bridge is not completed but we are working on it. 

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of Parliament for this area and when I see contradictions here, I get disturbed. The minister says that it is not under the docket of UNRA but in their 10 years anniversary, UNRA placed it in their supplement.

I am getting confused. The same minister who says that this bridge is not under UNRA has said that there is no money. At the same time, she said that they are working on it. Which company is working on this bridge? Who is the contractor? I need a clarification.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I seek this clarification as the shadow Minister for Works and Transport. The honourable minister said that the bridge is not under UNRA but the honourable Member said that UNRA mentioned about it as one of its activities. 

The honourable member and the minister should explain to this House whether that bridge is linked to any road. If so, who maintains it? Is it UNRA or the district or the sub county so that we can clearly know the mandate of either UNRA or the district or sub county under the community access roads. We cannot maintain a road without a bridge. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister said that the bridge is under the ministry, so that matter does not arise. The relevant question is: who are the contractors working on this bridge, because apparently there is no work going on? 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, we may be looking at an issue at its face value but if you go deeper into this matter, you may find that if UNRA is claiming to be working on the bridge and it is in their budget, they might be receiving money for it. Then the ministry in its own mandate, aside from UNRA, is also budgeting for the same bridge. The same bridge is being paid for doubly under UNRA and the ministry. 

The other issue I would like to state is that we do not have a minister for UNRA. We have only a Minister of Works and Transport. Therefore, if there is an issue that affects UNRA, it is in her docket. It would not be correct for the minister to say, “This one is with us but you know the money….” 

Both UNRA and Ministry of Works and Transport are all under your docket. We then come back to the question of who is the contractor and how much money did you put on this construction? We would ask whether you are in control.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Leader of the Opposition, what you are raising is pertinent. This honourable minister is saying the bridge is not under UNRA but Ministry of Works and Transport and so, they are the ones managing it. I do not know what the description of managing entails. 

This is supposed to be a bridge constructed. There is a road coming from Ngora ending at the water and the other from Agule County in Pallisa District also ends at the water. This bridge is supposed to connect the two districts. There is not even a trip of murram on that road. Therefore, when you say that you are managing it, you are misleading this House. 

Specifically to what the honourable Leader of the Opposition has said, sometime last year or in 2016, the honourable Member of Parliament for Agule County protested a presentation by the honourable minister here - even hon. Aogon hinted on it - that the bridge had been completed and commissioned. The minister herself presented to this House that they had completed that bridge and commissioned it.

We would like to know - what is exactly happening? Is there someone who has eaten money for that bridge and he is trying to mislead Parliament that the bridge is over or not? That is the information I wanted to give the Leader of the Opposition.

MS NTEGE AZUBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. About this bridge, two years ago, I read out a report. I came back later and told you that there was a mistake between Alelesi and another bridge whose name looks similar. I corrected that and it is on record that I did.

Alelesi is being done under the Ministry of Works and Transport through the small bridges project. This year, we have allocated finances towards that bridge. I visited it myself last year. I am sorry I do not have the figure regarding how much or which contractor is going to do it. If you allow me, I will come back tomorrow and give you all the information. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE WATER CRISIS IN KISORO DISTRICT

4.32
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Mr Speaker, I would like to respond to the issue raised by the District Member of Parliament, hon. Rose Kabagyenyi on the issue of inadequate water supply in Kisoro District. I would like to inform Parliament and the public in general that the dry spell that is quickly approaching – (Interjections) - do not disorganise me – (Laughter) - I would like to inform Parliament that the dry spell is quickly approaching in most parts of the country hence some areas will experience challenges and intermittent water supply and climate change.

However, Government of Uganda and the ministry in particular is and has been implementing various water supply environment restoration and other related activities. 

Mr Speaker, in response to the concerns raised by hon. Rose
Kabagyenyi, the Ministry of Water and Environment and in particular National Water and Sewerage Corporation is aware of the situation in Kisoro District.  

National Water and Sewerage Corporation took over management of Kisoro water supply and sewerage services from a private operator in July 2013 and later on, the water supply system for Bunagana Border Town in 2015, which had some major operational challenges due to dried-up borehole source.

The water supply system at the time of takeover comprised the following:

Chuho Water Treatment Plant of a capacity of 770,000 litres a day from where water is pumped to reservoirs on Kisoro hill of a total capacity of 600,000 litres and a reservoir at Mutolere parish of a capacity of 45,000 litres.

From Kisoro hill reservoirs, water is supplied to Kisoro town by gravity and part of the water is pumped to a 600,000 litre capacity Karambi reservoir using a booster pumping station of capacity 35, 000 litres per hour. 

From Karambi Reservoir, water gravitates to a number of high altitude areas including Nyarusiza Sub-county. At Nyarusiza sub-county, water is boosted from Nyarusiza Booster Station I to Nyarusiza Booster Station II where water is pumped to Nyarusiza Reservoir of capacity 100,000 litres that supplies Nyarusiza Sub-county and parts of Muramba subcounty.

From Mutolere Parish reservoir, water gravitates to Mutolere village and parts of Nyakabande subcounty.

Kisoro town has a sewerage system where sewerage was treated using lagoons that had mal-functioned and had become a major source of nuisance to the town dwellers.

At the time of takeover from the private operator, many communities within the Kisoro water supply area were not receiving supply with exception of the then Kisoro Town Council and a few neighbouring areas due to the limited capacity of the water supply infrastructure and unreliable power supply.

Water and sewerage services improvement measures undertaken since takeover by National Water and Sewerage Corporation:

Completed improvement measures

Since the takeover of the management of the Kisoro water and sewerage scheme in 2013 and Bunagana Border Town water supply scheme in 2015, the corporation has implemented the following interventions:

    1. Upgraded the capacity of the Water Treatment Plant at Chuho from 770,000 litres per day to 2,200,000 litres per day.
    2. Installed a standby generator at Chuho to optimise production and the water treatment plant.
    3. Upgraded the booster station at Kisoro hill from 330,000 litres a day to 770,000 litres a day. 
    4. Laid two kilometre water main interconnection from Chuho Water Distribution system at Maziba and Bunagana system, to alleviate the water situation in Bunagana due to dried up borehole source.
    5. Undertook a total of 14km of water mains extensions to some villages in the sub-counties of Nyakabande, Nyarusiza, Chahi, Nyakinama, Muramba and Kisoro Municipality.
    6. Upgraded water supply system to Mutolere through installation of high capacity pump at Chuho 
    7. Construction of 160,000 litre capacity tank at Mutolere Parish hill and expansion of water transmission and distribution system, to adequately serve Mutolere village and parts of Nyakabande and boost supply to some parts of Kisoro Municipality.

Mr Speaker, the corporation, using internally generated financial resources, is in the process of implementing the Nkanka Water Supply Project, which aims at providing a long-term solution to water supply challenges of Kisoro. This project is being implemented in a phased approach.

Phase 1

Phase I of the project is expected to be completed within six months and comprises of the following key outputs:

    1. Construction of Water Treatment Plant at Nkanka in Nyarubuye Sub-County, of capacity 3,000 litres per day.
    2. Laying of 6.5km of transmission main of 200mm diameter size, from Nkanka Water Treatment Plant to Ruko hill.
    3. Construction of water reservoirs at Ruko hill of capacity 260,000 litres.
    4. Interconnection of the new Nkanka system, with the Chuho water and Supply System and laying of 2km of distribution main.

Phase 2

Mr Speaker, Phase II will involve: 

    1. Laying 20km of water distribution mains to supply sub-counties of Nyarubuye, Nyaruzisa, Muramba and parts of Kisoro Municipality.
    2. Installation of water booster at Maziba and upgrading Nyarusiza water.
    3. Laying of 20km of water distribution mains to supply sub-counties of Nyarubuye, Nyaruzisa, Muramba and parts of Kisoro Municipality.
    4. Installation of water booster at Maziba and upgrading Nyarusiza water booster stations I and II and increasing the storage capacity –(Interruption)

MR MAKUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of Kisoro put a concern, that there is a water crisis there. However, I am surprised that the minister is giving us a work plan and a programme. He must explain what exactly is happening in Kisoro; why is there a crisis? Instead, he is giving us a full paper; making a full presentation. Is the minister proceeding well to the needs of the people of Kisoro? There is a crisis is current, instead, he is giving us a paper. I wonder if the minister is proceeding very well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I intended to give general guidelines on how we handle urgent questions and responses to them. When we capture and transmit to the minister that you are required to make a ministerial statement on a particular issue, you do not know where to begin from and where to end. This is because you are supposed to make a ministerial statement and yet, that should not be it. Maybe, I should use this time to clarify on this issue.

Rule 46 deals with questions – that all questions must be answered with notice. First give notice of the question and then you ask the question. However, there are exceptions created, where the matter is very urgent, you do not have to dissent with that notice. All you do is interface with the Speaker and agree that the question should be raised.

So, all questions, therefore, that should come under this – when they are coming back from the minister, they cannot come back as ministerial statements. They can come back as answers to specific questions that were asked. 

The way we are doing – now you can look at item 4, it is a ministerial statement, item 5, “statement by honourable minister.” They are not statements. They are responses to specific questions. By doing this, we remove the relevancy of the Member that initiated the question. The Order Paper should show that question by honourable member for Bukoto is - so that the minister can respond to the specific question.

When you say that they are ministerial statement and yet, there are provisions where we need to have ministerial statements. How do you differentiate that? My guidance and, therefore, directive to the Clerk’s Office is that, even if from the presiding officer’s perspective, we say that the minister should come with the statement, it is not a statement. It is response to a question. It is an answer to a question and it must be addressed as such.

The initiator of the question’s name must be captured and the nature of the question so that when the minister is coming to respond, he is responding to Jacob Oulanyah’s question, on a specific subject matter. It is not coming with a ministerial statement where you cannot measure where to start and where to end. 

When the minister is not here that is the reason why they have to come with these statements. These issues are raised when the ministers are not there. So, the communication they get from the Clerk’s office is that, you are required to make a statement and the minister comes with one, whose head or tail you cannot tell, yet the question was very specific - Water shortage in Kisoro: what is the cause and what are you doing about it; full stop. So, all these elaborate statistics could not have been invited if we had been careful to restrict ourselves to Rule 46, until we deal with it as such. In which case, the minister would have been properly guided.

I can hardly blame the minister for this but I think that his first part of the answer was satisfactory. He dealt with how the response system is, how the distribution networks have been boosted to deal with the water shortage. I think that was sufficient. 

So, all these other ones should come in your ministerial statements, when you desire to give a statement on water generally in the country and to show us your strategies as far as dealing with water issues are concerned.

That is why I keep asking whether the Member that asked the question is there, and whether the response is sufficient. If it is not sufficient, then you are entitled to a supplementary question, in which case, now at this time, I will ask the Member who raised this question to ask a supplementary question.

The rule says that, if the Member that raised the question is not present and has not delegated anybody to respond or raise the supplementary question, that matter ends there - and hereby, ends here. (Interjections) He is from Kisoro but he is not the one who asked the question.  (Laughter) Unless he is going to tell me that he has been delegated to a supplementary question. In which case, I will allow him to ask. Have you been delegated honourable member?

MR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, I am not going to lie that I have been delegated but with your permission -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

4.46
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to appreciate the minister’s statement. I think as you rightly pointed out, the first part of this statement addressed the concerns we have at the moment and I am particularly encouraged that this is going to address our situation which is real. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk’s Office, please, make sure that when these issues come as urgent matters and therefore become questions under Rule 46, address them to the minister as, “Responses to questions.” Make sure that the Member’s name is known and the specific question that is asked so that when they are responding, they deal with the question as if it was a question for oral answer, except this one is urgent and without notice. That is the only distinction. Please, from now on, even the pending ones on the record should be changed to capture the real spirit of our Rules of Procedure. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO UA 57 MILLION ($76.95 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK TO SUPPORT THE AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (AVCP) – PROJECT I

4.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to present a proposal from Government to borrow up to Unit of Accounts 57 million, equivalent to $76.95 million, from the African Development Bank to support the Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (AVCP)I . 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the paper that has been laid. It stands transmitted to the Committee on National Economy to examine and come back to the House when the motion will be substantially moved by the minister. Thereafter, a debate will ensue and we conclude this matter. 

MR OTIENO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that we had a directive here from the presiding officer then. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been making statements in the media – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural issue you were raising. 

MR OTIENO: Yes, the presiding officer directed that this House shall not handle any matter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development until the minister comes here and apologises to the House. 

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is; the minister has not come here to make an apology and the directive of the presiding officer still stands. The issue on which I am seeking procedural guidance is, are we proceeding rightly when there is a standing directive from the Speaker that this House shall not handle any matter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development until the minister comes here and makes an apology; first to the House and the Speaker. This is because the minister was making statements undermining the authority of the Speaker and it was raised here in the House and that directive still stands, Mr Speaker. 

Are we really proceeding well to entertain a matter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when there is standing directive from the Speaker that we should not handle this matter, until this minister comes and tenders an apology? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure it will be handled properly in due course. The particular ruling was not brought to the presiding officer’s attention. Therefore, it will be handled subsequently when this matter comes back. 

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.52 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 18 July 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

