

Tuesday, 19 July 2016

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otafiire, I welcome you to Parliament again. This is no new place for you. I welcome you to the Front Bench again to do the things you have been doing for many years. I am glad you have been joined by hon. Kahonda to escort you to take this oath. 

I give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure, which you already know very well, to help you process your business before the House. I also give you a copy of the Constitution so that whatever you do in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs conforms to those principles in the Constitution. You are very welcome. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I wish to give you notice that as of today, the Order Paper shows that we shall start discussing the State of the Nation Address by the President. Time permitting, we should have started today. The usual procedure is that we allow the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament to start that debate by giving a response. However, that response is not ready and so we shall be deferring this particular debate to next week when the Leader of the Opposition is ready to make her statement. However, the motion can be substantially moved and then we see how to proceed from there. 

In the course of the debate, you will notice that a good percentage of the Members are new and they will be giving their maiden speeches, and the rules are very favourable to them. The order of the House is such that we make it comfortable for new Members to articulate their issues with the least of interruptions like points of order, points of information and all others that come along during the course of debate. Such should be kept off so that Members can be comfortable in presenting their issues. The meaning of this is that the whole House should observe a state of order so that we are not disrupted because we cannot allow a Member to continue speaking when there is a state of disruption of the order of the House going on at the same time. This debate will start next week.

Secondly, on the issue of constitution of committees, I have now directed the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to start their sittings. This will be the first item on the agenda of the committee, such that they can present those matters before the House so that we can finalise with the constitution of committees and the business of the House and then start properly.

In the VIP Gallery, we have Members from the Baringo County Assembly, led by the Speaker, hon. William Kamket. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

On the Order Paper, you will notice that item 4(D) has not been presented properly. You can see that there are two items, which are not supposed to be joined. I, therefore, take this opportunity to correct the two. The Minister of Security had made a commitment to make a statement today but here it has been reflected as Minister of Defence. It will be the Minister of Security. Please, take note of the change. 

You also notice that this issue is combined with that of the Minister of Internal Affairs. There is also a statement expected on the conduct of the police that should come from the Minister of Internal Affairs. Please, consider these two issues separated. So, we will be expecting two statements from the two respective ministers; one from the Minister of Security and one from the Minister of Internal Affairs.

You also recall that we had received notice from a Member for a motion on the debate; that will be done on Thursday and not today. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Mr Speaker, I stand here to request that my ministry be given some time, up to Thursday, when the hon. Minister of Education and Sports will come here to make a comprehensive report about the status of payment of salaries for staff of public universities and the operation of Bridge International Academies in Uganda. I so request, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason there is more than one minister for each docket is to cater for such instances. The question of salary is so critical that when a minister glosses over it, it causes concern to Members of Parliament.

The minister is still new in that docket and number two, she did not go away with the office. Ministers always move in and out of offices but there is always a technical team in the ministry. To that extent, the matter here was of great public importance. We all earn a salary and you know we all go to the same market and we are all faced with the same challenges.

Now, for the minister to request for Thursday next week, I think is an insult to this House. I do not think we should allow that, unless the minister says that he is here just as a caretaker and he is not supposed to issue a statement. However, if he is here in his right capacity and he has taken to the Floor, there is no reason why we do not get answers.

2.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the matter was raised last week, I got in touch with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Bahati in particular, and instructed him to get in touch with the Ministry of Education and Sports because I knew that both ministries were concerned in this matter. As I speak now, something is being done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is something?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: From the way hon. Ssekikubo has presented, he seemed to be insinuating that the matter, which was raised under uttermost urgency, is being put aside awaiting the Minister of Education and Sports, which is not the case. What hon. Muyingo is saying is that his ministry is compiling a comprehensive report and that report is, unfortunately, not ready today. He has, therefore, requested that on Thursday, that report be tabled here and the progress of the matter, which was raised, will be embedded in that report.

Therefore, I request that the Ministry of Education is given this period, which they have asked for; meanwhile, the urgency of the matter is handled by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Education and Sports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You would have assisted the House by telling us which “something” was being done in the interim so that we can wait for the statement that will come next week. However, now you have just said something is being done, which something we cannot know. What is this “something” that is being done? What is being done in the interim period, honourable minister?

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, as I said at the beginning, we are coming up with a comprehensive report to be presented to this Parliament this Thursday. It is almost ready but there are a few things where we needed to compare notes with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That is why I asked for two days and a comprehensive report covering the whole subject matter will be ready on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thursday of this week?

MR MUYINGO: This week; that is the day after tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, if it is Thursday this week - Members were concerned with Thursday next week. We expect a statement from the Minister of Education and Sports on the status of payment of salaries for staff of public universities and the operation of Bridge International Academies.

Honourable members, additional notice is given for a meeting of the Business Committee which should have taken place tomorrow but it will not take place tomorrow; the date has been changed to Thursday same time and same venue. This is because the Prime Minister would like to attend the Business Committee meeting in person and tomorrow is Cabinet, so he will not be available.

We have also now received the parliamentary calendar - business proposed by the Executive - which has been submitted to the Speaker’s office. This kicks off the business of the Business Committee, which will be sitting on Thursday instead of tomorrow. Please, members of the Business Committee come on Thursday at 10 O’clock, same venue, and we schedule how we are going to proceed in this first meeting of this Parliament.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERVENTION THAT THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES INTENDS TO TAKE TO CONTAIN THE TICK BORNE DISEASE IN NYABUSHOZI DISTRICT

2.27
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence that you allow me a few minutes and then after, I will be able to present my statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we defer this statement and we handle other statements then come back to it?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SECURITY SITUATION IN THE WEST NILE AREA

2.38
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde): Mr Speaker, we got mixed up with what exactly we were supposed to do today. We are, therefore, unable to present this particular statement. 

However, I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker; I request that you allow us to present a proper report on Thursday, which will cover the whole of Uganda, because we have been given fresh instructions. We shall also give the Members of Parliament more information on what exactly is happening in Uganda. Using our arm of external security, we shall even supply more information to Parliament on other events, for example what has happened in Turkey, just so that our honourable members are informed and operate entirely from premised information terminals. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, allow us to present this comprehensive report on Thursday and you will find reason as to why we had to do this. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today I was informed that the Minister of Internal Affairs would be ready with a statement on the specific aspect of conduct and prejudice to some of Dr Besigye’s supporters at Kalerwe Market, Namusole Road, Busabala and Mbarara. I was told that statement was ready and I was actually given a copy. Is this statement ready for receipt by this House, Minister of Internal Affairs? 

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker and honourable members, on 12th last Wednesday, when the Prime Minister asked us to make a statement on this matter to Parliament, we agreed that we would consult and our intention was to give this notice on Thursday. 

I was surprised, however, when the Government Chief Whip informed me while I was at a function - and I had to rush from there - that this matter was on the Order Paper. Otherwise, our statement is definitely meant for Thursday, so that we give a total comprehensive statement not only on the incidents of the 12th and 13th, but also those others which occurred in Mbarara and Masaka. This will enable us to tell the House what we are doing on this matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope we are not setting a trend for this Parliament. We have deferred a motion today. That motion should have come today but looking at the statements that were available for Parliament today, we thought it could not be handled today. We, therefore, deferred it to Thursday, which is basically private Members’ time. That motion is on the debate on the conduct of the police in general areas in the country.  

I accepted notice from hon. Mwanga Kivumbi that this motion would receive a full debate and this House would guide the rest of the country on how to proceed with these matters. We shelved that debate knowing that we were going to receive five statements from the Government today and now we turn out with none. Even the one I was given this morning, saying it was ready for presentation, is now not there. So, who brought this statement to my office? Honourable minister, do you want to look at it? It is by the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs. You are now telling the House that you are not ready and yet I had seen the statement. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I must apologise to you because I do not know how this draft, which is totally unsigned, found its way to your desk. (Laughter) Otherwise, with a lot of respect to this House, we are determined to go into the details of this matter and give this House a comprehensive position. 

The debate on this statement on the police will help us, as a ministry, to see what we can do. I am embarrassed that this has found its way as a paper for this notice. I would plead with you, Mr Speaker, that you give us time to prepare this statement and finalise it so that we are here by Thursday. If you so wish to have the debate on the motion on Thursday, we have absolutely no problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will have a full debate on the matter that has been raised by the Members on the conduct of the police on Thursday afternoon. The Members who are going to move this motion should prepare in earnest and be ready to present this motion, with or without a statement from the ministers. The House will then take a decision on how we move with these matters. 

If you come along and want to comment on the debate using your text or your statement, that will be welcome. As of now, the train has left the station. So, we will have to find another avenue for dealing with this. Next Thursday, we will debate the motion on the conduct of the police. So, prepare for that debate. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Fr Simon Lokodo): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 231 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, I have the honour to lay on the Table the 34th report of the Inspectorate of Government covering activities of the Inspectorate for the period running July 2015 to December 2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.   

2.38
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table reports of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following local governments:

i) 	Luuka Town Council
ii) 	Kotido Town Council
iii) 	Sanga Town Council
iv) 	Igorora Town Council
v) 	Rakai Town Council
vi) 	Rushango Town Council
vii) 	Lugazi Town Council
viii)	Namutumba Town Council 
ix) 	Buyende Town Council
x) 	Katakwi Town Council 
xi) 	Mubende Town Council
xii) 	Lyantonde Town Council
xiii) 	Kaberamaido Town Council
xiv) 	Ngora Town Council
xv) 	Kumi Town Council  
xvi) 	Moyo Town Council 
xvii) 	Abim Town Council 
xviii) 	Ntwetwe Town Council 
xix) 	Kiboga Town Council 
xx) 	Sembabule Town Council 
xxi) 	Amudat Town Council 
xxii) 	Moroto Municipal Council
xxiii) 	Butemba Town Council
xxiv) 	Gulu Municipal Council
xxv) 	Nsiika Town Council
xxvi) 	Arua District Local Government 
xxvii) 	Sheema District Local Government 
xxviii) 	Mubende District Local Government
xxix) 	Nakapiripirit District Local Government
xxx) 	Lwengo District Local Government
xxxi) 	Nebbi District Local Government
xxxii) 	Zombo District Local Government 
xxxiii) 	Kalangala District Local Government
xxxiv) 	Amuria District Local Government
xxxv) 	Ngora District Local Government
xxxvi) 	Kaberamaido District Local Government
xxxvii) 	Bukedea District Local Government
xxxviii) 	Kalungu District Local Government
xxxix) 	Lyantonde District Local Government
xl) 	Mityana District Local Government

I beg to lay, Mr Speaker. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on the year and the period covered by the Auditor-General. The reason it is important is because Parliament has been coming under fire that we sit on these reports and yet, as you can see, they have just been presented here now.

The committee will have to examine them one by one and it could be a backlog itself but in most cases, it is blamed on Parliament. I am of the view that this goes on the Hansard and then we get to know the magnitude of the work we have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for those local councils that have been listed and also for the local governments. 

In respect with local councils, those particular reports stand committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts. In respect of the district reports, they also stand committed to the appropriate committee for examination and expeditious handling within the framework of the law and reporting to Parliament and advising us on how to proceed. Honourable members, the matter raised by the Member for Lwemiyaga –

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out why Kasilo Town Council is not among those that were audited for that financial year. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You may have to bring the Auditor-General here then. These are reports of the Auditor-General and Kasilo is not on the list. At this moment, I cannot extract anything for Kasilo but I am sure it will be coming; it should be on its way.

Honourable members, the Constitution provides a timeframe within which these reports should be handled - six months from the end of a financial year. I can see that these are for 2014 and that is part of the structural problem that we have. 

The law anticipated that there will be difficulties and that is why in relation to local governments, it is not these specific or individual town council reports that the committees of Parliament should be looking at. The Minister of Local Government should compile all the reports from the local government public accounts committees, put them together into volumes just like the Auditor-General does, and that is what the minister should submit to Parliament - a summary of all those reports. That is what Parliament should act on.

As it is now, Parliament is being treated to reports of subcounties, town councils – You can never find time to even handle them. We, therefore, need to go back to the law and the Minister of Local Government should come out with these reports so that this House is assisted in coming to a solution on this issue.

Secondly, even the reports that we handle in the Public Accounts Committee - Sometimes we pursue a query of Shs 100,000 and it takes us all the way to the district to ask about Shs 100,000. This takes time. There should be a mechanism evolved that should make Parliament look at these reports from here as reports, instead of engaging with every other person, before we come to a conclusion. 

These books are already audited; the queries are already raised. We should deal with the queries specifically and report to Parliament so that we can take action on those things. The recommendations are already made by the Auditor-General; we are not going to find any new figures as Parliament. The audits are already done. We should, therefore, just be picking those reports, deal with the queries and come back here and make the recommendations on who should be fired, who should refund what, who should be jailed - things like that. That is what we should be doing. However, we spend a lot of time doing what we should not be doing.

MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The guidance you are providing surely would be very useful to the new chairperson and the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. However, this same House, in the Ninth Parliament, directed the matter to the Parliamentary Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, which I was lucky enough to chair. I have to report that the report is very ready and it is looking into those issues. I know that the report has not been submitted to you, but I do not doubt your ability to have similar thought patterns, as it is in the report. I believe that if the report comes, it will really help. 

We do a lot of duplication. We went down to the district public accounts committees and here we have local government public accounts committees. We have actually recommended for some amendments. I believe that Members will have an opportune time to discuss this, if the Business Committee will allow that business from the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to be debated here. It will help this House to handle the backlog in a good way. I must appreciate that you “tickled” me to get up because you were reading our report in part.

MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your guidance. When the IGG performance report was laid on the Table, I thought that it would be committed to the respective committee. Unfortunately, I did not hear that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are going to do that. There are still other reports -

MR LUGOLOOBI: Okay. I thought that report is very important to this House and we should know the committee which will handle it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We still have some pending reports to handle; we will handle that too.
 
Honourable members, in the strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have the guild council of YMCA Comprehensive Institute in Kampala. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House and benchmark on how to conduct their council meetings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.49
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the annual performance report of the activities of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) for the year ended 2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this particular report stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling; and the report of the Inspectorate of Government stands referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for expeditious handling and update to the House on how we can proceed with the matters recommended in those reports.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 31 MAY 2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there being no other business other than this debate, which we had thought we would start on next week, if the movers are ready we could receive the motion today but defer the debate and response from the Leader of the Opposition to next week when she will be ready. If the Member is ready, we can receive that motion now.

2.51
MR DENIS HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, with great humility and profound gratitude, I rise in conformity with the provision of Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, to move a motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the 2016 State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the honourable members for Nakifuma, Mitooma, Nwoya and West Budama South. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, the motion reads thus: “WHEREAS Article 101 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the state on the nation;

AND WHEREAS His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in compliance with the constitutional provisions, delivered the State of the Nation Address to this Parliament at Serena Hotel, Kampala on the 31st day of May 2016;
	
NOTING that the State of the Nation Address gave a broad projection on the areas of strategic significance to Uganda, in particular concentrating on the basic priority sectors including agriculture, industry, ICT, services, among others;

COGNIZANT of the fact that in his address, His Excellency the President informed the nation that the Ugandan economy continues to be vibrant amidst economic challenges, which require reforms at the local, regional and international scene;

APPRECIATING that for Uganda to be competitive and address the economic challenges, emphasis must be put on the commercialisation of agriculture and value addition; industrialisation; building the services sector and the state pillars to ensure that the state is capable of governing its people and protecting them; developing the human resource through education and improved healthcare for all; continuing to promote a private sector led economy, which is a more proficient and a robust vehicle of enterprise identification and growth; developing the infrastructure especially electricity, roads, railway and others; and integrating the African market to assist the private sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1.	That Parliament of Uganda expresses its gratitude to His Excellency the President for his clear and precise exposition in the State of the Nation Address.
2.	The Parliament commits itself to the promotion of the great ideas, values and qualities cherished by His Excellency the President in the State of the Nation Address.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Would you like to justify your motion?

MR HAMSON OBUA: Honourable members, the standard practice is that a written text is first read then later on the mover gives their justification.

Mr Speaker, the 2016 State of the Nation Address by H.E Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, the Fountain of Honour and the National Chairperson of the National Resistance Movement political party -(Applause)- is also constitutionally translated to be the state opening of a session of Parliament. In this particular case, this address is also translated as the state opening of the First Session of the Tenth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, sitting in this Chamber. Congratulations to all the honourable members. (Applause)

Honourable members, in fulfilling this constitutional obligation and mandate under Article 101(1), His Excellency the President highlighted the strategic, tactical and operational mission of the NRM Government in the next one year. These range from promoting manufacturing in order to increase employment opportunities to the youth of Uganda; lowering the cost of electricity to less than five American cents in order to spur economic growth and development; attracting more investors while directing that investment requests to the Government of Uganda, through the line ministry, should never ever take more than two days; emphasis on production of coffee, tea and fruits, because those products have high demand on the international market; and the capitalisation of the Uganda Development Bank to enable its customers access low interest loans with focus on the agriculture and manufacturing sectors. 

He also highlighted the fact that the presence of proven reserves of 6.6 billion barrels of petroleum will help the country move easily in the areas of roads, railways, electricity, commercial agriculture, irrigation, education, health and support to viable products of our scientists, to mention but a few.

Mr Speaker, in my culture, there is a saying that when wild animals are grazing in the park and a giraffe, with its traditional long neck, takes off to a certain direction, the probability is 100 per cent that the remaining animals will never question why the giraffe has taken off at a breakneck speed to a certain direction. This, in my humble opinion, is the position of the State of Nation Address. His Excellency the President has given a direction that this country must take in the next one year. I strongly believe that given the support by this Parliament, we shall be able to move at the speed of the giraffe with minimal questions as to why the giraffe has taken off to that particular direction.

Mr Speaker, on the side of Parliament, His Excellency the President highlighted 29 Government Bills that will be presented and tabled before Parliament for consideration for amendment and enactment in this particular session of Parliament. I believe that the Prime Minister and all the Government ministers present have taken note of the 29 Bills that should be tabled for enactment in this session. Mr Speaker, when these Bills are finally tabled, we, the high priests in this temple of legislation, will be left with no option but to exercise our constitutional mandate of making laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda, irrespective of our political affiliation, whether NRM, UPC, DP, FDC to mention but a few.

On service delivery and corruption, His Excellency the President alerted the corrupt, and especially the top-notch Government civil servants, that the lackadaisical modus operandi in the delivery of services to the people of Uganda by Government ministries, departments and agencies and corruption will be dealt with the way indiscipline in the army was dealt with by the NRA, now UPDF. That is a clear message to those who have been sitting on the issue of service delivery, who have been stealing monies meant to deliver services to the people of Uganda. 

I strongly believe that this Parliament, and especially the Ninth Parliament, passed a very strong law against the corrupt, to the effect that their assets can be confiscated upon conviction by a competent court of judicature. That is very clear. If the courts of law can move ahead to implement that, I believe the dream and the mission of the President on corruption and service delivery will be realised.

On the future, the President envisioned that the future indeed looks bright, stating that Uganda is at take-off stage. He also stated that efforts should be made towards realisation of a middle income status by 2020, through the implementation of the above ideals.

Honourable members, I end with a famous quote from Fanon F, which says thus: “Each generation must, out of relative obscurity, discover its mission, fulfil or betray it.” A mission for Uganda has been discovered. As national leaders, the answer lies in our hands to either fulfil or betray it. However, I strongly believe that the Tenth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda will do justice toward the realisation of the mission, the dreams and the ideals that have been cherished by His Excellency the President in his address to the nation through this Parliament on 31 May 2016. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member, for presenting this motion. It has two seconders. I will propose the question for your debate and then the seconders will speak but we will defer debate to enable the Leader of the Opposition make a response to this motion.

Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution that Parliament of Uganda expresses its gratitude to His Excellency the President for his clear and precise exposition in the State of the Nation Address; and secondly, that Parliament commits itself to the promotion of the great ideas, values and qualities cherished by His Excellency in the State of the Nation Address. That is the motion and debate begins with the seconders speaking to the motion. I now call on hon. Amoding to speak to this motion.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, you clearly guided on how we would await for the Leader of the Opposition to make a statement -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: These are seconders of the motion. Let them second the motion before we open the debate with the Leader of the Opposition. 

3.06
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to second the motion. However, before that, allow me appreciate Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) members and the general House for the calling that you gave me last week to lead that group as its chairperson. (Applause) I sincerely appreciate that and I promise to do my best in that particular task. 

Mr Speaker, I rise to second the motion and I would like to thank the mover who has progressed sufficiently. I would like to second this motion by giving value to what he has said. 

Mr Speaker, first I would like to congratulate His Excellency the President for delivering this State of the Nation Address, which, in my view, was spot-on, relevant and appropriate at this time in our country. I would like to start by commending the President of this country for the time that he has spent being a combatant in the war of socio-economic transformation in our country.  In my view, for the last 30 years, our country is moving in the right direction and we can only say that this far God has brought us and much further will He take us where we desire to go as a nation. 

Mr Speaker, my analysis of the State of the Nation Address is largely based on the fact that the President focussed on the productive sectors of our country. In so doing, he focussed his attention on the energy and road sectors. I would like to commend him for the passion that he has also exhibited in advancing the investment sector in our nation. He has consistently appealed for more investors because I believe that the more investors we get, the more jobs will be created and the more we shall be able to address the unemployment challenge in our nation in a more sustainable way. I would like to commend His Excellency for this foresighted vision.

Mr Speaker, the first thing I would like to observe certainly, is that on page 2 he makes reference to the democratic path, particularly to issues to do with representative democracy in our country, which I believe makes us unique as Uganda. In this Parliament, we have various shades represented. We have the women that I stand for here, the UPDF, youth and workers. That, in a way, makes us a unique nation; it makes us very different. In terms of percentages, as women so far we stand at 32 per cent, which is greater than the global percentage, which is 22 per cent. That is something to celebrate, women. It is also something to celebrate as a nation. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I would like to commend His Excellency for what he said about issues to do with the economic development path we are taking. I also would like to thank him for making a very fundamental statement on page 7, paragraph 2, where he said he would require Government institutions, without exception, to buy locally made products provided they are of good quality.  

In my view, this is very fundamental because in the past most of the –(Interjection)- it is very important, hon. Ssekikubo, because I come from a sector that has been affected by unemployment. A lot of times we have emphasised the importation of products in this country. You cannot deny the fact that a lot of imported products are in our shops. If you walk downtown, you will find a lot of these things there. Therefore, emphasis in supporting our local investors is fundamental in supporting our local industry. 

I believe this should be a policy; so, at this point I would like to call upon the minister in charge of trade to ensure that this becomes a policy directive and it is sent to the relevant Government agencies, to ensure we support our local industries and investors. We should support the young people that are starting up industries as well as our local suppliers. I believe by doing this, we shall again address the unemployment challenge that we are talking about in this country.

Mr Speaker, I note with satisfaction that the President has addressed the matter of corruption. The mover of the motion has addressed this very well too. I can only say that we should learn from the example that he has been working on in terms of improving the health sector. There is a health monitoring unit in State House, which was set up to keep the President abreast with issues affecting that sector. 

At the same time, I would like to appeal to the IGG as well as the public; this is a cancer that cannot only be left to Parliament to address. It cannot only be left to the ministries or the Executive. It is incumbent upon all of us, as Ugandans, to be vigilant on corruption because it cuts across all the sectors in our country. I appeal to the public to be vigilant. When you go to a ministry and you are asked for a bribe, do not encourage it; instead, be the first to deal with this vice, which is largely embedded in our sectors and daily life. Therefore, it is going to take all of us to address corruption in a more spirited manner.

Mr Speaker, I would like to quickly make reference to something on page 13, where His Excellency talks about several issues especially tourism. This is a very important sector and I would like to second and support him. I encourage the ministry responsible to develop this sector further because it is one way Uganda is going to emerge out of this challenge. 

I would also like to inform the minister in charge of tourism that Karamoja as a subregion has great potential. I know that in Kenya and Tanzania, it is those areas which have such communities that give the country the biggest contribution in terms of tourism. Therefore, if we can build the roads and energy sector, we shall be able to empower those communities now that there is security in the region. What is left now is just investing in that region to transform it sufficiently. 

Mr Speaker, finally, I was very impressed with the Bills that have been put before us. In line with what the President said in his address, these Bills that are proposed are specifically meant to address the sectors that he has highlighted. I believe that he has been spot-on on these Bills. They are going to help us address the challenges that are specific in those sectors. 

I would like to commend him for talking about the National Legal Aid Bill, 2015, which I think is going to improve issues of access to justice in the country, as well as the Landlord and Tenant Bill, which is going to manage relationships between tenants and landlords. This is because we have seen a lot of evictions not only in the centre but also in other districts. 

The Consumer Protection Bill is very key, honourable colleagues, and I commend him for that. As you may be aware, we are all victims of the banks. As a Member of Parliament in the last Parliament, I took a loan which I concluded paying. However, in the last month when I was about to receive clearance from the bank, the bank told me they had changed interest rates along the five years. They said that they could not tell, but my account had attracted an additional Shs 68 million, which I was supposed to begin clearing even when I had been a diligent loan payer. Therefore, this proposed Consumer Protection Bill the President alluded to will enable our country protect consumers from banks, which I think have become sharks in many ways. We need to deal with them and find a way of solving that problem.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you sincerely for the opportunity to second this motion that has been placed before us. I so submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this motion has two seconders. I will give the opportunity to the next seconder to speak to it. 

However, let me recognise in the public gallery this afternoon Prof. Walter Plank and students of HTL Technical College in Braunau, Austria. They have come here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome. 

3.17
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to begin by thanking hon. Hamson Obua and my sister, the hon. Monicah Amoding. I am here to second the motion moved by my colleague.

Mr Speaker, as you are all aware, the President’s address was based on sectors. I am going to put more emphasis on three sectors. The first is the agricultural sector. Members, you are all aware the backbone of our economy is agriculture. When you look at the State of the Nation Address, the President emphasised areas which, in his and in my opinion, need to be improved in order to help our people transfer from rudimentary to modern methods of farming. 

The President has been a champion of Operation Wealth Creation. We are also aware that Operation Wealth Creation as per now, according to the data I have, has helped about 270,000 homesteads to manage our economy. If that has only happened in the last two years, what if we make it to five or six years, what impact shall we create?

Operation Wealth Creation yes, has a few challenges, and I know that is an area that honourable members would like us to talk about. One of the areas which we need to address is the criteria used in selecting of the beneficiaries. Mr Speaker, it is true, and I would like to appeal to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, that this is an area where Members need to be brought on board. This is because there is no Government policy which can succeed without the involvement of Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, within the agricultural sector, there is an issue in the fisheries department. You are all aware that Government has been investing a lot of resources in trying to see how our people can leave the waters of Lake Victoria and other lakes within the country. However, this is still a persistent problem. I am aware that to date, out of the 21 industries which have been functional, 12 of them have been closed. This is because we have allowed illegal fishing gear to continue coming in to the country. We have also allowed the same fishermen to continue fishing the little fish, which could help these industries create jobs. That is still a challenge.

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the new Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to help us because unemployment is a challenge in the country. That sector is making us lose most of our jobs as we talk today.

Another area within the agricultural sector with issues is the animal husbandry sector. Two days back, I visited a farm of one of my friends, a former Member of Parliament, in Kapelebyong County. He has opened up a very good farm. However, the challenge he faces is water. I know that if you go to Kiruhura, Isingiro, Masaka among others, these are water-stressed areas. How then do you expect our animals to improve? I would like to appeal to Government, and more so to His Excellency the President, that while he has given areas to be emphasized, there must be plans of getting water for our animals. This will enable us have a better way of creating more jobs for our people.

Mr Speaker, allow me talk about the infrastructure sector and specifically, I would like to address myself to the issue of roads. We are all aware that the Government has tarmacked 5,200 kilometres of roads compared to 1,200 kilometres of roads, which had been constructed by 1986. Most of the work has been achieved in the last three to four years. What has brought about this is the strategic prioritising of the road sector. 

As I talk, I am happy to say that next month Government will commission the construction of the road from Soroti to Katakwi to Moroto.  Government has linked Karamoja up to Tororo. I would like to ask my uncles from Karamoja to thank Government for this initiative. The construction of these roads will help in creating jobs for our people in those areas.

Mr Speaker, I cannot, however, leave the road sector without talking about corruption. The problem our country is facing today is corruption and specifically, in the road sector. You are aware about the inquiry that was conducted in UNRA. We lost Shs 9 trillion as a country. So, what should be done to these people? As we invest more money into the sector, those corrupt officials are also investing more energy in diverting the resources, which are helping us. If I am not mistaken, the accidents happening on these roads might be because of the bad workmanship done on them. I would like to thank Government for prioritising this sector. 

Mr Speaker, another issue in the infrastructure sector is about hydropower. On Friday, I was at Karuma and was privileged to visit the hydropower dam being constructed there. It is true work is going on well. However, the findings I got from Karuma are that while the contractor seems to be doing their work, the supervisors, which are Government agencies, are not helping the Government of Uganda to achieve value for money.

Mr Speaker, I promise to table, in this House, a comprehensive report about this sector highlighting areas where we are not achieving as Government. While we are doing all that it takes to put money into the sector, we know that if we have to solve the problem of unemployment in this country, we must invest in hydropower. Government is investing a lot in Isimba, Karuma and other hydro and geothermal energy dams at Lake Katwe. I am happy that my brother, the hon. William Nzoghu, is here; I would like him to pay attention to what I am saying because both the NRM and the Opposition Members must place emphasis on electricity generation, if we are to become a middle income country by 2020. 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to talk about minerals. The President, in the State of the Nation Address, talked about developing the mineral sector, which will generate an annual income of $360 million. He even highlighted the areas to create about 1,800 jobs in various mines like Kilembe, Butogota, Muko and other areas in the eastern part of this country. However, there are challenges within this sector. The first is the issue of the middlemen. There is still a challenge of middlemen buying these minerals from the local miners. How many jobs does that create for us? The sector is instead creating jobs for those people working in mineral sources. 

There is also corruption within the same sector. Why are we talking about corruption?  Corruption is an issue that affects all of us in regard to this sector. I would like to say that the challenge of Uganda today is not about resources. The challenge His Excellency the President faces today is how to find corrupt-free people to work with. I would like to request this august House to focus on areas, which are not generating what we want our country to get. 
I also would like to inform the Executive that we have done work and we shall continue doing work here. However, I would like to appeal to all Ugandans to learn to be honest and also to learn to appreciate by looking at where our country has come from and where it is going to be tomorrow. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I say all this for God and my country. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Peter Ogwang, for articulating issues in regard to this motion; we appreciate that. 

Honourable members, as we agreed, although I already proposed the question for debate, the response from the Leader of the Opposition should be able to balance this debate as a first response to the President’s speech. Therefore, we will schedule this debate for next week when the Leader of the Opposition will be ready to present a statement in response, after which we will open the debate to finalise with this matter. That will be a proper way to proceed and that is what we have adopted in the past. We will defer further debate on this motion to next week when we will start.

For now, honourable members, there are Members who said they had urgent matters to be handled. I have a list of them. If they are here, I will find them time to address us on those matters. On my list I have Members for the following constituencies: Tororo Municipality, Kumi, Ntenjeru South, Kashari South, Kasambya County and Bulambuli County. These had approached the Speaker’s office saying they have some urgent matters to raise. We can handle those matters now since the ministers are all here. 

3.28
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is a general observation about the timing of the State of the Nation Address. Before, the idea was that the State of the Nation Address was delivered to coincide with reading of the budget and the subsequent debate of the budget in Parliament. As it is now, through the Public Finance Management Act we have amended the budget cycle. We now note that the State of the Nation Address is actually read after the budget has been passed and it raises issues about its relevance in the budget process. 

At an appropriate time, Mr Speaker, I should move a motion suggesting that this timeframe should be changed to enable the issues that we discuss in the State of the Nation Address be incorporated in the budget; in other words, change the timing of delivery of the State of the Nation Address. That is my presentation to the House, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Are you rising on that same issue, hon. Okot Ogong?

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. Article 101 of our Constitution is very clear on the presidential address. Article 101 states, “(1) The President shall, at the beginning of each session of Parliament, deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation.

(2) The President may, also, in consultation with the Speaker, address Parliament from time to time, on any matter of national importance.” 

Article 98 of the same Constitution also describes the President as the President of Uganda. Article 98(1) states, “There shall be a President of Uganda who shall be the Head of State, Head of Government and Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and the Fountain of Honour.”

I believe the framers of this Constitution, by placing Article 101 in the Constitution, wanted the President to be accountable in his performance of his or her duties and to brief Parliament at every session. A session of Parliament means that at the end of every year of Parliament, the President comes and delivers an address on the state of the nation.

Mr Speaker, as Parliament, we have not addressed our minds to the format of the State of the Nation Address. I believe the framers of the Constitution in 1995 believed that they conferred powers to the President to be the head of Government, and the President must preside over all institutions of Government and keep abreast of all the things that happen in all Government departments. That being so, it means the President must be informed about what is happening in all sectors. Therefore, at the beginning or end of every session, the President informs Parliament of what he has delivered; for example, when you talk about corruption - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, may I know where you are going with all this, - (Laughter) - even if you rose on clarification?

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I rose on a point of guidance or procedure but you did not - (Laughter)– In your wisdom and with your indulgence, we would like Parliament to give clear guidance on this matter. 

As you are aware, the delivery of the State of the Nation Address is a very important function that the President does in Parliament. It is because the President rarely comes to Parliament but through the Constitution, he is given at least one day in a year to give Parliament information.

What I am saying exactly is that we should get the full brief from the President about the state of the nation. We are inviting Members of Parliament to consider that with time, maybe we need to form the format of how a state of the nation should be –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Okot Ogong has spent a lot of time without sitting on that front bench, since the time he was Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs.

Mr Speaker, when the honourable colleague moved to the microphone, his statement and observation from the Constitution seemed to be contradicting what hon. Lugoloobi insinuated. From the time he started reading the Constitution up to this time, I have not understood exactly what he intends to achieve. (Laughter) Specifically, hon. Lugoloobi had given guidance.  Mr Speaker, you realise that because of the change of the budget cycle, it would also imply -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of order. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, is the honourable colleague in order to waste the time of Parliament to try to explain something that is not understood by this House? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu has assigned me a big responsibility - to assess whether the entire House has understood what hon. Okot Ogong has said or not. (Laughter) However, since it is his declaration that he has not understood, that might not apply to every Member; I may not be able to rule on that. 

However, honourable members, there are two separate principles here: one is financial initiative, which rests with the President and is executed through the budget process. Then there is the executive authority of Government, which also rests with the President. The two are separate. However, in the previous budget processes, we combined the two, in the sense that the President gives his State of the Nation Address, which is in the Constitution, to outline what has gone on in the past and what needs to be done to achieve what he thinks should be achieved in the next phases. In the process also, he proposes the implementation mechanisms - moneys, policies and laws - available to implement those things. That was in the past but now, it has been separated. The budget cycle is now separated completely from this process, which is the State of the Nation Address.

In financial initiative, the President is the only one who can propose the budget. The budget cycle has changed and he can only propose it at a particular time and that will be the time he is allowed to propose it; he cannot propose it any other time. That does not remove the dictate of the Constitution under Article 101 for him to open Parliament with the State of the Nation Address and occasionally, address Parliament whenever it is required. 

Therefore, what needs to be done now is to harmonise the two processes. Is there a need to harmonise them anyway? If there is need, then how do you harmonise them? The budget will stand on its own; the President will come and after the budget speech is read, the President still speaks on the priorities that need to be focused on. 

Ordinarily, the President is supposed to be the one to actually deliver the budget but it is always delivered on his behalf. A clear demonstration was in the last budget where there was no Minister of Finance and he had to do it himself because it is his job to perform as per the Constitution, but that has been sorted. Therefore, the budget will be the budget. The President will present the budget through the minister and after the minister has presented the budget, he will speak on all those issues. However, the State of the Nation Address opens Parliament by Constitution - where do we stand as a country; where do we go as a country; and what is required for us to go where we want to go as a country.

As the matter goes back to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, the chairperson and members of the committee should see how to guide us as Parliament on how these processes can be made friendlier in terms of analysing Government business. Thank you.

Leader of the Opposition, would you like to respond to the motion now?

3.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is not a response to the motion; we have agreed to come next week when we are prepared for it. It is in regard to what the honourable colleague has raised about financial matters. 

The spirit behind having the financial year end at the end of June and having all the vote controllers approved by that time was that at the beginning of July, local governments, civil servants and everybody should be able to access money and start work so that at the end of the quarter, more money is advanced to the service providers and they perform their work. To the contrary, Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that even right now, people, entities and agencies have not yet received money to start delivering services to the Ugandans. I am worried that if we started the process of implementing our budget on a wrong note, it will still end on a wrong note. 

The issue was that districts were receiving money even at the end of the financial year and they would be forced to spend the money before the financial year ends. As a result, this money was abused, susceptible to corruption and our people missed out on service delivery. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to know, did we change the law in vain? When we changed this law, we thought that our people would be served properly. May we know from the Minister of Finance why we are not following our procedure? I am very sure by the time that money arrives in the districts, we shall be going into the second quarter and they will tell them, “you have not used your money; you have not helped the people to perform.”

Also, people supposed to receive salaries have not yet received their salaries because the deliveries and remittances have not yet been made. That is what I would like the minister to make clear, as we speak of taking services closer to the people.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two points to clarify. One is on the issue raised by hon. Lugoloobi regarding the timing of the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President. In my opinion, and I think the opinion of many, the timing is actually better than what we have been having. The President makes a statement to the nation in June when we are winding up a financial year. He is telling the nation about what we have been able to achieve, the challenges and the priorities for the following financial year. The process -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is not July; it is at the opening of Parliament.

MR BAHATI: At the opening of Parliament which is normally June. Let us take the example of the just concluded financial year, when he made a statement in May. In May, we were winding up the financial year 2015/2016 and the President was telling us what we were able to achieve, the challenges and the priorities for the following year. We are beginning our budget process in September and Parliament is debating this statement. Government is here to pick all the issues from this debate so that they feed into the budgeting process, which starts in September. That, in my opinion, is good timing and we should take advantage of it to raise these issues and then we implement them. 

The second point, Mr Speaker, is the issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition, that the purpose of amending the Public Finance Management Act was to remove the vote on account and start implementing by 1st July, to ensure that the implementing agencies get money and start. What has happened in this financial year? I would like colleagues to understand this. We released cash limits by 5th July. Cash limits mean that we tell the spending agencies how much they are going to get in a quarter. We then required them to give us some work plan stating what they are going to use the money for. Now, those who –(Interjection)- Just a second, Leader of the Opposition.

What has happened is that some of the implementing agencies are very fast; they gave their requirements very fast, but some have not. As we speak today, only 50 per cent of all implementing agencies have put in warrants and they have accessed money. This afternoon, we have actually been calling agencies which have not put in their requirements, to submit and then access the money. We hope that by the end of this week, all the agencies will have got their money to spend and this money is for the entire quarter. 

On the issue of salaries, which she has raised, our principle has been that all civil servants are paid by 28th and we stick to that. By 28th July, every civil servant will have got money or salary for the month of July. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, can we rest this matter here and when we come through the committee, we will be able to understand these things and analyse them better. Can we now move to the urgent matters that needed to be raised so that we can see how to conclude today’s business.

3.47
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, a group of suspicious conmen have invaded my constituency. These people are moving with forms promising people loans of between Shs 200,000 and Shs 50 million. The forms are going at between Shs 2,000 and Shs 10,000 depending on the loan that you want. They are telling people that this money is coming from Government to help them alleviate poverty. 

With the poverty situation in the rural areas, people have descended on the forms and are subscribing massively. If they have not yet reached your constituencies, honourable members, beware that after they finish with me, they might descend on you too. 

Mr Speaker, I would like the minister responsible for microfinance to inform us where we get money for poverty alleviation; clarify on this. The minister should also go to the ground and investigate this and possibly raise an alarm so that people are aware that what is going on may not necessarily be a Government issue. 

If the people fail to get this money and yet they are being told to buy forms because Government is bringing money, it will boomerang on us and they will say that the Government lied about giving them loans. People will say that they even paid their money and the Government failed to give them the money.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the concerned minister to investigate this issue and possibly issue an alert to unsuspecting people, who may also succumb to the conmen. I rest my case and thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, are you giving out loans to people and distributing forms?

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we have suffered from similar situations before, for example with Caring for Orphans, Widows and the Elderly (COWE) and other companies that actually conned Ugandans.

We would like to take this opportunity to caution Ugandans not to go in for that. The Government is not involved and that is not the way that the Government does business. We are going to get in touch with the honourable member and then use the Government machinery to inform our people in that area to stop doing that because they can be conned. We shall also arrest those who are doing it and caution people not to rush for that. We will investigate it starting tomorrow and we will update the House next week. 

3.51
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the past week, this country has witnessed a number of accidents that have claimed many lives. According to the police, up to 90 per cent of these accidents are caused by reckless driving. I was personally involved in an accident on Friday at about 7.10 a.m. My vehicle was knocked by a car belonging to the Ministry of Water and Environment and I survived because of God’s grace. 

Most of these accidents are as a result of reckless driving and bad behaviour of our drivers. I heard a colleague talking about the designs of roads. We can talk about the roads but the biggest component of the road accidents is reckless driving. Efforts by the police to curb this vice are always frustrated by influential people in court. 

I interacted with some traffic officers and they told me that most of the times, they are frustrated by politicians and ministers who form unnecessary convoys on the road and overtake on shoulders. Efforts by them to take action are in vain because sometimes they are threatened by dismissal or transfers to remote areas and at the end of the day, they lose morale. 

Honourable members, we need to take action right now. It happened to me and tomorrow it may be another Member or a relative. As I speak, between Friday and Sunday last week in my constituency, we buried six people who passed away after road accidents; some are still admitted in hospitals. The time for action is now and the responsible minister should come out and tell us how we can support this cause. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does this require a response from Government? What are we doing about the enforcement of these traffic rules and regulations? There is nobody holding the Floor at the moment. Does the honourable member want to speak on this matter?

3.53
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Mr Speaker, the Uganda Institution of Professional Engineers is concerned about this matter. The last time that we were in the House, a Member gave reports that showed that most of the accidents were due to slippery roads and inadequate designs.

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Institution of Professional Engineers is planning to petition Parliament on this particular issue. They hope to come up with a paper because there are reports, like the Member said, that over 70 per cent of the cases of road accidents are not due to engineering designs. The institution of engineers, where I am an active member, shall be coming to Parliament next week to share some of the reasons as to why we should involve scientists in this issue. 

There is concern that most drivers, including legislators, do not know the basics of road safety. The engineers suggest the amendment of the Road Safety Act to come up with stringent measures to punish the offenders, although we do not know if they will still be alive. However, the engineers argue that they have a way forward and when time allows, they will come to Parliament and present it. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are already in Parliament, so speak - (Laughter)- You are already here. 

MR KIBALYA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. As hon. Nakate rose to speak, I saw the finance minister come in and I was told, after consultation, that he is representing the Prime Minister, who was going to respond to the issue of accidents. We may realise that in some of these cases, as some ministers rise to represent the concerned ministers we are not being helped, neither are we solving some of the problems. We have ministries directly concerned with these accident issues like the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Internal Affairs under which the police fall. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that as some of these matters of national importance are presented to your office, you inform the concerned ministers to be present in the House. By the time an issue is presented, the minister concerned can then be around to brief us, defend the matter or inform us when he or she can be in position to give a position on the situation. Otherwise, we shall always be here giving sweet statements and speaking beautiful words and yet people are losing lives. A conman was even presenting the other side -(Laughter). I withdraw the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no Member who is referred to in this House as honourable conman. (Laughter) The matter that the Member raised was about conmen in his constituency.

MR KIBALYA: Mr Speaker, I wish to withdraw the statement and apologise. I did not mean to refer to the honourable member as a conman. I meant that the honourable member was telling us about conmen on the other side and in such a situation, the ministers for internal affairs and security would be in a position to note that. 

Those are some of the things that we cannot just play around with. Somebody can come in the disguise of giving loans when he is recruiting rebels. Some of these things must be taken serious. That is why I request you, Mr Speaker, to brief some of these ministers so that they do not leave at their will until the House is adjourned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is standard procedure that this House starts at 2.00 p.m. and will rise when the Speaker rises, and that is for all the Members, including ministers. You have not seen the Speaker sitting, going out and coming back. You should take the example of the Speaker that once the Speaker has sat, the House has sat and that applies to ministers and Members. The movements up and down can be entertained but not so much; it should be to the extent that does not frustrate business of the House.

We usually try to inform or notify the Members that if you have to raise a matter, please let the ministers know so that we have a response that can help your constituents instead of us talking to ourselves. We try to encourage discussions. Sometimes we call the ministers before the matters are raised in Parliament but sometimes the matters are urgent and you cannot find a minister. However, that should not stop the work of a Member of Parliament from raising these issues, Government capturing them and responding to them in good time, so that the people you represent know that their issues have come to the Floor and some statements have been made about them.

In the strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have a team of leaders from Namutumba District led by the district chairperson, Haji Saleh Kabuga, with his executive and subcounty chairpersons from the district. They are represented by hon. Paul Kamba, Busiki County, and hon. Mariam Naigaga. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue raised by the Member regarding accidents is a very serious matter. We have discussed this issue on the Floor of this House on several occasions, even when we commemorated the international week against road accidents. 

The information I would like to give Members is that we are also concerned about the increasing road carnage. Unfortunately, a majority of these accidents are as a result of human error. 

Just to let you know, about two weeks ago we discussed this matter in Cabinet and the Prime Minister is supposed to have a meeting with all the sectors concerned. It is not only an issue for the works ministry or the Ministry of Internal Affairs, but the Ministry of Health is also involved because those who get accidents end up in our hospitals and Government is spending a lot of money treating these people. Therefore, it requires a multi-sectoral approach.

I would like to suggest, Mr Speaker, that you allow us to first resolve our issues at that level and then we shall come and update Parliament accordingly.

4.03
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari South, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, before I joined Parliament, I was running a higher institution of learning. We were training students and after their courses, the students were free to get jobs either inside Uganda or outside Uganda. On this note, I would like to thank members of the UPDF for rescuing Ugandans from South Sudan. (Applause) However, as these young Ugandans come back, they have lost their capital and their jobs. What do we have for them?

Secondly, there is sad information in the media about Ugandans working in Dubai. Our girls are being abused. There are media statements here that they sleep with 20 men a day. This is very sad, and these are Ugandans whose parents have sold the last chicken at home to educate them. These are Ugandans who are earning a living, they have responsibilities, they bring money into the economy and they take care of the livelihoods of their siblings and their parents. Can we hear from the minister what the Government is doing about this situation?

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Mr Hebert Kabafunzaki): Mr Speaker, the statement made by the honourable member is true. The situation is not good for our fellow Ugandans but as the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we have put mechanisms in place to solve all these problems.

The youth, or those exporting labour from Uganda, were leaving the country and the Government was not aware. Right now, if I asked how many Ugandans are in Dubai, you cannot tell the number. We are trying to put in place mechanisms so that we can know the number of our labourers out of this country – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member who raised the issue asked a question: What is the Government of Uganda doing to rescue our girls who are abused in that Arab world? The honourable minister is talking about the numbers and getting the data, but what is Government doing to rescue them? 

Mr Speaker, you also remember very well that in 2014, we risked our lives when we raised this matter here. Hon. Anifa Kawooya and I went to Iraq on similar matters. We made recommendations when we came back here but the ministry has never responded to them up to today. There was even a motion that was moved in the House, which was supported, that the Government of Uganda stops the exportation of housemaids to these Arab countries, but they have not stopped that. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to come here and tell us about mechanisms when they have not implemented the resolutions Parliament made? He is not telling us about what they are doing to rescue these girls.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, now you have good information; please speak on it.

MR KABAFUNZAKI: Mr Speaker, this is a very comprehensive issue and honourable members should allow me to come back with a very comprehensive report about this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will allow the honourable minister to go and consult and then come back to the House when these issues are clearly understood. 

4.09
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance, which is a ticking time bomb if not addressed. It concerns the slot money machines that have been introduced by Chinese and Indians in this country. 

The Chinese have done a disservice to this country by cheating and robbing Ugandans through the betting machines that are all over our villages. As I talk, all able bodied men and women have resorted to betting activities with the hope of getting rich. Many school-going children have dropped out of school because they have invested their school fees in these machines with the hope of generating more school fees. In the villages, people have reached the extent of sleeping with animals due to the money lost during betting, and some have resorted to stealing. 

I wish to inquire from the minister if at the time of acquiring these machines the Chinese and Indians are given licences as investors or business people. This is because they come with the intention of stealing from our country. Are these people actually investors or are Ugandans investing in them? Is it a deliberate Government policy to make Ugandans rich or poor? 

Mr Speaker, I can see the minister getting out. (Laughter) I have seen some patriotic Ugandans arresting and confiscating these machines in various districts, so I would like to know if they are doing it according to the law or not. These machines should be put only in gazetted areas like towns, where people have grown rich and have extra money to give out. I thank you, Mr Speaker.   

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, honourable member, for raising this fundamental issue. Like you, Members of the Ninth Parliament were very concerned and they moved to enact a law to regulate this field. We, therefore, passed a law entitled, “Uganda National Lotteries and Gaming Act.” Yesterday, I inaugurated the board of this body. The purpose of the law is to protect society; to regulate the companies involved; and to some extent, but this is not very important though necessary, to raise revenue from these bodies. 

On the issue you have raised, Government has put in place a body to regulate this sector and we have licensed a few of them. However, what has been happening and what we have discovered is that some people have been importing machines in a very queer way - they dismantle them and then bring them in as spare parts of these machines. We have discovered them and have arrested some of them in certain villages. 

Yesterday, we inaugurated the body and they are ready to ensure that at least –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is in reference to the particular betting machines, which are rampant all over the villages. Under the law that we passed in the Ninth Parliament, have you been able to put in place a mechanism to withdraw these machines? 

According to us, as Parliament, these betting machines do not qualify by any standards to be categorised or be allowed into our communities. Therefore, what measures have you taken as you inaugurated the board yesterday? I thank you.  

MR BAHATI: Thank you, honourable member, for raising that clarification. As I said, we inaugurated the board yesterday. They are working on regulations and we hope that by 15th August, we shall have regulations to guide the Act. Our view is that we should, as much as we can, eliminate gaming sports because that is what we have seen destroying people. You can at least stay with the other lotteries –(Interruption) 

MS KIIZA: I would like to thank you for the steps you are taking to ensure that our population is protected. However, I got perturbed when you said you inaugurated the board yesterday and then said you are working on the regulations. What comes first? I thought as you inaugurated the board, these people were handed the regulations that will guide them? How can you first inaugurate - Between now and the time you come up with the regulations, what will guide the board that you inaugurated and the people who are supposed to use the regulations? What comes first?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Bahati, for giving way. Mr Speaker and Members, the minister is attempting to close the stables when the horses have already bolted. The board was inaugurated yesterday and indeed you are working on the regulations, but a Member has reported, and we all bear witness, that the machines are virtually in the deepest villages you can imagine. Are you, therefore, allowing business which is unregulated? 

We thought that for you to allow gambling, it must be regulated. The only position you can give to Parliament is to issue a directive to suspend, or in fact to call back all the machines, and then you can work on the regulations (Applause) 
However, as you do this, honourable minister, the matter raised by the Member is so serious because in the deepest of villages, there is theft of chicken, goats and beating of people in order to get money to do the gambling. 

Mr Speaker, the best way forward is for the minister to issue in an unequivocal statement that betting in villages should stop henceforth. After that, you can come up with regulations to regulate the business, rather than working the other way around. I thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just updating the House on the steps we are taking. Certainly, the law comes before the regulations and I think it is proper also to have the board in place before we finalise the regulations, so that the board can actually have an input in the regulations; after all, they are the ones going to implement them. 

Let me say this: anything that is not allowed by the law that we passed will be worked on and we will make sure that the situation is arrested. Thank you.

4.20
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues, distinguished guests around -(Laughter).  This is a maiden speech -(Interjections)– Yes, they are there in the gallery (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, address the House. 

MR BURUNDO: This is my maiden speech and I request you, Mr Speaker, to seriously protect me so that I get acquainted with how proceedings are conducted in this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I will protect you for as long as you are addressing the House through the Speaker.

MR BURUNDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a matter of national importance concerning cattle rustling in my constituency. I do not know if these were Karimojong or not, but listen to my short story. 

On Friday, I went to visit my constituency as usual. Unfortunately, when I got there, the cattle rustlers had stolen 110 animals at night. This happened in my constituency in Bunambutye Subcounty in Bulambuli District. They also stole three donkeys. This is very unfortunate. The commander of the Police Force and the UPDF made a follow up, which was very good. They tried to pursue these men; unfortunately, they could not apprehend them. Up to now, we have not recovered the 110 animals and the three donkeys, which were stolen.

My humble request, therefore, is that Government should deploy more Anti Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) people so that they can apprehend these cattle rustlers. Secondly, those who stole our animals should be brought to book. We need to bring back our animals because it is against the Government programme of re-stocking and Operation Wealth Creation. Intelligence reports by ASTU say that the animals are in Napak District. This is found in Karamoja sub-region. I think that I would not be wrong to say that our neighbours, the Karimojong, are going against the policies of the Bible which stipulate “Love your neighbour as you love yourself.” (Laughter) 

This issue has dragged on for a very long time, since 1980. Many neighbours, including Bukedea, Kween and Kapchorwa, have been affected by the same problem. In the Ninth and Sixth Parliament, if I can recall very well, the honourable Ambassador Wakidoso was almost trading blows with hon. Lokeris. As you can see on my right, the honourable member from Karamoja was raising up to defend the theft, which is unlawful. (Laughter)

Finally, Mr Speaker, this is my maiden speech -(Laughter)- and I want to thank the Government for the disarmament programme which has been going on in the Karamoja sub-region. However, the armed forces are very few on the ground. I, therefore, request that the barracks which was given to us should be re-enforced. Let the process be started so that we do not quarrel with our honourable Members of Parliament. It is a shame to hear that in this 21st Century people are still stealing cows from their colleagues. That is very dangerous and it is very bad. Thank you very much for protecting me, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did I see hon. Lokoru rising up?

4.26
THE MINISTER OF KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Karamoja is quite peaceful and the people there have been enjoying cordial relationships with their neighbours. If this is an isolated case, we shall investigate it and take appropriate action. If necessary, we shall revert back to the House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member from Bulambuli, it is not a declaration of one against the other. It is just that some people have bad ways of doing things – a few of them. That is what the Minister has said. 

Honourable members, we will bring matters of urgent public importance to a close here. We shall then proceed with the Minister’s statement and conclude. I think there is a statement that is ready with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERVENTION THAT THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES INTENDS TO TAKE TO CONTAIN THE TICK-BORNE DISEASE IN NYABUSHOZI DISTRICT

4.27
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg for your indulgence. We have had a delay in the printing of copies. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR SSEMPIJJA: I would like to read a brief on the current status of ticks and tick-borne diseases in western Uganda, but of course it also touches other areas of Uganda. 

Ticks and the diseases they vector constitute a major constraint to productivity of cattle in Uganda. Historically, as the Government strived to maximize milk production, importation of exotic cattle for crossbreeding with local cattle was viewed as a strategic intervention. After 1986, the National Economic Recovery, Rehabilitation and Development Programmes prioritized the improvement of the diary sector as a pillar of livelihood and national development. The launch of the Milk Master Plan, 1992 and the enactment of the Diary Industry Act in 1998 that established the Diary Development Authority as well as the Animal Breeding Act of 2001 have seen massive transformation of especially the dairy industry from indigenous breeds to exotic cattle based production.

This has come at a cost, since over 30 years of crossbreeding has led to increased gene frequency of exotic cattle that are highly susceptible to tropical-borne diseases. The improved cattle require regular control of ticks through weekly spraying, dipping and application of acaricides. If done irrationally, it leads to the emergence of acaricide resistance. Recent research reports (Vudriko et al, 2016) confirmed that acaricide resistance is widely spread in western Uganda. Kiruhura District was reported to be most affected with cases of resistance to multiple acaricides detected.

Honourable members, to this point, various complaints of acaricide failure have been reported to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF), National Drug Authority and Makerere University College of Veterinary Medicine.

Current Challenges in Chemical Tick Control

A myriad of challenges characterise chemical tick control in Uganda. These can be categorised into:

i) 	Lack of acaricide use support services: The collapse of communal dips, insufficient dip strength testing services and lack of acaricide efficacy testing services variably affects efficiency of chemical tick control.

ii) 	Widespread irrational use of acaricides: Lack of knowledge on appropriate acaricide use, failures and/or resistance.

iii) 	Acaricide resistance: indiscriminate and irrational use of acaricides has led to a multitude of acaricide failures in western and central Uganda but we can also add Karamoja.

iv) 	Poor regulation of acaricides.

On-Going Interventions by the Ministry to Address the Challenges

1. 	Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has formed a national taskforce to develop a national tick and tropical-borne diseases control strategy.

2. 	An inter-institutional collaboration consisting of MAAIF, National Drug Authority, Makerere College of Veterinary Medicine and National Livestock Resources Research Institute (NaLIRRI) has been formed to intervene at farm level. The task force has also held various meetings with farmers in Gomba, Kiruhura and Sembabule to sensitise them on tick acaricide failure.

3. 	The national taskforce is also finalising development of the national tick and tick-borne diseases control policy for Uganda.

4. 	Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries together with Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) established a research centre for ticks and tick-borne diseases control at Makerere University College of Veterinary Medicine. This laboratory supports farmers with tick acaricide resistance testing to identify the most effective acaricides for evidence based tick control. This initiative has been implemented in Kiruhura, Gomba, Mbarara, Rukingiri, Mitooma, Sheema and Sembabule, among others.

5. 	Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has also worked with Makerere University College of Veterinary Medicine to develop extension manuals for training farmers on rational acaricide application. I will also bring these manuals to MPs here so that they can use them to mobilise our farmers.

6. 	Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has secured support from FAO to build NaLIRRI’s capacity to carry out acaricide resistance surveillance. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has also partnered with National Drug Authority to support countrywide mapping of tick acaricide resistance.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, while doing all this, we still have challenges.

Major Interventions Pending due to Financial Constraints

A proposal on an intervention strategy was developed pending funding. The key areas of the proposal include:

i) 	Nationwide surveillance to map out the pattern of tick acaricide resistance to support zoning of acaricide use in Uganda;

ii) 	Building capacity of various institutions to provide tick and tick-borne diseases control services;

iii) 	To intensify monitoring of quality, effectiveness and safety of acaricides on the market;

iv) 	To build laboratory capacity at district level to detect tick-borne diseases for prompt intervention. 

v) 	To build the capacity of existing laboratories at MAAIF, NaLIRRI and Makerere University College of Veterinary Medicine to provide tick acaricide resistance testing and dip wash strength testing services to farmers.

vi) 	Mass sensitisation of farmers on appropriate control of ticks and tick-borne diseases.

These, among other interventions that we proposed, could not be implemented because of inadequate funding.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for this statement. Can I have hon. Mwesigye who raised the issue to respond first.

4.37
COL. (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the effort he has put in to explain some of these issues. However, I am not satisfied because he has presented what has already been said several times here. By the time you see me raise this matter on the Floor of Parliament, you should know that there have been protracted discussions with the ministry. All these sensitisation programmes have taken place in Kiruhura, but the farmers are disappointed because there is no solution. 

What we have been calling for all these years is for capacity building - for Government to deploy more staff at subcounty level. This has not been done. We have been calling for zoning, whereby a certain acaricide is put in one region for some time, like it was done before. Now, you find that all the acaricides in one area. They have four generic names but have got about 1000 trade names. Once they develop resistance, you can see what is happening right now. 

In the past, when Karamoja region was using say Supona, Dicatex would be used in Ankole region. Once it developed resistance in Karamoja, it would be brought to Ankole region and the other switched to Karamoja region. This is not what is happening, Mr Speaker. What has caused these problems is liberalisation where everybody is allowed to bring in acaricides. 

Mr Speaker, whereas I appreciate the efforts by the minister, all these things have been said before. We would like to see zoning in place; we would like to see veterinary officers at the subcounty level; and we would like to see all these things that you have said. If you cannot attend to 14 million cows in this country, then we cannot lift this country to a middle income status. Thank you very much.

4.14
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to also register my dissatisfaction with the statement of the minister in regard to tick-borne diseases control in our country.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the livestock industry in Uganda is not being recognised. The minister has just told this august House that there is limited funding to the subsector and I think that is where the problem begins. The reason the livestock subsector in Uganda is not yielding the benefits it should is because little is being done by Government in terms of funding and developing the subsector. 

One big problem is the absence of a pastoral and rangeland policy. It is currently in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries but has not been operationalised. If this policy had been operationalised, I think funding would have been adequate to control tick-borne diseases in this country and also livestock diseases that have robbed farmers of their source of livelihood.

We have more than 4 million cattle in this country and the dairy industry is just beginning to pick up, but it is limited by the limited investments in this subsector. We call upon Government to speed up implementation of the pastoralists and rangeland policy so that the livelihood of the livestock-dependant households in this country, which is about 60 per cent, can be enhanced, so that they are able to join the rest of the country in attaining a middle income status which the President is passionate about.

The other issue is regulation of veterinary drugs in this country. Mr Speaker, the ministry has lost the battle in regulating veterinary drugs and other chemicals for livestock in this country. You can find fake acaricides being sold in the cattle markets in this country. I think that is where the problem begins. Farmers are buying acaricides to control ticks but they are no longer effective because the regulation of the drugs that are entering the country is not effective. The ministry should go an extra mile as regards this matter. 

We have other species of livestock that are resistant to tick-borne diseases such as the Boran and the Brahman. These cattle have thick skins which cannot be penetrated by the mouth pattern of the ticks and, therefore, they cannot get tick-borne disease. Introduction of these livestock that are resistant to tick-borne diseases would go a long way in protecting the cattle population in this country so that they can contribute adequately to the GDP. 

The other issue is budgetary allocation. Out of four per cent budget allocation to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the livestock subsector again gets peanuts. How do you expect them to effectively carry out and implement their mandate when they are getting little money? 

In Maputo, the council of ministers of the East African countries and COMESA countries agreed that the governments of East Africa and COMESA should raise funding for agriculture to eleven per cent. However to date, Uganda still allocates only four per cent of her budget to Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Out of this, the other subsectors - fisheries and livestock - get very little. 

I call upon the Government to think of splitting the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries into two. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should stand out as a separate ministry because it is now marginalised when it comes to budgetary allocation. This Parliament should think of pulling out the docket of livestock and fisheries from the ministry. It should be independent so that it gets an independent budgetary allocation, to be able to carry out all these interventions that can boost the livestock industry in Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.48
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the Floor. My response to the statement by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is twofold.

First, I appreciate the detailed separation of issues in the minister’s paper. The minister decried the resistance of ticks against acaricides. This indicates that there is a mutation in the genes of ticks that are affecting our cows. When there is a mutation, it means the species have evolved, and when species evolve, a new gene rises. There is a law of natural selection in which there is survival for the fittest. That means that there is a new species of ticks amongst our cows, which have now adapted to survival for the fittest. They fit better because they resist the acaricides. I thought the minister’s paper would talk about the interest of the ministry in these new modifications of ticks among our cows.

That said, I would also like to say that it is not true, scientifically, that ticks have developed resistance to acaricides per se without linking this to the emergence of new genes of ticks. Rather, the acaricides on the market are of low quality. They have been highly adulterated such that even when they are used repetitively, they are not effective. 

The Government is crying because we are using acaricides that are not effective. However, I thought that in the minister’s paper, despite one of the major interventions in No.3 being that there is an intention to intensify monitoring of quality, effectiveness and safety of acaricides on the market - This is major because the different acaricides and de-wormers on the market have been adulterated so that even repeated use does not make a big difference.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to add that it is deplorable that the Government has accepted that our efforts to crossbreed our cows have practically failed. The essence of crossbreeding is to bring up three elements; if you are crossbreeding local breeds with exotic breeds, it is to increase milk production of the local breed, increase resistance to disease and also to increase productivity. The expectation is that the F1 of the crossbreed is both disease resistant and also a good milker. In such circumstances, when Government confirms that the efforts of crossbreeding have been challenged, what do we do? We go back to our local Ankole or Zebu cows, which are good for beef largely and not necessarily milk.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to note that ticks pose a danger to all cattle but they are more dangerous to the exotic cows. What about our local breeds that are resistant to ticks? Is there an effort to improve their line of resistance? Actually, a cross between the Ankole (the long-horn) and the Zebu (short-horn) is stronger in resistance than a cross between the Ankole or Zebu with exotic breeds. Therefore, I would like to see the ministry focusing on this. 

I have been informed that the Government is now moving towards establishment of big abattoirs because we want to export meat. We are not going to export meat of exotic cows; our local cows are good for meat production. I thought we would see an effort by the ministry to raise some new genes in our local cows and make them better beef producers.

Mr Speaker, the problem is not only resistance to ticks. The bigger problem is the shortage of manpower to respond in time, especially when these improved cows get sick, as they are very difficult to deal with. I have not forgotten my story in Serere where we persuaded farmers to change from the local Zebu cows to the exotic cows for better milk production in vain. This was because they feared to attempt the unknown, and they were right because the improved cows are very delicate.

Mr Speaker, I would like to report that in my constituency late last year, Operation Wealth Creation distributed improved cows (F3) to farmers. The F3 is about 75 per cent exotic and a good milker. However, out of the 21 cows that were distributed, 18 died. They did not die necessarily because of the negligence of the farmers but because of lack of appropriate quick responses from the veterinarians who could help arrest the situation in time. 

Of course, there are some local veterinarians on the ground whom the farmers are used to. However, the qualifications of those veterinarians on the ground fit where they are and they are more familiar with the local cows. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like the ministry to get interested in employing sufficient staff at the local level who can quickly run in to help these farmers, especially when their cows are attacked by tick-borne diseases. Thank you very much.

4.54
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Mwesigye and my colleagues for raising this issue. 

The issue that I would like to emphasise is that hon. Mwesigye and Nyabushozi have not just recently faced tick-borne diseases. It is because our population is progressively moving according to the Government’s call for wealth creation. The reason as to why our people are abandoning the local breeds is for purposes of getting high milk yielding cattle and stock. Those in the meat sector go for Boran cows. That is why there is that move. The reason why there is an upsurge in disease and death of cattle is because these are new breeds.

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether Government will achieve its target of prosperity for all by 2020. This is because people have agreed and moved away from traditional methods and are embracing modern methods, which are letting them down. I can tell you that we have many of our boys who had gone abroad to Iraq and other countries and when they came back, they bought high-yielding breeds but all these have died off.

Mr Speaker, I think the minister’s wish list is where the problem lies. The wish list involves monitoring the quality of acaricides and injectables. Our local people, with low incomes, were used to Milbitraz, which is fairly priced. When you tell them to use Dicatex or Supona, a litre of Supona is between Shs 90,000 and Shs 120,000. Even the injectables are very expensive; one hundred millilitres (mls) cost between Shs 120,000 and Shs 140,000 and yet this cannot even cure the disease. 

I grew up in Rwemikoma and at that time we used to have communal dips and each parish would know the date that was appointed for them to dip their cattle. I remember that we used to dip every Friday. What is happening right now is that the Government has completely abandoned the dips and people are on their own. At that time, Government would intervene and bring in quality acaricides, monitor how people were dipping their cattle and even the poor would have an opportunity to rear cattle. I do not know –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to give supplementary information to the House, which can help the ministry. I remember that in the last Parliament, we debated and advised the ministry to strategically plan for the importation of acaricides. I do not care if I have to pay Shs 100,000 for 100mls but the quality matters. 

We advised Government that we should do it the way we are dealing with human medicine. National Medical Stores tests the drugs imported into the country before they are put on the market. However, with animal medicines, it is a case of “to whom it may concern”. It is a commercial business and it does not matter if a business person fakes a drug and puts it on the market; what he or she is interested in is making a profit.

If we want to hit our target and promote the dairy industry, Government should strategically come in. If it does not do so, I do not think we can perform better.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, for the minister to say that a major intervention is pending due to financial constraints is where the problem lies. Actually, these interventions would cover the sector.

I am sorry if I have to refer to it once again, but the people who were in charge of this country and who set up the livestock sector were farsighted - during the time of the late Milton Obote in the 1960s and Idi Amin in the 1970s. We were dipping our cattle in the 1970s. Leaders who had no close affinity to cattle had this foresight and yet those who are by-products of cattle are failing. (Laughter) It is terrible. No, this cannot be steady progress. What those leaders did –(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: I would like to inform my brother that some of our people have very close connections with animals. People from Lango, for example, are actually cattle keepers. It is only that some people raided all our cattle and now we are farmers. I would like to inform hon. Ssekikubo that the late President Milton Obote was highly attached to animals and that is why he developed clear policies on breeding animals in this country.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank the honourable member for the information and I take it in good spirit. 

Recently, Government undertook ranch restructuring and they left land for communal dams and even dips. However, out of impunity, the common facilities have been taken over. Unless we get serious, we shall be looking back to when Sir Edward Mutesa helped Mawogola to dig permanent water sources that we still use today. The late Idi Amin left permanent structures and dips which we, the enlightened generation of today, have destroyed.

Mr Speaker, there is good benefit in liberalisation but Government is running away from its responsibilities and leaving a laissez faire market to reign where people with money import drugs. I would like to put it on record that it is people with strong connections to Government that are at liberty to import fake drugs and acaricides and they go unchecked. Now, here we are lamenting and yet the benefits go to a few but the sufferers are the people whom we represent here. Unless the minister commits himself to this, we shall end up without real solutions to the problems that we have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the House satisfied with what the minister stated to the House? Let me first hear from the minister, please.

5.03
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Mr Speaker, allow me to plead with Members to be satisfied with my explanation.

The honourable member has rightly got the answer to one of the issues raised. We have not realised adequate funding to this sector. We all know that our President is one of those who signed the Maputo Declaration to fund agriculture up to 10 per cent of the national budget. However, we are the same people who pass the budget. Of course, I am aware that we all agreed to prioritise and start with a few areas and move on until we reach our desired destination because we do not have enough money in the national purse. Therefore, under the circumstances, it is fair for the honourable members to accept my explanation. 

Having said that, we are not sitting; there is serious work that we have started on to organise crop and animal farmers into cooperatives, farmers’ organisations and producer organisations so that they can also join the struggle. Some of the failures come from the farmers because they are not well organised and well sensitised to fight this war against diseases. I would like to assure Members that we are going down, and you will be part of us, to make sure that within six months we are done with organising farmers.

Regarding the issue of fake imports, we have some Acts in place like the Animal Health Act and others. I request you, Mr Speaker, to make sure that the counterfeit law is brought here and passed so that it can beef up the other laws that are in place. This is because people adulterate these drugs openly and the laws that we have are too weak to handle these counterfeits.

Mr Speaker, the animal industry is not marginalised. The money we get in NAADS is shared among the different areas and sub-sectors of the ministry, although the money is not enough. However, we have agreed that with the meagre resources, we can also prioritise and start with a few and then prioritise other areas as we move on.

Mr Speaker, regarding extension workers, we have been struggling with this problem as we do not have enough manpower on the ground. We have agreed with the Ministry of Public Service that by the end of the third financial year from now, we shall have 100 per cent coverage. In addition, as I mentioned earlier, we have agreed to organise farmers so that they can, through peer education, fight diseases by helping each other –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is saying that there is no adequate manpower but he has not indicated in his status report how many staff they have and therefore where the gaps are. 

Secondly, I thought that this report should have captured the amount of money, which has so far been injected, what your budget was and the deficit so far. Three, I also thought that this report should have captured the animal population so that we know the magnitude of the problem. Four, how many farmers are you talking about? When you talk about outreach programmes of veterinary services, you should know the number of farmers that you are dealing with so that we have a picture of what they are going to pursue. 

After perusing through this statement, Mr Speaker, in my opinion, it fits more into academic jargon than a status report. When you read the first paragraph on page 1, the illustration given is as if Uganda started in 1986, which is not the situation. Actually, there were interventions in the animal industry before 1986. Therefore, we should really appreciate the fact that other regimes have contributed to this sector and we need to build on what they did and improve on what they failed to do.

On the major interventions pending due to financial constraints on page 2, my interpretation, having had a background in development work, is that these sound more like objectives than interventions. An intervention is more activity-based. These are more like objectives and, therefore, they cannot give clear meaning and direction. Therefore, in my view, this brief needs to be given more surgery because in the real sense, we do not know what we are dealing with. It is more generic and not specific and a brief should be specific and precise. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, he has gone into an area, which I am more conversant with. This is a brief and if need be, we can go back and produce an elaborate comprehensive report on agriculture. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister and Members, from the way this matter is going, we shall have no comprehensive end to it. The issues being raised are very critical but the question is: how do we conclude this debate? How do we guide ourselves on what to do next? I see that as the missing piece in the process of this debate. 

How are we going to proceed with this? We are well informed and talking very eloquently but how do we zero down in terms of positions and move the issues forward? From here, I am hearing very eloquent speeches but there are some gaps. Honourable minister, would you like to assist?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I am aware of the expectations from the Members of Parliament and the entire country for this sector. Everybody thinks that we should redeem this country from where it is, especially in terms of food security, nutrition and income for our farmers. I also think that this should be the lead sector in supporting export for this country and I am aware of this. 

However, the question that I came to answer was asked by Col (Rtd) Mwesigye on behalf of Nyabushozi. I would have also loved to have a session to discuss agriculture –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, you ably guided the House and specifically, the minister. He is a long standing Member with vast experience but apparently, he has not picked your guidance and he has continued loitering around the subject without delving into its depth. 

Mr Speaker, we would have expected an immediate intervention, well aware that a question from Nyabushozi is not for Nyabushozi per se but for the entire country. We all have similar problems across the country. Can Government, for example, undertake to subsidise immunisation drugs? Once you immunise a cow, there is a metal placed on the ear of the cow and people would know that the cow is indeed immunised. This is expensive for farmers because vaccination alone is between Shs 20,000 to Shs 30,000 per cow. Vaccination would go a long way because once a cow is vaccinated, even if it gets a problem, at least you can treat it and it would get better. 

Can the minister lay on the Table concrete and immediate plans to help the sector rather than digressing into the Ministry of Public Service and promising to recruit extension workers? That is something covering many years. Short of that, we demand that the minister withdraws his statement and comes back with practical steps to help the situation.

5.17
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister has identified four challenges, which he called current challenges, in chemical tick control. If I may help the honourable minister; what solution or intervention do you have for the first challenge? That is if you have any intervention that you can make.

The first challenge he has identified is lack of acaricide use support services. He goes ahead to say that the collapse of communal dips, insufficiency of dip strength testing services and lack of acaricide efficacy testing services variably affects efficiency of chemical tick control. May I suggest that you say that like the Idi Amin and Milton Obote regimes used to do, you are going to take immediate steps to reintroduce these interventions that existed before and helped to sort out this problem? I know it is very challenging for you to compare this to Idi Amin and Milton Obote but it is the reality and you bring it out yourself in writing. 

Challenge two is widespread irrational use of acaricides. What are you going to do in the immediate? Challenge three is acaricide resistance; what are you going in the immediate? Four is poor regulation of acaricides. How do you lament when you are Government? This is the first time that I am seeing a Government lamenting. The minister comes and says, “we have poor control”. What is your solution to the regulation? Nothing! 

That is why hon. Mwesigye is saying that they need interventions, controls and regulations. Instead, you have gone to research in Makerere. This is for the long term. What the cattle keeping communities are crying for is immediate solutions to the challenges, which you have ably identified. Therefore, if you come up with these four, we will not have this debate. Thank you.

5.20
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To begin with, the next time that the minister brings his submission, I request that he makes this correction: veterinary medicine at Makerere University ceased to be a school; it is now a college - College of Veterinary Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity (COVAB). When you continue referring to just the College of Veterinary Medicine, that ceased to exist; it was just a school.

Mr Speaker, my colleague has just said that this is an epidemic. Well, I have problems with that because research and impact cannot be disconnected; you cannot delink them. The reason why we are failing on so many interventions as a country is because we have failed to connect our interventions with research. It is research that is supposed to show you the way. A lot of our programmes and interventions are not guided by research. As a result, we miss the target.

Mr Speaker, I would encourage the minister to explore the possibility of not only looking at journals - I saw an updated journal of 2016 and I think that is good - but make sure that he first looks at the longitudinal economic impact of ticks and tick-borne diseases or the situation analysis. The College of Veterinary Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity at Makerere University, and of course other research institutions, would be in a position to guide and enrich your submission. In the interest of time, I request that this be adequate for now. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need a way forward on this debate because this is general and is not taking us anywhere.

5.23
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Mr Speaker, after listening to Members and the minister’s brief, which is not satisfactory, I move a motion that the minister be given one week to come up with a practical solution to what is happening on the ground rather than having a technical statement. He should also withdraw this statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that acceptable, honourable members? 

HON. MEMBERS: Aye!  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have taken a decision. I need you to come and confirm that you will come back with a more elaborate submission on the issue that has been proposed and a proper intervention mechanism that you are going to propose.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I wholeheartedly receive the input from the honourable members and I promise that within one week, I will come back with an elaborate and clear report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This statement is already on the record and even if you say “withdraw”, it does not help much. However, honourable minister, you need to help us because you have seen the concern and a lot of people draw a livelihood from this - 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, Sir. I take this as support to my sector. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Absolutely; this is support to you, honourable minister. Let us have a way of handling this issue in a comprehensive way because these issues keep coming up. I was about to suggest that we take it to the committee but the committee is just starting. Therefore, it will take a bit of time before it comes back. 

Honourable minister, please assist this House. Come with all the things you have to the House and we will take a decision on how to move forward with these matters. That is the only way we can help our people. 

Honourable members, can we pause now? Tomorrow we have Prime Minister’s Question Time that starts at 3 O’clock. For those of you who have issues to raise, we discussed the parameters of how to make this time useful - you deal with broad policy issues that the Prime Minister will have responses to. If you ask specific constituency issues, the Prime Minister will of course not have knowledge and we will lose the opportunity of asking more vital questions. Therefore, I would like you to go and look at this again and get those issues that you see as gaps in what we need to understand as Parliament and pose these questions to the Prime Minister tomorrow. The Prime Minister’s Question Time starts at 3 O’clock tomorrow but House starts at 2 O’clock with other business. 

The Business Committee meeting is for Thursday because tomorrow there is Cabinet. The Prime Minister would like to attend the Business Committee meeting. I have already told you that we have received the legislative calendar proposed by the Prime Minister’s office and the Prime Minister on what kind of business we are going to start with and how we are going to prioritise and move on with it. It is already here, so let us brace ourselves and get ready to start work in earnest. Honourable members, this sitting is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.27 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 July 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
