
Thursday, 7 July 2022

Parliament met at 2.01 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS
(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)
The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. During yesterday’s sitting, I noticed breaches of the Rules of Procedure on the debate stipulated under Part XII of the Rules of Procedure, which covers, among others: the time and manner of speaking (rule 70); close of debate (rule 71); contents of a speech (rule 72): and the persistent rejection of the ruling of the Speaker (rule 79). 

In the interest of harmony, I urge Members to exhibit the requisite level of discipline, courtesy and respect for each other – let us have respect for each other at all times when we are in the House. Outside there, people are watching us. 

One time when we were in this House – I will not get tired of referring to the late Rt. Hon. Jacob Oulanyah – the late Jacob said that when he went back home, his children asked him: “Daddy, is that the House you preside over?” 

So, your children are watching and seeing whether this is the House that you come to and this kind of mess can take place when you are here. We are all parents and need to have mutual respect for each other. 

Honourable members, I would also like to emphasise the rationale of the rules in the conduct of parliamentary business. The rules enable us:

    1.  To focus on the subject matter at a time. If we are looking at a subject matter, let us focus on it at that time. That is why we have a well-laid Order Paper.

    2.  To extend courtesy to each and every Member. If, say, Agnes is speaking this side, even if you do not agree with what she is saying, just give her the courtesy – listen to her. I mean, we are all in the process – we have not been here like other people who have been in this institution – like the former chairman of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Let us offer courtesy to all Members. Let us observe the rules and respect the right of the majority.

    3.  To prevent unfair advantage. That is why during debate, I try my best to balance the House. Let us practise the principle of Ubuntu – that is essential: I am because we are; we are here because they are. 

The togetherness we created in this House must continue and we must build on it. We are one when in the House. When you are out there, that is when you can be in political parties.

As the Eleventh Parliament, let us be glued to strengthen the cohesion that the society would love us to have. Uganda is ours; this is our homeland and there is no other place we can call home. So, it is us to build our country or break it. As the august House, let us build this country. Let us build this House. 

I thank you. 

I know there are Members who have matters of national importance. We are going to have Prime Minister’s Time. We have a number of issues, so, I will allow only five Members to raise matters of national importance. 

2.08
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We respect your advice on how the House should have debate. Indeed, we enjoy debate when it is fruitful and there is good engagement from both sides. 

Where we get a challenge – my prayer through you to the Front Bench – ministers have that capacity because they are ahead of us. They are the ones on the Front Bench. When they are raising issues, we always seek clarification and it must be admitted by them.

Madam Speaker, majority of the ministers do not want us to seek clarifications from them, yet we always want to find out what they are saying based on what they are reporting. We used to have the Rt Hon. Prime Minister – you also referred to the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and how he used to guide us here. We even had the Rt Hon. Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi here. He could see you and say “no, honourable members, I am going to give you” and then we could sit. 

Then, he could say: “Can I listen to all those seeking clarifications?” We would then raise our points of clarifications and he would respond to them. 

However, Madam Speaker, where we become rowdy and fail to control ourselves is when ministers rush to air out their views without listening to the back bench. The back bench must be addressed professionally by ministers. That is why I like Hon. Bahati very much. When you seek clarification, he says: “Honourable member, calm down.” Later, he says: “Hon. Ssewungu, come in.” 

Madam Speaker, if the front bench does not accept “clarification” I will go for “order”. 

THE SPEAKER: The message has been taken. 

MR SSEWUNGU: So, kindly, Madam Prime Minister, through the Rt Hon. Speaker, you should be the first to accept clarifications. You are fond of refusing them but they are for your good –

THE SPEAKER: Who is “you”? I said let us have respect for each other. (Applause) You can say: “Above all, the Prime Minister.” 

MR SSEWUNGU: Above all, the Prime Minister, accept clarifications. (Laughter) Otherwise, you are fond of rejecting them. 

THE SPEAKER: No, we will seek clarifications because we need clarity in whatever we discuss. So, we will seek clarification where we can and where the minister or anybody else is not ready, we will give time for clarification to be made, maybe, the next day. 

MR SAMUEL OPIO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is more of a procedural issue. Yesterday, you guided that we need to clock in when we come in and also clock out. I clocked in today and the time shown on the clocking system was “1.00a.m., 1 January 1970”. (Laughter) 

So, I request that this matter be corrected so that we can appropriately clock-in. When I look at the different clock-in systems, they are showing different times. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: That is a very good observation, Sam. We are going to handle it. The Clerk should handle that immediately. 

2.12
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I thank you for your communication especially on decorum on the Floor of Parliament. 

I also want to thank you for the recently concluded training that you provided to Members of Parliament, from which we all benefited and learned something. However, you cannot only learn once. I request that we have smaller trainings in smaller groups in our different political organisations and also together so that we keep learning. As you are aware, we have new Members of Parliament and others who are old but still need to learn like me. Learning is a continuous process. Much as we had one training, I request that we should not end at that. We should make it a continuous process so that we keep learning and following the Rules of Procedure so that we have a better House that is not going to walk but to run in this session that we are starting. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: In most of these things, you learn by attending. I mean, learning how to behave towards people, do I have to take you to class? The presumption is that we are all above senior six. 

Matters of national importance, Hon. Ssemujju?

2.14
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance. Yesterday, I was raising a matter of national importance and you granted me leave to bring evidence to present today. I do not know whether this is the time to present it - If you allow, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker, this matter, as I wrote to your Office, I present it under rule 49 and rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure. Can the Government, and specifically the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs, brief Parliament on complaints raised by some of the leaders of the Democratic Republic of Congo relating to the events of June 13th when the rebels of M23 captured Bunagana. The Speaker of the DRC National Assembly Rt Hon. Christophe Mboso N’Kodia, on 15 June, accused Uganda of backstabbing their forces at Bunagana and vowed that they will not allow the agreement with Uganda to have a joint military operation in Eastern DRC that is due for renewal, to be renewed. I am quoting him as he is quoted on the Parliamentary website of DRC. “Even before these troops – M23 - did what they did, we said following the pact that President Museveni’s son Lt Gen. Muhoozi Kainerugaba signed with Rwanda - we are not letting this agreement pass”- 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, lay the information on Table then we will ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to respond.  

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I may not read everything; I have attached all the necessary documents –

THE SPEAKER: Yes. Lay it on the Table. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Finally, Madam Speaker, the second part of this matter of national importance relates to Ethiopia where we are also accused of training, in Karamoja, of the Tigray rebels who are fighting the Government; a matter that has been widely captured –

THE SPEAKER: Please lay the document and we will have a response to that effect. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the rule requires that I read what I am laying, if the Prime Minister can be patient. So, the documents I am laying: one is a report in The East African; it can even be accessed on www.theeastafrican.co.ke –

THE SPEAKER: Please, lay the document. 

MR SSEMUJJU: The second is a report called the “First Forward” relating to Ethiopia and the tweets by the ‘tweeting General’. Madam Speaker, as you have guided, I lay both this information. I was just providing more sources in case anyone wants to read on his or her own. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, lay. Thank you. 

2.18
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda is not training any rebel groups in any part of this country or outside the country. 

Secondly, I want to commit that the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, will come here with a report and respond. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We need a report from the minister to that effect after understanding the whole thing. We cannot debate what we have just received; we have not internalised the document; we do not know whether it is true, we will even need an authenticated Hansard from the DRC to be able to know that this is a resolution of their Parliament. 

2.19
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. As you may recall, this House, by a resolution of Parliament, adopted a recommendation of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the fuel crisis in this country. At that time, a litre of fuel was averaging Shs 5,000. 

Today, the same litre costs between Shs 6,000 and Shs 7,000 across the country. At the same time, the same litre of fuel goes for an equivalent of Shs 3,700 and Shs 4,700 in our neigbouring countries.  If you go around town, the observed reduced traffic jam is evidence that some people have parked their cars and started walking or limited their journeys. 

Madam Speaker, these high prices have an effect on the cost of production, doing business, education and transport. This may get worse. Kenya will be holding its general elections on 9 August 2022, and Uganda’s largest share of petroleum products enter the country through Kenya. To this effect, Madam Speaker, allow me to give a notice that next week, I will move a motion inviting Parliament to make a resolution asking the minister to give us a plan in respect to the Kenyan elections. What is the plan in case we get what we have seen in the past; the post-election violence?

However, for today, Madam Speaker, my prayers are two:

    1. That the minister responsible for energy informs the House on what steps Government has undertaken, if any, to implement the resolution of Parliament that was made and that I have referred to above.

    2. The Minister of Energy explains how she is planning or is dealing with the current skyrocketing fuel crisis in the country.

I submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Mwijukye but honourable members, I want all of us to do research before you bring anything. Most of these issues that are being raised, like the fuel prices, have external factors to that effect. It is not only affecting Uganda. 

The issue would be, how ready are we in terms of our reserves? Now that Kenya is going for elections, what plans do we have as a country to see how to regulate the fuel prices? Prime Minister -

2.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, you have rightly put it that all that we are going through now are a result of external factors, which were exacerbated by the war between Ukraine and Russia.

Madam Speaker, there are a number of things we are putting in place, as Government, and one is to have another external route on the waters into the country. The other is through Tanzania in case we get a problem this side of our sister country, Kenya.

Madam Speaker, we have always told our people to remain frugal because all the factors that are bringing fuel prices to increase are external. I will request the Minister of Energy to come up with a comprehensive paper such that Parliament can be ably informed. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We will need a report on how ready we are, as a country, in terms of our reserves. The report which was brought to this House said the reserves had nothing. Layibi - 

2.24
MR MAPENDUZI OJARA (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity –

THE SPEAKER: Make your issue very short, not reading a whole pamphlet.

MR MAPENDUZI OJARA:	Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, you are aware that section 17(2) of the Public Finance Management Act requires that the vote that does not expend money that was appropriated to that vote for the financial year shall, at the close of the financial year, repay that money back to the Consolidated Fund.

Madam Speaker, you recall that sometime back, I raised a concern in this House pointing to the fact that the Ministry of Public Service and the local Government ministry had taken too long to provide guidelines, including the human resource structure, for the operationalisation of the cities created.

Much as, later on, the Ministry of Public Service provided that guideline which we had requested for, especially on the structures, the ministry did not go ahead to provide the job descriptions for the positions that were created. As a result, the cities were not able to go ahead with the recruitment processes for the positions provided.

Madam Speaker, I am raising this because recently, Gulu City returned back to the Treasury a total of Shs 4,401,062,129. Out of this total amount that was returned, a total of Shs 2,584,589,383 was meant for salaries. Gulu and all the other cities cannot go ahead to have these recruitment exercises done unless the ministry provides the approved job descriptions for these positions created under the human resource structures that the ministry has provided for the cities.

Madam Speaker, I therefore pray that:

    1. Parliament should intervene in this matter and cause the Ministry of Public Service to expeditiously provide the approved job descriptions for the positions under the approved structures for the cities, to enable these cities go ahead and carry out the recruitment.

    2. Parliament should give a specific timeframe within which these actions should be taken and a report be given back to Parliament.

    3. Finally, Madam Speaker, there is need for tougher action to be taken on those whose inactions hamper implementation of programmes that are planned for a specific financial year.

Madam Speaker, I am not sure whether the Ministry of Public Service - and I do not know for how long they are going to continue with this kind of sluggishness. I am not sure whether they know how much impact this is negatively putting on the cities.

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that this Parliament will pay a lot more attention to the plight of the cities created in the spirit of enhancing service delivery to the citizens in the cities. Thank you very much.

I have documents that I would like to table –

THE SPEAKER: Which document is that?

MR MAPENDUZI OJARA: I have a copy of the approved structures. I have a breakdown of the returned money.

THE SPEAKER: Read one by one.

MR MAPENDUZI OJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have this document as proof of the structures that the ministry provided. I also have a breakdown of the unspent balances for Gulu City and I would like to provide them. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister of Public Service, you provided guidelines, you asked for people to be recruited but the job descriptions were not given. Ministry of Finance was kind enough to give the money to these cities but recruitment has not taken place. Money was returned to the Consolidated Account and the hassle will be getting back that money into the cities. What is the way forward?

2.30
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, it is indeed unfortunate that this has happened, particularly for Gulu City. When the structure was approved initially, we sent guidelines to cater for a generic staff and in some cases where that generic staff was customised, things went well.

The way forward, Madam Speaker, is that indeed, the Public Service is now going to fine-tune the job descriptions for Gulu City and then the process of recruitment can immediately continue where it halted.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, what does it take for somebody to make the job descriptions? Are you understaffed that your staff cannot do that? You need to take action on some of these technical people.

MR MURULI MUKASA:
Madam Speaker, all I can say is that yes, this job description of the staff of Gulu is going to be available-

THE SPEAKER: Not only Gulu. Honourable members, we want all the cities, we do not want the inefficiency of other people to be borne by you; make your people do their work.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Agreed, Madam Speaker. I can say that in two weeks, the job descriptions will be ready and sent to the various cities.

THE SPEAKER: I am giving you the two weeks. In the two weeks, my presumption is that finance will also be able to get back the money for recruitment. 

2.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Can I say something, please?  Madam Speaker, I request colleagues that when you see things are not moving, involve us other than us waiting until the money is returned. If you had come earlier, maybe we would have saved that money. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request colleagues-

THE SPEAKER: You know the Prime Minister is a majegere. 

MS NABBANJA: Yes. So, when you see things are not moving, involve us so that we can crack the whip. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like you to crack the whip. Let people do their jobs and we have these things other than all the time having “matters of national importance” which are not being implemented. 

2.33
MR ALLAN MAYANJA: (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter regarding the persistent vandalism of electricity poles, theft of electric wires and yaka meters in the country. But in this case, I am referring to Nakaseke Central County in Nakaseke District.

Madam Speaker, for about three months now, electricity is off. Eleven villages and four parishes-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Allan, that issue is on the Order Paper. You will raise it when that is being answered. It is a matter that was raised before we left.

MR MAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter from this side. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I would like to raise relates to the statement that has been made by the Minister of Public Service and also the Prime Minister now, in relation to the cities. 

Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: We are on another item. 

MR ANGURA: I am a member of the public- 

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, we are on another item. It is unfortunate that you came in late. I made a ruling that you can only debate on what is on the Floor. You are the ones who at the close of a debate - check our Rule 71, you one of the senior Members here. We are on another item. 

2.35
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I arise on a matter of national importance regarding some bandits from Karamoja who are not only terrorising the people of Agago but also are killing, looting and doing all sorts of things to the people of Agago, especially Agago North County. 

Madam Speaker, during the most recent recess, those warriors decided to change their style; they decided to relocate and they got a hiding place in Milan between the Karamoja and Acholi sub-regions, especially in the place called Obwore hills. The Karimojong warriors who are doing all these atrocities are no longer living in the Karamoja sub-region. Instead they are in that hiding place.

In the last three days, they have killed people. Just as I speak now, today they are burying one person called Okee Caesar, a 57-year-old man from Laciki village in Lakwa Parish. No wonder, this gentleman’s brother lost about seven heads of cattle some two weeks ago to lightning and thunder. And all those disasters are just surrounding that family. 

Before then, one called John Katongole, a 28-year-old man from Lacek Oto village in Laita Parish also was killed by those Karimojong bandits. 

Another gentleman called Okema-

THE SPEAKER: Did you confirm that they were Karimojong?

MR AMOS OKOT: Yes, Madam Speaker. They are the Karimojong.

THE SPEAKER: How did you confirm? Were you part of them?

MR AMOS OKOT: Well, Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: Cattle rustlers are not Karimojong alone; unless you were part of the team. Let us use a more civilised language so that we do not divide this country.

MR AMOS OKOT: Well, Madam Speaker, it is a matter that can be debated which I do not want to go into for now. I hail from Agago, North County. And-

THE SPEAKER: Let us use, “the cattle rustlers.”

MR AMOS OKOT: That is what I said, “Karimojong warriors and bandits-”

THE SPEAKER: I am saying remove the words “Karimojong warriors”, and use “cattle rustlers” instead.

MR AMOS OKOT: Most obliged. The cattle rustlers who are hailing from that side of the Karamoja sub-region-(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am saying - first of all, if you know where they are hailing from, then why are you raising an issue? If you want to be helped, do not bring divide and rule in this country. It is only after investigation that you can be able to know whether this is a Karimojong, an Etesot or even an Acholi.

MR AMOS OKOT: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. The cattle rustlers-(Interruption)-

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In your communication, you guided us with precision and clarity. It is very important that when we have young citizens in the gallery or even without them, we have to lead by example. 

Madam Speaker, I invoke Rule 79 and I have to read it verbatim: “Motion that a member no longer be heard. Where a member persists in irrelevancy or tedious repetitions or uses objectionable words and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words and offer an apology to the satisfaction of the Speaker, a Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that the Member using the objectionable words no longer be heard, and the question on that motion shall be put forthwith without amendment or debate.” 

Madam Speaker, what my colleague is trying or is continuing to push forward borders on dividing this country into “us versus them”. And you have been very eloquent in guiding us that we need one Uganda and we need one family. It is wrong for a Member to continue and persist in trying to divide our country, yet we are supposed to move as one family. 

Madam Speaker, if it pleases you, I am asking you to guide us on whether rule 79 should not have been invoked. 

Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I gave my caution at the beginning of the session. I also did that in my communication today. Let us debate objectively. He has withdrawn the statement here. He has said “the cattle rustlers”. Let us not divide the country. We are all one. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Much obliged, Madam Speaker –
 
THE SPEAKER: Can you give us your prayers? 

MR AMOS OKOT: During this course, people are running into Internally Displaced People’s (IDP) camps. Foods items are being stolen. Goats are being stolen. Cassava plants in the gardens are being uprooted by the cattle rustlers. 

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that: 

    1. The responsible ministry, especially the ministry for disaster preparedness, responds to the problems of the people of Omiya Pachwa Subcounty and Paimol Subcounty.
    2. The UPDF should revise the method they were using to try and follow up these cattle rustlers. Previously, there was a decision taken after suggestions following many meetings took that place with the affected people to the extent that some vigilantes were even recruited so that they could work hand-in-hand with the UPDF to follow up these people. However, as we speak now, the involvement with those vigilantes is not taking place, but these cattle rustlers have a corner and ground where they pass through. 

Therefore, the prayer we are putting across is that the UPDF should revise the ways - Much as they have deployed, the Killings are taking place while they are even there. Besides, for the hailstorms that killed the seven herds of cattle as well as these brothers, they should respond and help them.

2.44
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, you are aware that last week but one, the President was in Karamoja. There are a number of plans that have been put in place by the army, the ministry for defence and the minister for Karamoja to end cattle rustling across the four regions that neighbour Karamoja.

I have taken note of my brother’s concern. I promise that tomorrow, I will cause a meeting with the concerned ministries so that we can focus our efforts on his area. 

Thank you so much.
 
THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I request that when you cause that meeting, you could invite the Member of Parliament to be part of it. 

2.45
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on an issue of urgent public importance. I would like to bring to the attention of this House, and indeed the Government, the destruction caused by elephants and other problematic animals in Buliisa District, which has inflicted untold suffering to the people of Buliisa. 

The subcounties that have continued to be affected by these problematic animals include: 

    i. Ngwedo where we have Kilyango, Mvule Nunda, Mvule 1 and Kharatum; 

    ii. Buliisa Subcounty where we have Nyamitete, Pondiga, Beroya, Bugana Kichoke, Bugana Kataleba, Waiga, Kijangi, Kabolwa and Kigoya; and

    iii. Buliisa Town Council where we have Kitahura, Tugu Lyec and the centre of this town council.  

The effects are the ravaging of crops of the population and even loss of lives. 

Madam Speaker, you recall that this Parliament passed the UWA Act in 2019. The Act contains, among other things, addressing wildlife conservation areas or protection of species, wildlife user rights and the management of problem animals.

Since then, the regulations to guide the compensation have not been ratified by Parliament. The wildlife compensation scheme consists of the two per cent of monies collected by the authority from all the revenue collection and the monies appropriated by Parliament specifically for this purpose. 

The scheme was to be used for financing compensation claims for human life, injuries or damage to property caused by wildlife animals outside protected areas. Since October 2019, Uganda Wildlife Authority has been putting aside 20 per cent of the revenue collected to cater for the corporation. There is no mechanism as of now to disperse this money to the affected persons or communities. 

The delay to ratify this regulation has left our communities neighbouring these protected areas very devastated. This Parliament appropriated funds this financial year for 161km electric fence around Murchison Falls conservation area from Bugongo Gate through Nyamitete to Bugana. The trench line – 

THE SPEAKER: Can you be precise? What are your prayers? 

MS BIGIRWA: The reason I am raising this is that it is something that has been ongoing even up to last night and even today morning. The elephants have been hitting our communities on a daily basis. 

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that: 

    1. Government acts swiftly in releasing funds for boundary demarcation between the park and the neighbouring communities.

    2. There is need for quick response from Uganda Wildlife Authority to address the movement of these problem animals, more so the elephants.

    3. Government, through the responsibility ministry, avails proper network connectivity within the protected areas to enable faster response from the park authorities, since they normally have issues of network.

    4. Compensation for the destruction of gardens, crops, property and even lives be put in place because our people are suffering. We need to live in harmony with the park and the people also need to be alive in order to conserve it for generations. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister?

2.49 
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I was in Buliisa last week but one and I was informed of the same problem. I caused a meeting with the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and we have come up with –(Interruption)-

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, our rules are very specific. They provide the Prime Minister Time to answer questions every Thursday at 4.00 p.m. They require ministers to attend Parliament to answer questions. 

Since Parliament started, the Prime Minister is the one standing up. The Prime Minister keeps saying, where she cannot answer, “I am going to ask a minister”. The rules are very clear: ministers must attend and answer questions. The Prime Minister is required to come here at 4.00 p.m. today to answer her bit of the questions but not to answer every question that is posed and then to say “now I am going to tell this minister”. (Laughter) That is in total violation of our rules.  

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether the Prime Minister now has become the minister of every ministry, forgetting that her time is coming at 4.00 p.m. for her to answer questions posed to the Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: When you look at Article 108A of the Constitution, the Prime Minister is responsible for coordinating all the ministers and all the work of Parliament. So, when the Prime Minister is responding, she is doing her job. When she gets defeated, she will now invite the sectoral minister.

I think Hon. Ssemujju is really in love with the Prime Minister because when she is not here, he complains that she is not here; now today she is here, can you let her do her work? (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I meant the rule, because you said you ruled; we are now going to –

THE SPEAKER: You are talking about the rules; I am talking about the Constitution which is the supreme law of the land.

MR SSEMUJJU: And because you have said that I do not want to engage you, Madam Speaker. But if you had allowed - because you see, at the beginning of Parliament -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, can you sit down?

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I had invited him for a cup of tea and he did not come. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Order. Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. You see, sometimes you can tolerate -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was a commercial break.

MR SSEMUJJU: My name has been mentioned -

THE SPEAKER: How would this House be if you we did not have a Ssemujju, do you see that? Hon. Ssemujju, thank you for making the House lively.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am raising a point of order.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, it was a light moment.

MS NABBANJA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Like I told you earlier, I was in Buliisa myself for PDM systemisation and these issues came up. So, I took it upon myself and wrote to the minister in charge and I was given the following responses:
One, is that this Parliament appropriated money to do electric fencing in those districts that are affected by wild animals, especially those that are neighbouring the game reserves; that is the districts of Kanungu and Buliisa -

THE SPEAKER: Please go ahead. 

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, there is money we have appropriated to do exactly that. 

Then two, there is also some money that has been provided in this financial year's budget to compensate all those people who are affected by these stray animals. 

Madam Speaker, I will make sure that I connect my sister, the honourable member from Buliisa, to the ministry so that she gets more clarity. 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, it should not be only Buliisa but all the areas that are bordering national parks. This House budgeted and appropriated money for the fencing; that must take place. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Rubanda District Local Government. We have:

    1. Mr Stephen Kashaba 	- 	LC5 Rubanda 
    2. Mr Alex Kwizera – Chief Administrative Officer
    3.  Ms Prossy Kesafari- LC5 Vice Chairperson
    4.  Ms Waguma Mary-Speaker Rubanda
    5. Mr Mutatina Obed - Secretary for Health and Education
    6. Ms Mary Bebwajuba – Secretary Production and Marketing
    7. Ms Nevline Tusasirwe - Secretary Tourism and National Resources
    8.  Mr Kibuye Vincent – Secretary of Works and Finance
    9.  Mr Martin Turyagenda – Political Assistant to Hon. Musasizi.

These are represented by none other than our very good Minister Hon. Musasizi, who is very hardworking; Hon. Kamuntu Moses, also a very good person and active and our Commissioner of Parliament Hon. Akampulira. You gave us very good people; please, bring them back. We want to thank you so much, you are welcome. (Applause). 

Again, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of youth leaders from the 54 countries of Africa and beyond. They are currently participating in the Third African Peer Review Mechanism Continent Youth Symposium under the African Union at 20 years. You are most welcome. (Applause)

They are here to witness the proceedings of this House and how we process matters; that is what will shape these young people here. 

I want to welcome you; this is Parliament of Uganda, the Parliament of the people of Uganda that is people-centred; you are most welcome.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I have a matter of privilege under 78 –(Member: “Order”)- I think the colleague who is raising “order” missed the training - (Laughter) - because if he did not, he should have known that the rules say that debate may be interrupted –

“(a) by a matter of privilege suddenly arising” - I can give him free training.

 Madam Speaker, I have nothing personal against the Prime Minister. This is the second time. The first time she asked if I have something, I wanted from her; I did not have it. (Laughter) Today, she is issuing a second invitation, actually the third, inviting me for tea.

Madam Speaker, I moved around Uganda and identified a lady called Faridah and I married her -(Interjection)- you need to read 78 because privilege takes precedence. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, all of you sit. Hon. Ssemujju, sit.  Honourable members, can I have order? Can I have order in the House? If you people need to disagree, you can go to the corridors or in the compound, not in the House that I am chairing. 

Members, I am here for business not for jokes. Patience - 

3.01
MS PATIENCE NKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had the same issue because my district has been attacked by the wild animals from that national park.  

THE SPEAKER: That will be handled. 

MS NKUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, what is the matter of national importance?

3.02 
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The urgent matter of national importance regards to the continued death of our fellow citizens dying in prisons for one fundamental reason. We have been, multiple times on this Floor, pleading with the Government that prisons are not hospitals. When somebody is sick and they need medical attention, humanity or even the conscience demands that you take them to the hospital. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, you raised that issue on Tuesday and I asked the Attorney-General to come with a statement on what the Government is planning, especially on the political prisoners. It is also on the same vein, now that the term of Office of the Court Martial has expired, we need a statement from the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General is supposed to present that statement in the House. 

I gave the Attorney-General two weeks to give us that information and present it in the House.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I appreciate you for your very kind and wise guidance, which I take in good faith. This morning, I received a call from the prison authorities that while we have lost 11 members – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you realise, there are many colleagues that have matters of national importance. A colleague has raised an issue and he is lucky that the person responsible for his issue is in the House and he is going to answer. 

Are we proceeding right, Madam Speaker, for a colleague to take time, which would be utilised by other colleagues who have their issues while he only waits for the Attorney-General to answer him?

THE SPEAKER: No, we are going to have a report from the Attorney-General. Give that information to the Attorney-General and it will be incorporated in the report that is going to be brought.

MR KATUSABE: I appreciate, Madam Speaker. Can the Government commit itself to take the critically sick to the hospital? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, give your information to the Attorney-General and he will come with it. 

MR KATUSABE: Okay, I am waiting for the Attorney-General. 

MR SOLOMON SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a very important procedural matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please listen.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, it touches on Members of Parliament. I seek your indulgence, honourable Members of Parliament, to give me your attention. 

It is now one year since Parliament was sworn in office. However, Madam Speaker, as we talk, there are still Members of Parliament who do not have offices. (Applause) Parliament is one of the institutions that is – Honourable members, this touches Members and I seek your indulgence to listen. That is why – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members –[Hon. Mbwatekamwa: “Order.”]- Hon. Mbwatekamwa, first sit. Honourable members, I have said, let us have respect and listen to everybody and if you do not agree with that person, I will make a ruling. First listen to him. 

MR SOLOMON SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Why I raised this on the Floor of Parliament is because we have discussed it several times and it is not working and Parliament is where it can be solved. 

Parliament of Uganda is renting for honourable Members of Parliament in several places. We are renting at Queen’s Chambers, we are renting at Kingdom Kampala and we are renting at Development House. Every day, you find honourable Members of Parliament crossing the road; walking here and there and yet the President of this country guided us that we should start the process of getting our own premises and we save on rent.

Honourable members, I want to inform you that at Kingdom Kampala alone, we are spending Shs 8 billion on rent. Honourable members, I request that you listen; this is very important information. We are spending about Shs 3.9 billion on rent at Queen’s Chambers. All this money is spent on rented premises, yet the President guided that we should have our own –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know this affects the Members of Parliament and I understand where the Commissioner is coming from. I am the Chairperson of the Commission and I do understand. 

I think what the Commissioner is trying to say is – we had a meeting with the President and the meeting resolved that we should have a one stop centre where all Members of Parliament should be accommodated in offices.

The only issue that we need is clearance as to whether that should happen. Yesterday, I got a motion from Hon. Kahunde, where she is urging Government, instead of spending money on rent, to ensure that we have our own premises as Government. 

On this note, therefore, Attorney-General, we need clearance from your office on this matter. It is a very serious matter; Members are scattered everywhere in town. We even do not know where our Members are.

3.10
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, as soon as we get a request from the Clerk’s Office, we shall inform you. 

THE SPEAKER: We will do that. Next item - 

LAYING OF PAPERS
    (i) REPORT OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION (CPA) CAPACITY BUILDING SEMINAR ON AGRO-REVOLUTION AND E-PARLIAMENT HELD IN DAR-ES-SALAAM, TANZANIA FROM 27TH – 31ST MARCH 2022

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, the paper is just being laid for information and for capacity building. 

3.11
MR DAVID KALWANGA (NUP, Busunju County, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the CPA Executive, Uganda Branch and on behalf of the delegation that I led to Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, I beg to lay the report entitled, “The Report of the Uganda Parliamentary Delegation to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Capacity Building Seminar on the Agro-revolution and e-Parliament held in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania from 27-31 March 2022”. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. If you need information, please go to the library and look at it. It is for information. 

    (ii) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE SIXTY-SIXTH SESSION OF THE COMMISSION ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN THAT WAS HELD 14-25 MARCH 2022.

3.12
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will note – please allow me to raise this matter. I am supposed to lay the “Report of the Delegation to the Sixty-Sixth Session of the Commission on the Status of Women that was held 14-25 March 2022.” 

Madam Speaker, allow me to raise this; beside my name, there is “DWR”, implying “District Woman Representative” and when you look below, all the other people are listed as “Members of Parliament”. There is Hon. Polycarp Ogwari, MP, Agule County; Hon. Nancy Acora, MP, Lamwo District; Hon. Charles Matovu, MP, Busiro. 

I have looked at our Rules of Procedure and what is defined therein is “Member”, meaning “Member of Parliament”. I do not know where this title “DWR” comes from. I request that the women Members of Parliament in this House be referred to as “District Members of Parliament” not “DWR” while others are Members of Parliament. There must be uniformity as per our Rules of Procedure.

I have heard the men saying that we are women. Why are you emphasising my woman-ness beside my title?
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi, please lay the paper. You can now show us whether you are a district woman or you are not. (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament representing Tororo District. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this report. We had a delegation that was led by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Our meeting was organised under the theme: “Achieving Gender Equality and Empowerment of all Women and Girls in the Context of Climate Change, Environmental and Disaster Risk Reduction Policies and Programmes” - (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order. Members, if you want to speak, go and speak from outside.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, Uganda was applauded for being a trailblazer on gender equality and women’s empowerment and for the enabling legal and policy framework. Member states were urged to come and benchmark. 

In this report are 66 agreed conclusions. I encourage Members to get interested and read – 

THE SPEAKER: Your work is to lay the document; Members will read the report. 

MS OPENDI: I, therefore, beg to lay this report with a call on Members of Parliament to promote tree planting in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next?

PROPOSAL FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA TO ACQUIRE 150,000 PREFERENCE SHARES WORTH APPROXIMATELY SHS 202.13 BILLION IN ROKO CONSTRUCTION LIMITED

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the proposal for the Government of Uganda to acquire 150,000 preference shares worth approximately Shs 202.13 billion in Roko Construction Limited. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we have a clearance from the Attorney-General laid on Table? Has it been cleared?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, yes, we have a clearance by the Attorney-General and I beg to lay it on Table, together with the proposal. 

THE SPEAKER: Please lay it. I am referring this to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Report back in one week. They want to acquire shares - Why don’t you debate when the report comes? We are referring it to the finance committee. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE WORLD POPULATION DAY

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to present a statement to Parliament on the commemoration of the World Population Day, 11 July 2022.

This statement is about the commemoration of the 2022 World Population Day that will be celebrated on Monday, 11 July 2022. The celebrations are used as a platform to highlight the country's population development achievements and milestones. The occasion is also used to reflect on the challenges that confront the country regarding its population and development concerns, with a view to addressing them.

The objectives of this statement are to inform Parliament that: 

    1. Uganda will join the rest of the world to commemorate the World Population Day on 11 July 2022. 

    2. This year's World Population Day commemoration will be hosted by Kumi District at Kumi Boma Grounds under the theme, “Mindset Change for Wealth Creation: Ending Child Marriage and Teenage Pregnancy”. 
    3. The President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, is expected to be the chief guest at the national commemoration. 

Every year, national commemorations for this day are marked under a selected theme and are hosted by a local government that is selected on a rotational basis. World Population Day commemorations are organised by the National Population Council on behalf of Government to take stock of the achievements so far made towards improving the quality of life and standard of living of the people of Uganda. 

The occasion is also used to reflect on the challenges that confront the country regarding its population and development concerns, with a view to addressing them. 

Uganda has been observing this day since 1989 and has been using this occasion to raise awareness and mobilise commitment and support among the country's leadership in Government, civil society, the private sector, donor community, academia, the media and the general public, for the country's population issues that need to be addressed. 

This year’s national theme of “Mindset Change for Wealth Creation: Ending Child Marriage and Teenage Pregnancy” is premised on the grounds that to alleviate poverty, communities need be mobilised to engage in income-generating activities. Mindset change and wealth creation will also help address the economic issues, beliefs and practices that lead to child marriage and teenage pregnancy.

Madam Speaker, more than one out of every four adolescents become pregnant before the age of 19 with the rate being higher (27 per cent) in rural than urban Uganda at 19 per cent (UBOS 2016). This issue is quite alarming, for the young girls risk poor maternal and child health, dropping out of school, attempting unsafe abortions, failure to continue with school and poverty. 

Evidence also shows that girls from poor households and communities are more likely to marry early and become teenage mothers. In these poor households, girls are perceived as an economic asset from which families can gain wealth and an economic burden at the same time. This is because parents are unable to meet their basic needs and so often marry off their young daughters in an attempt to gain bride wealth. 

This year’s theme calls for investment in mindset change for wealth creation to improve the standard of living and quality of life of the people/households and the education, health and future prospects of adolescents, their families and communities.

Madam Speaker, over the past three decades, Uganda has achieved remarkable economic growth and substantial poverty reduction. Between 1992 and 2020, the proportion of the population living in monetary poverty fell dramatically from 56 per cent to 20.3 per cent – this is according to the Uganda National Household Survey (UNHS) of 2019/20). 

Uganda has also made considerable progress in improving the status of the girl child over the last decade. This is reflected, most notably, by the strides the Government has taken to create greater opportunities for girls’ education and in the creation and promotion of a conducive legal and policy environment for the protection and promotion of women and children’s rights. 

However, there is evidence that in spite of Government’s efforts to end discrimination against women and girls, harmful practices such as child marriage have persisted and with adverse consequences for the girls, their communities and national development. Today, over 25 per cent of girls become pregnant before the age of 20 (Uganda Demographic Health Survey, 2016).

Furthermore, the Constitution of Uganda sets the age of consent at 18. However, getting married before the legal age is a common practice across the country. The prevalence of child marriages is highest in northern Uganda, where it is estimated at 59 percent, followed by the western region (58 per cent), eastern region (52 per cent), West Nile (50 per cent), central (41 per cent), south-western Uganda (37 per cent) and lowest in Kampala at 21 per cent. 

On the other side, teenage pregnancy is lowest in the Kigezi subregion at 16 per cent and highest in Teso subregion at 31 per cent (Uganda Demographic Household Survey, 2016). Something must, urgently, be done to alleviate this situation.

Madam  Speaker, it is important to note that the key drivers of child marriage and teenage pregnancy include, as I mentioned earlier, poverty, the low value attached to girls’ education, domestic violence, social cultural norms and practices and the poor implementation of child protection policies and laws. 

To end child marriage and teenage pregnancy, efforts need to be intensified to alleviate household poverty. Parents should be economically empowered to fulfil the basic needs of their children. It is, therefore, very important to get households that are sti1l engaged in subsistence production into the money economy, if we are to succeed in ending child marriage and teenage pregnancy. 

The Parish Development Model initiative will help us realise this aspiration, since its main objective is to improve household incomes. This will empower parents to fulfil the basic needs of their children, thereby addressing the economic reasons for marrying off young girls.

Furthermore, education is one of the most powerful tools available to prevent and respond to child marriages and teenage pregnancies. Girls who are in school are not only protected from child marriage, but are empowered with knowledge and skills necessary to succeed in 1ife. Both young girls and boys should be provided with age-appropriate reproductive health information. 

There is a graph below that shows that girls with no education are three times more likely to become teenage mothers than their counterparts with more than secondary education.

Madam Speaker, some of the tried and tested interventions for reducing teenage pregnancies include; availability and accessibility of quality education, awareness raising on reproductive health matters, provision of skilling and training programmes, keeping or re-enrolment of young mothers in school, coupled with counselling and guiding students to make the right choices. 

It has further been proven that adolescents who hold positive beliefs about their future economic opportunities may be more 1ikely to engage in productive educational and economic activities and avoid risky sexual behaviour. 

I call upon you, honourable colleagues in Parliament, to support such initiatives in your respective constituencies.

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, invitations for participation to this national event have been sent out to all Cabinet ministers, Members of Parliament, key development partners, civil society, media, religious and cultural leaders/institutions, local governments from the Teso subregion, Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). 

Additionally, Kumi District Local Government leadership has been mobilised to popularise this important event and ensure that the public is informed about it.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I would like to remind Members that:

    1. Uganda will join the rest of the world to commemorate the World Population Day on the 11th of July. 

    2. The President of the Republic of Uganda is expected to be the chief guest. 

    3. This year’s World Population Day commemorations will be hosted by Kumi District.

I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable minister, for the statement. We have talked about teenage pregnancies and early marriages over and over. There is nothing we are going to say - this was for information. Can we get a brief comment from LOP?

3.29
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Nambeshe John Baptist): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me thank the minister for the statement. 

However, honourable minister, what is of concern is when the Government says it is going to plan for this fast-changing and growing population of Uganda and we allocate the basis of our planning on demographic surveys and data of 2016 when the Uganda Bureau of Statistics has the current data of 2022. 

You are aware that the rate of teenage pregnancies was exacerbated during the lockdown, that is, between 2016 and 2022. This means the cases were even worse during the lockdown which was brought by COVID-19. 

Now, you are giving us the planning figures basing on old figures even giving the statistics of those regions where teenage pregnancies were higher or lower. That is basing on the data of 2016, yet there are current projections by the United Nations. So, honourable minister, this statement is lacking -

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the current figures?

MR NAMBESHE: It is the minister to furnish this House with current figures.

THE SPEAKER: What I am looking at is prevalence of child marriages, region by region stated by Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 2021.

MR NAMBESHE: No, it is 2016. Madam Speaker, go to page pages 3 and 4; he has not mentioned 2021. But Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) has all this data and demographic surveys of 2022. I do not know why the minister could not use those of 2022 or at least those of 2021; they could have been better.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to have your record clear. Next time when you report, you should have the updated statistics from UBOS. Thank you for the report and for identifying that anomaly. 

THE SPEAKER: We have a few minutes to Prime Minister's Time. So, we can resolve this and go to the Prime Minister's Time.

MOTION FOR RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO HARMONISE AND ENHANCE THE REMUNERATION OF PUBLIC OFFICERS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, this came up yesterday afternoon. We discussed, debated and resolved to come up with a team that would come up with a motion. The motion is ready, and we will not debate this. What we are looking at is the adoption of the motion for Government to take it up.

3.33
MR JOHN TWESIGYE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Right Madam Speaker, this is a motion for the resolution of Parliament urging Government to harmonise and enhance the remuneration of public officers, moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS Article 21 of the 1995 Constitution provides for equal treatment of all persons before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life and in every other respect and for the enjoyment of equal protection of the law;

AWARE THAT, that section 7(1)(b) of the Public Service Act 2008 mandates the Minister responsible for Public Service to receive and consider on behalf of the Government proposals for remuneration and benefits of persons whose emoluments are payable directly from the Consolidated Fund or out of monies provided by Parliament;

RECALLING THAT, from 1990 Government undertook a number of reforms, including the Public Service Pay Reforms, under which the Ministry of Public Service came up with a pay policy for public officers, which the Cabinet approved in 2017, and agreed to be implemented it in a phased manner, starting in the Financial Year 2018/2019 due to the limited resources;

APPRECIATING THAT, according to the implementation of the pay policy for public officers, has been ongoing in a phased manner and gradually, some categories of public officers have had their salaries enhanced;

FURTHER APPRECIATING THAT, on 22 June 2018, the Government entered into a Collective Bargaining Agreement with public service labour unions, including Uganda National Teachers’ Union, which clearly indicated salary structures and pay targets for all public officers to be implemented over a five-year period;

CONCERNED THAT, despite Government pay policy for public officers and subsequently a commitment under the Collective Bargaining Agreement, a section of public officers including medical doctors, nurses and teachers have had a series of industrial actions arising from the failure by the Government honour its commitment to enhance their salaries;

NOTING THAT, under paragraph 2.3 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement, the parties agreed that there would be no discrimination in pay and other terms and conditions of service;

AWARE THAT, on the 24 August 2021, Government announced that Cabinet had resolved to enhance the salaries of scientists, which decision is being implemented;

RECOGNISING THAT, although the policy adopted by Government to pay scientists better than their arts counterparts cannot be disputed. There is a need to carefully study its implementation to ensure that it does not cause strife and division among the public service labour force and ultimately affect service delivery;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:

    (a) Government presents to Parliament a sustainable salary enhancement plan for all categories of public officers with clear budgetary indications and timelines for its implementation.

    (b) Government implements the salary enhancement plan of public officers in line with Article 40 (1) (b) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

    (c) Parliament urges Government to commence the implementation of the approved salary enhancement of the arts teachers and primary school teachers progressively.

    (d) Parliament urges Government to ensure continuous engagements with the public service unions through negotiations, consultations and participation in accordance with the Public Service (Negotiating, Consultative and Dispute Settlement Machinery) Act 2008, during the implementation of the approved salary enhancement plan”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Odur, Hon. Atkins, Hon. Nabukenya, Hon. Zijjan, Hon. Bashir, Hon. Onzima - by the whole House. Can I have one seconder speak to it?

3.39
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have come to second the motion. As observed, in 2017, the Government entered into an agreement to enhance the salaries of all public officers and this was supposed to be enhanced in a phased manner.

Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: It was in 2018.

MR ONZIMA: The agreement was 2017 but the implementation was to kick-off from Financial Year 2018/2019, which was supposed to run up to Financial Year 2022/2023. That is when all categories were supposed to arrive at their increment.

Madam Speaker, along the way, a number of things have happened. When the initial agreement by Government was tabled in the Committee of Public Service and Local Government, that this enhancement would be financed through funds that would be realised after rationalisation of Government agencies. However, along the way, I think the element of rationalisation has not taken place and also, there was faith that our economy was gaining and more money would be realised.

When COVID-19 came, it shattered the economy and all these expectations –

THE SPEAKER: Let us be brief. This was debated and it is –

MR ONZIMA: Therefore, we feel that the initial plan of Government to enhance these salaries for all the public servants might not be implemented the way it was planned. As a team, thought it would be important to come up with a comprehensive plan, looking into the economic situation - and also taking into consideration that the element of rationalisation was not done. The monies which were expected have not been got. So, whether the current situation, as it is, will be sustainable is still questionable. 

Madam Speaker, we expect that Government must come up with a realistic plan that can be implemented and will not put Government under pressure, based on our current economic situation.

To conclude, this increment has come for various groups of people, but there are other categories that are still left behind like local Government officials and others, who are still warming up –

THE SPEAKER: Even the army men.

MR ONZIMA: Yes. We think that Government should also engage other categories of people before it is caught up with this kind of situation. Thank you and I second the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Odur, you have one minute.

3.42
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to second this motion. The four prayers that are listed are drawn from the Collective Bargaining Agreement that was signed. 

If you look at prayer (a), it is consistent with paragraph 2.1 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement that had proposed that all public workers must have their salaries enhanced and specific figures were actually stated there.

Prayer (b), Madam Speaker, is drawn from paragraph 2.4; the parameters that Government should use for enhancement of salaries of all public servants. It includes position, responsibility, economic factors like inflation, interest rate and the cost of living. We think that if Government takes into consideration these factors, they will be able to reach a proper enhancement strategy for all civil servants.

Prayer (c) is drawn from paragraph 2.3 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement, which states that there should not be any form of discrimination in salary enhancement. (Applause) We think that all the civil servants, including the arts teachers, the primary school teachers, and categories like the armed forces should be looked at, at once without any discrimination.

The last prayer is drawn from paragraph 2.5 about the equal rights of the workers. Government should approach the workers with an open mind, with hope and with respect so that we implement the continuous review of this Collective Bargaining Agreement. 

If Government, at some point, feels that the Collective Bargaining Agreement had some issues in paragraph 2.10, it is provided that Government can sit with all those 10 unions and then revise and come to an amicable settlement. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much and most importantly, it is a constitutional requirement under Article 41. Yesterday, I said if you have an amendment to that effect, please take it to the committee.

I now put the question that this House adopts a motion – (Interjection) – I put –

3.45
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, although the motion is good for all intents and purposes, it does not have timeframes. That is one.

Secondly –

THE SPEAKER: Progressively, we will determine that. We are not going to – you know, we do not know what we have in our resource envelope.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, remember we passed the Appropriation Act. When we passed that Appropriation Act, we never included anything to do with discriminatory payments. Can we, then, order the accounting officers to ensure that in implementing the Act, there is non-discrimination, particularly, when it comes to payment of salaries for teachers? (Applause) It must be captured within this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that this House adopts a motion for resolution of Parliament, urging Government to harmonise and enhance the remuneration of public officers with the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MR JOHN TWESIGYE: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for constituting the team of five people. I would like to specifically thank my team: Hon. Onzima, Hon. Nabukenya, Hon. Odur and Hon. Kunihira. Madam Speaker, allow me to lay a copy of the motion on the Table. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Next item. (Laughter) Honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, kindly listen; the item is yours.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE FIRST SCHEDULE OF THE UGANDA REGISTRATION SERVICES BUREAU ACT, CAP 210

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you ready? If you are not ready, please tell us.

3.47
THE AG. MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, I am not ready to raise this motion now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how did it come on the Order Paper?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, we sent a proposed motion to the Office of the Clerk. I think that is how it came to the Order Paper.

THE SPEAKER: When you sent the motion to the Office of the Clerk, what did you expect us to do - to keep it or put it on the Order Paper? (Laughter) Can we go to the next item? 

Honourable minister, next time when you send an item, know that it is going to be on the Order Paper so, you need to be ready.

STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK; 12TH TO 14TH JULY 2022

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister -

3.49
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, Rule 28 of our Rules of procedure requires me, as Leader of Government Business, to make a statement in this House regarding the Government business of the proceeding week. I am, therefore, submitting the following business for the week ending 14 July 2022:

    1. Introduction, for the first reading, of the Museum and Monuments Bill, 2022;

    2. Laying of Acts and Bills of East African Legislative Assembly, as required by Article 65 65 of the Treaty of the Establishment of the East African Community and Rule 36 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament.
 
Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That is what we expect from the Government next week. And we would be pleased, if you even brought more. 

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO URGENT QUESTIONS -
6(1)(A)	ON THE ONGOING MINING PROJECT IN WAWANGA PARISH, BUWUNGA SUB-COUNTY IN BUGIRI DISTRICT – BY HON. SILWANY SOLOMON, MP BUKOOLI CENTRAL 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, at the end of the first session, we had some outstanding urgent questions that were pending to be responded to by the ministers and we are ready to receive the responses; Minister of Energy and Mineral Development.

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai Opolot): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. I will start with a question raised by Hon. Silwany Solomon, a Member of Parliament for Bukooli Central, regarding the ongoing mining project in Bwabanga Parish, Buwunga Subcounty in Bugiri District. 

He specifically raised a concern -

THE SPEAKER: Please speak to the microphone. I think they are not hearing you.

MR OKAASAI: People are not hearing; maybe I can remove the mask.

THE SPEAKER: No. Speak to the microphone.

MR OKAASAI: (He specifically raised concern regarding the land acquisition process being undertaken in that area. 

Madam Speaker, as per your guidance, my ministry undertook to provide clarification in respect of the operations of Rwenzori Rare Metals Company in Bugiri, Bugweri, Iganga and Mayuge districts.

Background

My ministry carried out an airborne geophysical survey covering 80 percent of Uganda in 2005. The survey detected potential for rare earth elements in Makuutu, among other findings. Subsequently, my ministry granted an exploration licence to Rwenzori Rare Metals. 

Further, geological studies by Rwenzori Rare Metals, including drilling, have revealed 532 million tons of ore containing rare earth elements. The exploration activities have confirmed the existence of rare earth elements in mineable quantities in three districts of Mayuge, Bugweri and Bugiri.

The rare earth element deposits found within the Makuutu Rare Earth Project Area is one of the largest in the world, after South China. Rare earth elements are essential for the manufacture of medical equipment, smartphones, laptops, crude oil processing, batteries for electric vehicles, and wind turbines, among many other uses. 

Rare earth elements are critical for the global transition from fossil fuel to renewable energy. Rare earth elements are key in many new and upcoming technologies; technological applications in electronics, including computers, lighting, magnets, and various other uses. 

With this innovation, the ministry will ensure that Uganda minerals are explored and exploited in a sustainable manner that supports the growth of the economy of the country, and uplifts the standards of living of our people. 

The Makuutu Rare Earth Project is one of the key projects that can lead to the industrialisation of Uganda and position the country on the international stage as one of the very few countries in the world that mine rare earth elements. Currently, the production of rare earth elements is dominated by China; so we would only be second to China. 

The exploration and development of the project requires land access and support from the community and the different leaders. The land acquisition laws of Uganda ensure that adequate and fair compensation will be paid judiciously to the land owners that would be affected. 

Compensation, land access and resettlement for Project Affected Person (PAPs) 
The ministry will ensure that where PAPs properties, including land and infrastructure are affected, the PAPs will be duly compensated or resettled before the company can utilise the land. There will be no evictions carried out by the company. 

The ministry is aware that the development of the Makuutu project will create lots of benefits to the community and the country both through direct and indirect benefits that come with such projects. 

The development of the project will also cause temporary and permanent resettlement impacts in the project area. Rare earth mineral is currently developing a resettlement action plan that will inform the company on the number the PAPs and their socio-economic and livelihood aspects, as well as strategies and actions necessary to minimise the resettlement impact and restore them to an improved social, economic and livelihood status. 

The company plans to follow a systematic approach based on demarcated blocks one after the other. Therefore, not all PAPs will need to be resettled all at once. The project's interest lies majorly in rare earth elements, not the land. Once mined, the land will be restored for productive use for normal farming, resettlement, recreation activities, where applicable, and other uses of the land. 

Based on the provisions of the Mining Act, 2003 and Mining Regulations 2019, which repealed the Mining Regulations 2004, the company is required by the ministry to apply and acquire mining lease before it can compensate or resettle affected landowners to develop the rare earth elements. 

In order to obtain the mining lease, the company must undertake a feasibility study, conduct an environmental and social impact assessment, obtain consent from land owners to access the project land and to develop a resettlement action plan that will be used to mitigate the probable resettlement impact to the project-affected persons. 

The objective of the RAP is not to evict the PAPs but to provide resettlement options that suitably allow them to continue their livelihoods and activities. 

The following compensation and resettlement options are envisaged;
 
Option one: Cash compensation. Under this, there will be

a) 	Outright cash compensation for a mutually acceptable amount.

b) 	Priority for paid work or share in the profits of collaborative agricultural partnership programs that may arise in the project area. 

Option two: Temporary resettlement. This would include:

    i) Lease land to the Makuutu Project for an agreed period of time. 

    ii) Compensate the land owner for lost assets. 

    iii) Affected households will be provided with a good house in a nearby establishment near the resettlement village. 

    iv) The livelihoods and food security of resettled people, including vulnerable people, will be secured through the provision of paid work on collaborative agricultural partnership programmes that will arise in the project area. 

    v) At the end of the lease period, Makuutu Project will provide the project-affected persons with a permanent replacement house prior to him or her resuming occupation of his or her land. 

    vi) Provide the necessary support to assume a better socio-economic standard than before. 

Option 3: Permanent resettlement

    i) Swap land for land, permanent replacement of house and suitable replacement land.
    ii) Cash compensation for lost assets.
    iii) Provide the necessary support to assume a better socio-economic standard than before.
    iv) Provide opportunity for paid work or a share in the profits of collaborative agricultural partnership programmes in the area. 

The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the project-affected persons and company 

The provisions of the Mining Act, 2003 and Mining Regulations, 2019 which repealed the Mining Regulation, 2004, requires mineral rights holders to show proof that they have obtained consent from land owners to access the minerals therein or proof that the applicants for the mining lease have secured the surface rights of the land which is the subject of application. 

The signing of the MoU is the first step to developing a mutual relationship between the company and land holders. The MoU does not transfer the land ownership interests in the land surface rights to the company. Therefore, the land owner retains the surface ownership of the land. 

After the company has acquired the mining lease and the project-affected persons have been fully compensated, the company will then have access to the land for the development of the rare earth elements depending on the resettlement action plan options, which I had mentioned earlier. 

The MoU that is prepared in English and translated into Lusoga will be presented to the project-affected persons and administration for consideration – (Interruption)-

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 47(5) of the Rules of Procedure, which reads “The reply to a question shall be limited to three minutes…” 

I am seeing the honourable minister presenting a whole paper. Our minister is not directly answering the questions that were asked. Are we proceeding well, Madam Speaker?
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister – is Hon. Silwany here? Hon. Silwany asked about the mining project in Wawanga Parish in Bugiri. There are people who are purported to have been given a licence. We needed to know from you if it is true. Did they follow the right procedures? Did you do due diligence on these people? Are they the rightful people to be doing what they are doing?

MR OKAASAI: Madam Speaker, I know that to most Members of Parliament, these are new areas. I needed to give a background and detail to how this is done. 

However, to answer you specifically, the ministry is aware of the persons and they have been given exploration licence to actually see what can be done. I wanted to be clear on the procedures that should be followed to make this land available and to also allay fears that the land is being grabbed by unknown people. 

Conclusion 

Makuutu Rare Earth Project is one of the key projects that has great potential to cause socio-economic transformation of our communities through mineral-led industrialisation and the position of Uganda in the international stage, as one of the very few countries in the world that will mine rare earth elements -

THE SPEAKER: Do you take time, as a ministry, to talk to the people around those areas?

MR OKAASAI: We have actually been engaging the population, including Members of Parliament. They have been participating in the awareness creation. I do believe -

THE SPEAKER: So, how did the Member of Parliament raise that issue?

MR OKAASAI: I cannot explain that one but the rest of the Members of Parliament from those affected areas have been participating in the activities.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we will hear from the person who raised it. There is another question, again, directed to you.

6(1)(B) ON THE DISRUPTION OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY DUE TO THE NON-FUNCTIONALITY OF SEVERAL TRANSFORMERS THAT BLEW UP IN AGULE COUNTY – BY HON. OGWARI POLYCARP, MP AGULE COUNTY

MR OKAASAI: Madam Speaker, a question was raised by the Member of Parliament representing Agule County, on the power outages – (Interruption)

MS NALUYIMA: Madam Speaker, as per Rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure, it is the Prime Minister's Time. Given that the earlier response took over 10 minutes, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the Prime Minister first attends to her business here and then later, we can continue with other responses.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Polycarp’s question was also asked to the Prime Minister. Can we have one answer from the Prime Minister and then we continue with the other ministers?  

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.08 
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, Hon. Isaac Joakino, Member of Parliament for Upper Madi County, asked a question over lack of Government health facilities in Anyiribu Subcounty and Goromi Subcounty. 

By the time of approval of the Uganda Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer Reform Programme (UGIFT), Anyiribu Subcounty had a public not-for-profit health centre benefiting from Government and they were getting Primary Health Care (PHC). 

In the current Financial Year 2022/2023, Government has earmarked and planned to construct a public health centre III in Anyiribu Subcounty. 

The other question he asked was the upgrading of Uleppi and Akino health centres II to health centre III in the subcounties of Uleppi and Okollo.

Akino Health Centre II is located in Okollo Subcounty, which is already served by Okollo and the Oyima Health Centre IIIs.

Uleppi Health Centre II has been planned for upgrade to health centre III in this Financial Year 2022/2023. 

The other question was when will the ambulance that was removed from Okollo Health Centre III in 2016 be returned?

Madam Speaker, the establishment of a functional ambulance system is one of the top priorities of the NRM Government. As part of the response, through the COVID-19 Preparedness and Response Plan, you are aware that 125 additional ambulances were acquired and deployed according to our policy of regional ambulance systems.

Under this system, 20 to 30 ambulances are managed under one call and dispatch centre to ease coordination, maintenance, control and accessibility. This has changed the management of ambulances from health facilities based on a regional coordinated system at the 14 regional call and dispatch centres. 

In addition, regions are responsible for fuelling and maintenance of ambulances. The Government has initiated the procurement of 340 ambulances in a phased manner to address the gaps.

Hon. Ogwari Polycarp, Member of Parliament for Agule County raised a matter on the disruption of electricity supply due to non-functionality of several transformers that had got blown in Agule County - two in 2017, Nyakoi and  Omurwoka Trading Centres in Kameke Subcounty. In 2019, one was blown Kameke Trading Centre and in February 2022, another one was blown in Akisim Trading Centre, Akisim Subcounty.

The transformers in Akisim and Kameke Trading Centre - Madam Speaker, you know I was an RDC in this district. Therefore, I know these areas. The transformers were replaced in May 2022 after stakeholders’ engagements.

The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development will bring more details and has been directed to follow up with Umeme - I wrote a letter after getting this. Umeme is  the only distribution company operating in the area to ensure transformers are installed in Nyako Village and Omurwoka Trading Centre. So far, site visits have been done.

Hon. Isaac Joakino, MP, Upper Madi County, raised a concern over the misuse of firearms by armed personnel in areas outside their duty stations, which has led to the loss of lives in some parts of Arua District. He requested that the authorities should hold the UPDF personnel accountable, but also meet the medical and burial expenses of the affected victims.

Madam Speaker, the Government regrets the death of Alioni Amos, Nicholas Drando and the injuries sustained by Odriru Alice.
 
Private Niwamanya’s actions were not within the scope of his employment. In the spirit of civil-military relations and the need to support the families of the late and the injured victim, the Government has considered giving a start-up contribution of Shs 10 million, per family as compensation to the deceased’s family for the loss of the lives and Shs 2 million to the lady who sustained injuries; the compensation process is ongoing. I wrote a letter soon after getting this question. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. There is a supplementary question from Hon. Allan on electricity.

4.15
MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a matter regarding the persistent vandalism of electricity poles, theft of electric wires and yaka meters in the country; in this case, Nakaseke Central County in Nakaseke District.

For about three months now, electricity is off, and 11 villages and four parishes are affected. Some of the villages are 4 Nabisojo, Kirinda, Bwamibuwoome and others. The parishes are Kirinda, Mijumwa, Kalagala and others in Wakyato Subcounty.

UMEME, Rural Electrification Agency (REA) and the Uganda Police Force have not yet identified the thugs or arrested them for doing this criminal offense, and there is no effort that has been made to restore electric wires and yaka meters such that the residents get back power however much I have approached those concerned. This is paralyzing work and development in the mentioned areas and the country at large.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are:

    i. The Minister of Internal Affairs should intervene to stop this kind of theft in the country. He should also come here and give us a ministerial statement.

    ii. The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development should immediately restore power in affected areas in the country. 

    iii. Lastly, Nakaseke District Central Police Station does not have any working police patrol vehicles and therefore, should be provided with some to curb such insecurities in Greater Luwero Subregion. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister.

MS NABBANJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I want to thank the Member for the question.

The problem of vandalism of our electricity wires and poles is across the country. The other day I was in Mbarara for a function and they told us that almost three kilometres of electricity cables were removed from poles at night; at least we were lucky that those thieves were arrested by police.

But even then, the Ministry of Internal Affairs together with the Ministry of Presidency, the RDCs and the local leaders across the country have been sensitised.

We are also starting a strategy of putting transformers in trading centres, where people can see such that they can now make an alarm when these thugs come to steal these cables. 

However, I have taken note of my brother's issue. I am going to direct the Ministry of Energy through REA to replace those wires.

Madam Speaker, three days ago, Hon. Najjuma told me about the same. I told her to write so that I can use this to pass over the message to the ministry concerned. Now that I have this from the Floor of Parliament, I am going to act. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. There is an Act that we passed in this House and it has been assented to. It has very good sanctions to that effect. Why don’t we implement it? 

We need to implement what we agreed upon in this House so that it acts as a measure for those who are going to continue doing the same. We need to take it up. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We thank the President for assenting to that Bill in record time. 

However, the population does not know about the provisions in that Act. Therefore, would it not be procedurally right to direct the relevant ministries to sensitise the population about the provisions in that Act because that should be the way to go? They should know how risky it is; that if you are caught, you will pay Shs 1 billion or be jailed for 15 years.

THE SPEAKER: It is not only in that Act but all the Acts that were assented to. Prime Minister -

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, it is our responsibility, including Members of Parliament, to help our people know what is in the law. Therefore, all of us shall move as a team to popularise this law because it is a good law. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us run adverts on what has been approved and warn people - in case you do this, you will be arrested and you will have these sanctions. We need to run adverts to the effect. Yes, Kinkizi - 

4.22
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. 

My concern is that what belongs to many belongs to none. We must have a clear cut - Who is responsible for popularising this law? When we say we are all going to go there and popularise then it is likely to have –

THE SPEAKER: No. It is the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to do that. 

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I request that we have timelines because sometimes, we pass very good laws – 

THE SPEAKER: We actually do not need timelines. We need it started immediately and continuously. 

MR KABERUKA: Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, yesterday there was a document that your office promised to lay today following Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s question. Hon. Cecilia, now that you have the Prime Minister -

4.23
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, yesterday, I raised the issue of payment of Ugandan traders trading in South Sudan; the pending issue, which we have been discussing since 2018. 

The Prime Minister who represented you yesterday, communicated that today, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will give us details of the preparation that you have, concerning the payment of the 23 verified companies whose payments have so far not been cleared.

I do not know, Madam Speaker, whether the Prime Minister has already got the details of the persons who have not yet been paid but the details are there. Even the Office of the Clerk has got the details of the 23 companies, which are pending to be paid. 

In addition, there are other new companies, which are also being verified. Therefore, I would like the matter to be brought to a close. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the last session, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development promised to come and lay on the Table the addendum from South Sudan. That is what Hon. Cecilia is asking for.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, you are aware that a forensic audit was carried out by a company that was hired by the Government. A number of companies were found to have not supplied South Sudan. 

Therefore, I request that you allow us up to next Thursday because Cabinet is supposed to go through this such that we can come up with a concrete answer of those companies that will benefit.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as a point of correction - it was the verification team, which was to verify the 23 companies. The verification was done, the report was brought to this House and it was adopted. What is left is basically an addendum that is supposed to come from South Sudan for ratification and payment. It is just an addendum that the House needs and we will be good to go.

4.26
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, picking from what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister mentioned, if it is true that forensic –

THE SPEAKER: There was no forensic audit.

MR ODUR: That is what we want her to confirm. She is still insisting that a forensic audit took place. If it is true that a forensic audit took place, as the Prime Minister has confirmed, then this House should have access to that report. I would beg that when the Prime Minister comes next week, she comes with a copy of that report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we passed a resolution in this House and it was sent to South Sudan. The resolution was signed on 2 May 2018 and the resolution is here, signed by the Clerk to Parliament for the 23 companies. 

There was a select committee, which was chaired by Hon. Anna Maria Nankabirwa. The Members were; Hon. Mpuuga, Hon. Kibalya, Hon. Ariko. They brought a resolution, which was adopted by this House. 

Basically, what we need is an addendum, which the minister said he was going to make follow up and bring it. 

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I am good at reading. I got a report at my desk - and I do not want to deceive this House - that Ernst & Young was contracted to verify and audit. There are some companies that were found that did not do any work in South Sudan. Therefore, to come here and deceive, I will look really funny. I am a very strong Catholic; I do not deceive. (Applause)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the Prime Minister, this is where we go wrong. A committee was constituted by Parliament. It first sat here and interfaced with Ernst & Young, with the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The committee went to South Sudan and met the Government of South Sudan. All ministries concerned agreed and made the recommendation that the 23 companies deserved to be paid. The report was tabled. The minister came and also presented his position about the addendum and we agreed that they were going to pay these people after presenting the addendum.

Now the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business drags us back - to take the position to Cabinet and we go through the same process again. 

The challenge we have is that this is money that will be paid by South Sudan. Uganda is just standing in for them but South Sudan is ready to pay the money. Now the position of Cabinet – going here, there, everywhere – Madam Speaker, we must move forward. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going to get a report as requested. Maybe, for the information of the House - as I said yesterday, we had a joint meeting between the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, the Speaker of South Sudan and the President. We agreed to write to South Sudan and the minister makes a follow-up. We have since then written to South Sudan and we are waiting for feedback. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will come and report on the addendum. 

4.30
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, as you are aware, being the custodian of the rules, the Leader of the Opposition has a right of reply to the Prime Minister, after she has made responses. It will be brief this time round. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when you talk of – 

THE SPEAKER: You have a right to reply after all the questions have been asked - but Members are still asking  questions. So, you are blocking your Members.

MR NAMBESHE: Oh! Are they still asking? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. (Laughter)

MR NAMBESHE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: They have supplementary questions. Hon. Ssewungu, please ask your question. It should be in relation to what the Prime Minister has been talking about.

4.31
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your ever illustrious and distinguished judgement. 

While processing some of these – (Interruption)

MR KAGABO: Madam Speaker, as guided by Rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure, in the Prime Minister’s Time, there is no provision for supplementary questions. It is only covered in rule 42, regarding Questions to Ministers. 

I, therefore, seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, whether we are proceeding properly. 

THE SPEAKER: We amended the rules and agreed that we should have oral questions asked to the Prime Minister for a specific time. It is unfortunate that you are not aligned to your rules which you have just amended. We have only six minutes to close the Prime Minister’s Time. Clerk, you need to print the new rules. 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of my fellow good Catholic - the Prime Minister - that this should probably be extended. 

Rt Hon. when you are meeting your technical team and they are giving you presentations that specifically answer oral questions, tell them to focus on three things namely;

    1. Content specification
    2. Boundary demarcation
    3. Ensuring there is no room left for pseudo scenarios. 

I would like to restrict myself to the independence of this House. It is extremely sad that we can have this kind of scenario, where a matter that was presented before this very House, tabled, passed and adopted and then the Prime Minister says “ wait a minute”  - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe that is not now a question. Can we have a rebuttal from the Leader of the Opposition? 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question raised by Hon. Etuka Isaac on lack of health facilities in Anyiribu Subcounty – Rt Hon. Prime Minister, your response is a good one - to construct a new health centre III. But why wouldn’t these funds that are used for construction be shifted to equip the already existing facilities? 

We have seen a number of white elephants of health centres III, health centres II, with no equipment, no medicines and huge staffing gaps; no healthcare workers. I saw in yesterday’s health report that a lot of funds are being earmarked for the construction of more health centres. Why can’t we equip the existing ones first? 

The second question is about the ambulance – actually, Madam Prime Minister, you did not answer that question. The honourable member asked: “When will the ambulance which was removed from Okollo Health Centre III in 2016 be returned? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you were beating about the bush; it is actually circumlocution. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you would be spot on to say that Government has an initiative to buy 340 ambulances. That is a good plan. But before you procure these 340, where is the ambulance which was removed in 2016? Ambulances are for emergencies - as you are aware, Madam Prime Minister. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude by responding? Yesterday, we had a discussion on health centres and it was exhaustive. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please respond to LOP. Are you done, LOP?

MR NAMBESHE: I am not yet done. Let me conclude. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you have a new system, like you have vividly put it here, that you have coordinated 14 regional call and dispatch centres - honestly, if these are on standby at regions and the emergencies are in those rural parts, by the time you arrive there, a mother who is supposed to deliver may have lost her life. That is why the question has substance to insist on the return of their ambulance. 

THE SPEAKER: LOP, that takes you back to the resolution of this Parliament yesterday - to operationalise health centres IV because they are more reachable than the district hospitals. (Applause) Do not forget what you discussed yesterday.

MR NAMBESHE: You are spot on, Madam Speaker. But operationalise when funds are being used to construct new ones - These very funds would be focused on equipping and operationalising the existing facilities. (Interjection) You will come in after I am done.

The other question was about the directive you have made, Madam Speaker. This was a question by Hon. Polycarp Ogwari of Agule County about the non-functionality of several transformers. You have directed UMEME, a power distribution company to replace them. 

However, Madam Prime Minister, you are aware of the vice of swapping transformers by the same personnel. This should be investigated and given the vigour, determination and commitment you have put to fight corruption. Know it from me that even vandalism - this stealing of service cables and wires – is done by the same personnel from Umeme. So, you should institute a serious intelligence gathering unit or even a unit to arrest these fellows and nip them in the bud.

Also, there is technology, for instance, in neighbouring countries like Kenya, where if you tamper with any of those service cables, an alert is quickly registered in the command office. You should secure such technology and nip this vice in the bud.

The last one -

THE SPEAKER: Actually, we need to be vigilant to know what is happening in the communities. Let us not just be in the communities when looking for votes. We should be there to see what is happening to our people. If you see that people are doing that, you have a right to make sure that such people are arrested.  

MR NAMBESHE: Yeah. The last one was by Hon. Joakino, the MP Upper Madi County, on Private Niwamanya, a UPDF officer.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, justice should be seen to be done. This Niwamanya should be arraigned in court and prosecuted – whether it is in court martial or our normal courts. It should be seen to be done. However, due process is not being done and that is why the Member came up to raise this complaint. 

Secondly, it is also taking too long. For an injured person, you give only Shs 2 million and you give Shs 10 million to the dead. They have even already been buried and you are not paying the funeral expenses that have already taken place. Wouldn’t you give more attention and be more compassionate to the person who is injured and undergoing medical treatment. She has many bills and needs good nutrition? Even then, if it is that paltry Shs 2 million, why can’t you give it early so that you save a life other than taking that long and making those pledges which may take donkey years to be honoured? Thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I told the House that the health centre that is in existence is for a non-governmental organisation despite the fact that the Government supports them with PHC funds. This one is going to be purely for the Government. You know our policy here is to have a health centre per subcounty. This subcounty had that one that was for an NGO. This time round, we are constructing a new one for the Government. Government will be the one to manage it. 

My brother also talked about the ambulance. Parliament passed a policy here, Madam Speaker, during the COVID-19 time. Remember it was that time when we were putting ambulances on standby to collect members of the community who would be identified with any signs of COVID-19. It was during that time when we decided here – I was a minister then – that we regionalise ambulance services and make sure that those ambulances are functional and can save lives. 

The other day I saw an accident towards Jinja, when I was going to Mbale. That was between Lugazi and Jinja. We saw ambulances come very quickly and they picked up the man who had got into an accident. They took him to Lugazi and referred the others, who had gotten injured, to Mulago. 

So, we could give them more of these ambulances and they are positioned either by road sides other than dumping an ambulance at a health facility. When the health centre does not even have fuel, it would still be useless because a health centre III has very limited funds. However, these ambulances that are managed by regional hospitals and regional centers are usually perfect.

Madam Speaker, on vandalism, I had given an answer and you had already ruled. I will not talk about that. 

THE SPEAKER: (Member rose_) Thank you. A clarification is on what? 

MR TIMUZIGU:  On the ambulances having no fuel in health centres. The Prime Minister has said that instead of having ambulances in health centres without fuel, we better have regional ambulances. Why shouldn’t we have fuel, to give to ambulances at the health centres? You are the Prime Minister? Why should those ambulances have no fuel?

MR ETUKA: Further clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR ETUKA: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister said they are giving Shs 10 million for the bereaved families. These are two separate families – where soldiers killed people. The first one was the family of Nicholas Drando, who was shot in his compound by the UPDF who came from Bondo Army Barracks and shot the wife too. The medical bill alone was Shs 9.7 million. This is a woman who has total disability up to now. 

Prime Minister, if you go to Bondo, you can get this woman permanently disabled. You are allocating Shs 2 million for this. This Drando is survived by more than 10 children. He was shot in his compound. 

Annet Tiko, who was killed by Corporal Okecha O. Alex in June 2019, was strangled dead inside the barracks. The army threatened the people. They took the body and this soldier was left scot-free. The one who killed Drando committed suicide and they could not do much about that. However, at least compensate these families. Prime Minister, it is very important. 

Giving Shs 10 million – put yourself in the shoes of these people. The children are suffering – they are orphaned by the UPDF – and you proudly say on this Floor that you are only giving Shs 10 million for these two families! To me, it is a total abuse and negligence of the citizens of this country. May you clarify further? How did you reach Shs 2 million to compensate this woman, who is up to now disabled? I thank you. 
 
THE SPEAKER: Of course, that would not work as compensation because that can only be pronounced under the courts of law. It is not compensation. That could have just been support. You can follow other due processes to have compensation done.

Next item. (Member rose_)  You are the same people who say time for the Prime Minister Time is 45 minutes. Let us have respect for our Rules of Procedures. Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs? 

6(II)(A)	ON THE INSECURITY IN LAMWO DISTRICT WHERE ON 5MARCH 2022, TWO PEOPLE WERE KILLED AND AN ESTIMATED 270 HEADS OF CATTLE LOST AT LOKER WARD, ORYANG VILLAGE, MADI OPEI TOWN COUNCIL IN AGORO SUB-COUNTY TO ARMED RAIDERS FROM SOUTH SUDAN – BY HON. ACORA NANCY, MP LAMWO DISTRICT

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I am here to give response on behalf of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. The first question was raised by Hon. Acora Nancy, Member of Parliament Lamwo District on the insecurity in the district where about two people were killed and about 270 heads of cattle were lost. 

In Lamwo District, these incidents were attributed to, among others; 

    (a) Porosity of the border, Lamwo is bordering South Sudan.

    (b) Unresolved border dispute between Uganda and South Sudan. However, efforts are there to re-demarcate the border.


    (c) Cross-border community dynamics, including cross border movements for socio-economic activities. For example, intermarriages, farming, visits. 

    (d) Disruption of cross-border security meetings by the COVID-19 pandemics. Investigations were carried out regarding the incident on 5 March 2020, where two people namely Okello Joseph, aged 46, and Aroma David aged 38 by suspected Langi of South Sudan were killed revealed.

The investigation revealed the following:

    (a) In 2021, local authorities resolved to establish community kraals for protection of livestock of the locals. The community of Oryang Village, Pobura Parish, Madi Opei Subcounty, Lamwo District where the incident occurred, formed two kraals with the 201 heads of cattle.

    (b) On the fateful day, it was the turn of the deceased persons to graze the cattle, which were 193 in number. 

    (c) The victims had taken the cattle to the watering point approximately four kilometres to the border, when they were attacked by eight armed warriors from South Sudan. 

    (d) Due to the proximity of the scene of crime to the border, the attackers managed to cross back into South Sudan before our own security forces could quickly respond. 

    (e) The attackers hailed from Lodwara in South Sudan and belong to the Koki clan. 

    (f) Efforts are ongoing to recover the stolen livestock and bring the perpetrators of the attack to justice, working in collaboration with the South Sudan authorities. 

In view of the continued pockets of insecurity in the affected districts, the following measures are being taken: 

    (a) Continuous readjustments in security deployments to deal with the threats. 

    (b) Enhancing kraal-based intelligence collection to support security operations.

    (c) Construction of security roads, especially along the borders to stem the cross-border issues.

    (d) Enhancing coordination amongst various local security actors, including the district security committees.

Madam Speaker, the latest is that we have had a meeting of the Chiefs of Defence Forces of Republic of Uganda and that of South Sudan and the agreement is that for those who are visiting from South Sudan, when coming to Lamwo, they should not come while armed; that is the latest we have.

6 (II)(B)	OVER THE EVICTION OF 700 RESIDENTS OF KATABI TOWN COUNCIL BY SPECIAL FORCES COMMAND (SFC) – BY HON. MATOVU CHARLES, MP BUSIRO SOUTH

MR OBOTH: The second question is about the eviction of residents of Katabi Town Council by Special Forces Command from a landing site at Kasenyi. This question was raised by Hon. Matovu Charles, MP Busiro South.

The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs would like to clarify as follows:

    1. The landing site in question is part of Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs/UPDF land at Kasenyi, Bendegere in Entebbe, which is currently occupied by Special Forces Command.

    2. The subject land originally belonged to the late His Excellency Prof. Lule’s family and was occupied by UPDF in 2003 by the Presidential Protection Unit.

    3.  The Lule Family, that is, Hon. Waisswa Lule and Mr Kato Lule sought a court order to be compensated by Government and the ministry fully compensated them in 2020. 

    4. The landing site in issue is not a gazetted landing site, but an illegal settlement of fishermen and their families on army land. 

    5. The fishermen and their families have constructed temporary makeshift houses, which is mud and wattle on the said landing site. 

    6. The ministry through its military land board, organised a meeting on 6 May 2021, at Kasenyi, to discuss the settlement with the view to agree on the roadmap to vacate army land. The meeting was also to assess the number of settlers and agree on how they would vacate the subject land. 

    7.  The meeting was attended by Special Forces Command leadership, LCI representatives, led by Mr. Mpanga Samuel, the LCI Chairperson of Kasenyi, Bendegere. It was also attended by 233 settlers comprised of fishermen and their families.

    8. The whole group was given an ultimatum to vacate army land having recognised the fact that they are not bona fide occupants and therefore, not eligible for compensation. 

    9.  With the exception of five families claiming that they were “bibanja” holders and that they were not compensated by the late Professor Lule’s family, who were the landlords, for these, we agreed to handle their cases at a later stage. 

The rest of the settlers were given a period of three months within which to vacate the said landing site.

Lastly on that, it should be noted that there was no such eviction of 700 families as alleged by the honourable member of Parliament. These facts, we pray, should be able to be found adequate to enable the response to be accepted by the honourable MP who asked the question and Members. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

6 (II)(C) ON THE DELAYED PAYMENT OF THE UPDF CONTINGENT WHICH COMPLETED ITS TOUR OF DUTY TO THE AFRICAN UNION MISSION IN SOMALIA

MR OBOTH: The last one is delayed payment. Madam Speaker, for the record, AMISOM is now abbreviated as “ATMIS”, not “ATKINS” and this stands for Africa Transition Mission in Somalia. Hon. Atkins is looking at me; I said “ATMIS”. 

At the sitting of the Third Meeting of the First Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda held on Tuesday, 1 February 2022, Hon. Moses Aleper, MP Chekwii County, raised an issue on the delayed payment of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces contingent that completed their tour of duty to ATMIS.

Madam Speaker, it is indeed true that our officers and men deployed under AMISOM then, have experienced a considerable delay in getting paid their mission allowances for the period beginning March 2021, which was due to some technical challenges at the AU that have since been resolved. 

The brief of the matter is that the challenge has not been because of us in Uganda; the challenge has been because of AU and we expect the money any time. We do not actually have control over when they should bring the money and it is not the first time. We are very hopeful, as of this week that money will come in any time. I beg to respond. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the response. Yes, clarification.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister was responding to insecurity in Lamwo District, which took place on 5 March 2022. Two people were killed and a good number of animals were stolen. In his response, he said, “The process to recover those animals is ongoing”. This incident took place in March. He did not indicate to us as to how far they have gone with this process. Otherwise, a similar kind of insecurity is still ongoing.

When you go to Palabek Ogili in Padwat, these South Sudanese purportedly keep coming and committing atrocities and then move back to South Sudan. When you report the matter to UPDF, they do not respond quickly. Yet, when we, Ugandans, make any small mistake to cross the border to South Sudan, you do not come back alive.

Can you clarify the extent you have taken to recover or find out the perpetrators since March 2022? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I did raise the issue of the UPDF recruitment that was done and you gave clear directives to the minister to come and answer to this process. The minister has responded to three issues and is silent about this UPDF recruitment that he actually knows was very unfair, even in Tororo District, where he comes from.

Madam Speaker, would it not be procedurally right for the minister to also respond and assure us that they have put a halt on this recruitment process and the lists be sent to the districts for verification, as you directed? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I remember very well that I gave them up to Tuesday. Let us not hijack the minister - he does not have information on what was discussed and what was agreed yesterday. We agreed, minister, that this should be investigated and put on hold and that you give us a report on Tuesday on the recruitment process. You may not need to respond now because I know you do not have it.

MS OPENDI: Sorry, I missed that, Madam Speaker. My apologies.

THE SPEAKER: There is a supplementary from Hon. Odur.

5.05
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My supplementary question is on the delayed payment of the officers of Somalia. It has not happened once, twice or thrice and the problem has been with the African Union. What mechanisms has our Government undertaken with the AU to prevent that happening in the future? 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR SSEKITOLEEKO: Madam Speaker, I am rising on the issue of eviction. When the UPDF simply evict Ugandans without following the right procedures, other Ugandans take advantage of the same. Now, we are seeing evictions in this country everywhere.

Last week, I personally survived pangas in Zirobwe Manyama, Bamunanika, Luwero District by a rich man, Rugambwa with security guards. They threatened to kill me and the masses. As the Ministry of Defence - we are seeing some army men moving around within our places without any communication from local leaders. Many people fear to state their concerns because wherever they go, they are not helped. Some people are using such powers –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Robert, give the minister information of those areas where you are seeing army men evicting people so that we have information and they investigate and come back and report to the House. However, for this case, a due process was followed; there was a meeting.

Evictions are really happening. What we need to do is to get all the information and avail it to the ministers and then they will respond to it and tell us the action taken, not just responses that “we are making a follow-up”. Tell us what you have done at the moment.

MR SSEKITOLEEKO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR KOLUO: Thank you very much for the response. I wanted the minister to give more clarification on the security road that borders Karamoja and Teso. It starts from a place called Ising to Olilim and to Kapelebyong. The road is impassable; there is totally no patrol and no water for the soldiers who patrol. 

Madam Speaker, the cause of this Karimojong inflicting the people of Teso, more especially Katakwi -  

THE SPEAKER: What did you say? (Laughter)

MR KOLUO: I said we also have the security road from Oketa to Angesa to Olilim and to Kapelebyong; that road is impassable, which makes it hard for the security to patrol the area. I would like the minister to clarify how best that road can be worked on so that the soldiers are able to patrol the area. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister and benefit from his competency, as a lawyer. The policy of this Government is to protect people on land. And the private people are not allowed, even when they have a court order. Does the policy change when it comes to the Government land and the UPDF and the Minister of Defense’s land? Does it change from the one that you keep talking about in the media; the one for which the President keeps swearing upon, no removing people from the land? Does the policy change? And they want to benefit from your competence as a lawyer as well.

5.10
MS FLORENCE NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My question goes to the minister. Thank you for the presentation. My concern is about the workers. As a health committee, we are recently in the Bukedi sub region and other regions, monitoring work relating to the health centers in different areas. However, while still there we faced the challenge, whereby there is a big gap between the UPDF and the communities in which they were offering the services. 

Take for instance, my own in district of Butaleja - they are there, they are doing a good job, but we are facing a challenge like I have said, the salary payment is not streamlined. And in most cases, they are a bit harsh with the workers on site. What is the pay being designed to be paid to the non-skilled and skilled workers? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yours is about Namboole. Okay, let Kiboga first then we conclude. 

5.11
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This goes to my Minister for Defense. In Kiboga, we have an area that neighbours the Kokoola Barracks. However, we have tried to study their training programs, but we have failed. And sometimes when they are on their training, they even shoot shots that scare our people. 

Therefore, to your office, my prayers are that at least the neighbouring communities be made aware of these training programs such that they can go on with their agriculture activities for some days. However, as of now, they can spend like two days from morning to 1pm without doing any activity but hiding in the anthills because that is what was told to them, that the bullets who do not find them once they hide in the anthills. 

Therefore, I request that at least the barracks begins to relate with a neighbouring community such that they are safe, and they can ably attend to the economic activity. Thank you. 

5.13
MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Defense, hon. Oboth. To be real, the minister is trying. Three months back, I took him to my constituency in Aruu County in Acholi-Pee.

In Acholi-pee, the UPDF is having a clash with the locals over land and they have evicted several individuals from their land. The minister went there; the PS was there and intervened in the situation. However, the soldiers have remained adamant and are still evicting people. 

Today in this House, the minister is assuring us that in Entebbe, the soldiers will not evict. Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether the soldiers more powerful than the minister or the minister is being driven by the soldiers? Thank you very much.

5.14
MR DAVID LAGEN (NRM, Agago County, Agago): I am very grateful for the opportunity given to me. I also would like to appreciate the minister for the response delivered, especially on the issue of the border with Lamwo District. 

Madam Speaker, part of the reason the people of Lamwo, Kitgum and Agago are suffering is because of the porous border. We have reliable information - and security is very aware of this - the reason why the Government is also getting difficulty with the disarmament in Karamoja sub region is because of the porous border. 

Some of the cattle rustlers normally penetrate to South Sudan and buy guns and come back with those guns for raiding cattle. And I would like to find out the strategy the Government has in place in mitigating some of the porous borders because it is becoming a big problem. 

And then, two, the minister talked about the border conflicts. What are some of the strategies that are also put in place to make sure the conflicts on the border are mitigated? I thank you. 

5.15
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the honourable Minister of Defense to help me in this dilemma about the security forces that we have. In my area, Buhweju West, there is a forest called Kashoya Kitomi and it is a guarded forest. However, it is under collaborative forest management between the National Forest Authority and the community.

Soldiers dressed in police uniform, and at times others dressed in the green uniform of UWA come and pick people even from their villages or find them either collecting firewood or doing their collaborative forest work and pick them and they do tax correction. Anyone they pick and pays is released. Anyone who is stubborn and does not pay is not released. 

Therefore, there are two questions; these soldiers are not even answerable to the DPC of the district, but two they collect money from people, are they not paid at all for their work that really they must be paid by the community? 

Secondly, who commands those soldiers because they are called the commanders in the forest? And they don’t give receipts -(Interjection) - they collect free money by coercion. Thank you very much.

5.16
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I always find it challenging that issues concerning soldiers usually become heated issues. One of the reasons we have our colleagues representing UPDF in this Parliament - if it is hard for them to get information from the wanaichi, they can get it from us that represent these constituencies.

Madam Speaker, including the army commander who is also a Member of Parliament - these are high ranking officers in UPDF. When we cry here, we would expect it the following week to have solutions and answers. However, it is disappointing that every time we cry, another issue will come, another death will come, another indiscipline case will come and we shall have our colleagues seated here; they will not mention anything but we shall have the same challenges.

Madam Speaker, through your office, could we now begin having answers and the reasons as to why UPDF continues to be indiscipline, when we have the 10 members representing them here who must have put these to book? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, a lot of questions have been raised in regard to UPDF on the impunity they have on other forces, like shooting the police officers who are at work - yeah, these are the same people. Why should you react like that? We need to get resolutions to this because it is getting out of hand. Maybe we need to understand who they pay allegiance to. This is because if they cannot listen to the cries of the House and the people, then what should we do? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I will begin with the comments you are making. UPDF in full stands for Uganda People's Defense Forces. It gives us hope that it is one of the most disciplined forces within the region, save for a few isolated incidences of indiscipline of individual soldiers who have been apprehended, arraigned in court and punished accordingly. 

I would be more than grateful for the hon. Kibalya, who is my friend and former guild President, if he could share with me the latest - if any - of indiscipline soldier so that that particular soldier is brought to book. We heard the rest in this Parliament. 

The Deputy CDF, who was with me in this Parliament - for the first time in the history of this country, owned up when the UPDF officer clashed with a traffic police officer – (Interjection) - My brother in-law is intimidating me with a point of order. 

Anyhow, to begin with, hon. Amos Okot raised an issue - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, respect your brother in-law.

MR OBOTH: Thank you for your protection, Madam Speaker. What is the latest? I actually said here that the latest - by the time we prepared this response – is quite a number of weeks ago - as I was concluding on Lamwo. I said the latest is that our CDF and the CDF of South Sudan have already engaged each other. This is just in the past two weeks. Right now, the situation there is that no South Sudanese is allowed to cross over the border with a gun. If there is any new – 

THE SPEAKER: Address the Speaker; do not address the chorus. 

MR OBOTH: First of all, the verification takes place. This is not isolated to cases of Lamwo, Madi Opei where I have been myself; I mean in the whole Acholi Sub-region and the border districts. I do not know where I have not been to. 

Secondly - 

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish presenting then you will seek your clarification. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you for your guidance. On hon. Sarah Opendi’s matter, I was following the Order Paper and as a minister, I am not in charge of the Order Paper but thank you for the guidance. We shall respond to matters of recruitment. 

Hon. Odur asked about the Government measures to stop the recurrence of money delaying to come. We are engaging our Minister of Foreign Affairs and all the stakeholders to make sure this money – it even used to take up to six months. We hope you know that ATMIS - the Mission there - is to end around 2024. So, we hope that measures are going to be put in place. 

Our attaché to the UN and others - are working to make sure money is paid to these soldiers before their sweat dries. It is very embarrassing, on our part as Government, but there is a lot of diplomatic engagements involved. 

On the question of the eviction by the UPDF with pangas in Zirobwe. Pangas are not one of the tools or weapons known to be in the preserve of the UPDF. Maybe I did not understand you well but you talked about a rich man in Zirobwe - this needed more, but I want to invite my good friend from Bamunanika to give us facts so that we can come and – 

THE SPEAKER: Remember to avail the facts to the minister for him to handle.  

MR OBOTH: The honourable member from Toroma raised an issue on security roads. You are aware that I was in Katakwi and talked about security roads. You know what Government is doing between the borders from Acholi to Teso. The security roads are being worked on. Maybe the pace is slow. I am going to share that concern with our colleagues in the Ministry of Works so that we fast track it, but, already, work is ongoing. 

Question six was from my former friend, hon. Ssemujju. He asked; does the policy change when it comes to UPDF? The policy has not changed. In fact, if you listen, like I know you listened attentively, when we convened a meeting, we found five people who claimed to have not been sorted out. There is no way anybody is allowed to evict bibanja holders; the occupants in this country - whether it is Government or not. Therefore, the policy has not changed. 

I want to repeat here that we are following that policy to make sure those who were not compensated get compensated before they are asked to leave. 

My neighbour, Hon. Nebanda asked about the community gap between the UPDF – last week, on 29th, I was in Busolwe. The same matter was raised. The UPDF is undertaking renovation of 74 housing units for health workers. As it was agreed, they have local labourers who come; builders who are both skilled and unskilled. Now, the soldiers work differently. They have different work ethics. They do not waste time. The mistake they made at the beginning was to make them work per day and started by paying Shs 25,000 - 35,000 thinking they will work. When our friends from Butaleja knew that it was per day - whether you work, stand, chat or make phone calls - they lowered their ability to work. The UPDF resolved to employ them won contract. That now will be on contract; you agree on a portion. There are those who are getting Shs 30,000 and those getting Shs 20,000. It is all according to what you have agreed on. Therefore, there is no working per day. One works according to their speed and the work portion agreed upon so that has been resolved; I was there. There will be no more cry. They are happy, motivated and encouraged to work harder. You know our people.

About the barracks, this is a serious concern from Kiboga. I have taken note of the interference with the firing range, practices and training. We are going to handle this; we shall get back to you. 

Madam Speaker, I was fired more questions than; I think I will come more regularly. Hon. Komakech, you were spot on. We went there but there is no soldier who is above a minister. As we were there with you, you realised that the commander who was on ground was doing his own things -

THE SPEAKER: Was saluting you (Laughter).

MR OBOTH:  But we are working very hard. The Army leadership knows about this. We agreed that the Army should construct the Brigade headquarters to a certain level. However, they went beyond into some markets. We thought they had stopped and when you last called me, I thought- so, we are going to make a follow up on that matter in Acholi P. 

Hon. David from Agago about porous borders; yes, coming from Agago, you know for sure that that is a big challenge and the same for Teso, Acholi, Lango - this is a big challenge. 

The AU made a resolution to the effect that where there are conflicts, borders should be redemarcated. The pace is going on very slowly, and the Cabinet took a decision to set up a small working subcommittee headed by the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of African Community, the Minister of Defence is part of that to make sure that we get to fast track. 

The South Sudanese come 10 kilometers and because they know we are very receptive, we do not repulse them so they start settling there. So the issue of borders was a decision that was taken by the African Union. Then, within the East African Community, we are working hard to ensure these borders are re-demarcated to help in sorting out the conflicts at the border because they are all international borders. Therefore, very soon, I believe the subcommittee - (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the issue of porous borders is very crucial. What the honourable minister is giving is a long-term plan - demarcations, building walls; that is long term. 

Madam Speaker, right now, like in my district Amuru, the South Sudanese have entered my district for more than 10 kilometres and settled there; they have guns and are terrorising people. 

What are the immediate measures you are putting in place as a ministry? We need an immediate intervention to expel those people back to South Sudan. The long term measures may not help us as at the moment. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Have they grabbed anybody’s land? Have they chased away anybody?

MR OLANYA: Yes! Madam Speaker, at Okidi Parish in Atiak Sub County, they entered and chased away the community from their land. They came with their heads of cattle; they are rearing their cattle inside Uganda’s border. That is why I am asking the Minister to think about an immediate intervention.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have anything to say?

5.32
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Madam Speaker, the Minister said that South Sudanese entering Uganda with guns will not be allowed yet we have porous borders. How sure are you that those who will not come through the right way will not have their guns with them? 

In addition, there is the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region about peace in the region, of 12 countries. This is about the infiltration of small arms; what is happening, people who enter the country with guns are just killing our people? Thank you. We are not confident with that answer. 

5.33
MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from my brother, the Minister of State for Defence is: he has talked about the adherence to the AU Resolution and the East African Community Resolution on reaffirming the boundaries of the member states. 

However, Madam Speaker, around the 2019/2020 indeed, the boundaries between Kanungu-Uganda and Congo were worked on. In addition, the affirmation along Kunungu border affected over 2000 homes. I raised this matter but it has not gotten any solution. Those people are suffering. They do not have what to eat, where they can dig because they have been found to be in the Congo, yet they have our IDs, they subscribe to Uganda. What is the Government planning to do for those people who are affected? And what timelines do you have to help them also so that can also enjoy? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you summarise?

MR OBOTH:  Thank you very much. On international borders, as I said, the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of East African Community Affairs, has been charged with a duty to lobby the sister ministers of Africa within the member countries to effect the East African Boundaries Commission to make sure they start working. 

The issue of protection of territorial integrity is the mandate of the UPDF. But the challenge we have when the UPDF goes out; not long ago, a few weeks ago, they were in Lamwo and repulsed those South Sudanese - I do not want to say it here, but a few casualties were realised from those who resisted.  

So, the UPDF gets into a problem because they can only enforce when the boundaries are demarcated. This is work in progress, we are now waiting for the Minister of East African Community and First Deputy Prime Minister to come up with a report so that the East Africa Boundaries Commission should help to fast track that, with our Ministry of Lands. Therefore, colleagues we need your support; the other ministries will need the money also to do that. 


Hon. Biraro, soldiers dressed in police or in UWA uniforms? Hon. Biraro, you know that I know you very well, but today you confused me. How you are able to tell that these are soldiers dressed in police uniform or in UWA uniform; there is a problem there. Hon. Biraro, are you still there? We need to talk; we need details to help us speak with some clarity. UPDF has gazetted uniforms; they are known and are not shy to put it on, including in the Parliament of Uganda. 
Therefore, I think with that, I would invite hon. Ephraim Biraro, who is my very good friend, to share with me so that we can - I think I have -
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is something about the court martial, we are told its term of office has expired yet there is a backlog. So, maybe you need to go and check on that and see what action you can take so that these people are brought to court and prosecuted.

MR OBOTH: Noted, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister. Next -

RESPONSE BY MINISTER

    (a) ON MAL-ADMINISTRATION AT AMELO TECHNICAL INSTITUTE

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Education and Sports -

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, question No. 1 is responding to the issue raised by Hon. Jesca Ababiku on the mal-administration at Amelo Technical Institute. The ministry wishes to respond as follows. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports took note of the concerns raised about Amelo Technical Institute. The Permanent Secretary and our team visited the institute in May 2022 and interacted with the stakeholders on the ground.

It was agreed that the Principal of the institute be disciplined and/or transferred because the challenges seemed to revolve around poor management of the institute by the Principal. This has been effected and the Principal has been interdicted pending investigations on several allegations against him. The institute has been handed over to a caretaker principal as these investigations go on. 

On the issue of delayed construction at the institute, the problem has been attributed to an inefficient contractor who failed to complete the construction works. This contractor was terminated and replaced by another one who also failed to deliver on the project. The Project Management Team has proposed commencing the closure processes of this contract as well as seeking a different contractor to complete these works in line with the laws of Uganda. 
In the meantime, arrangements are being made to ensure the institute is relocated from the temporary premises at the farm institute to its permanent location as soon as possible. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit and respond. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. There was a second question.

(b) ON THE SLOW REGISTRATION OF CANDIDATES ATTRIBUTED TO THE HIGH COST OF ONLINE REGISTRATION AND LIMITED INTERNET ACCESS IN RURAL AREAS

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the second question is on the slow registration of candidates attributed to the high cost of online registration and limited internet access in rural areas. This question was asked by Hon. Patrick Nsamba. 

The ministry wishes to respond as follows: 

Madam Speaker, allow me to inform the House that online registration of candidates; e-registration is not a new system. It has been used to successfully register candidates since 2015; seven years now. 

It is a faster, more accurate and cheaper system than the manual system, which was in use up to 2014. The old system required candidates to fill computer forms and the head teachers or district inspectors of schools would carry these forms to UNEB along with registration fees. 

The process of checking these forms by UNEB staff was laborious and head teachers spent several days in Kampala waiting for their turn to submit the forms. Some even lost the registration money they carried. The system was slow and prone to many mistakes in the candidate data. 

These risks have been removed by the online system. Schools have greatly appreciated this. The registration exercise was conducted successfully up to 30 June 2022. According to UNEB, a total of 1,182,073 candidates were able to register online for all the levels of the 2022 final examination.

Of the registered candidates, 647,828 constituting 51 per cent of the total numbers, are females and 632,813 are males, representing a percentage of 49 per cent. 

On the limited access to internet, Government has put in place a number of interventions to widen access. Members may be aware that the total Optical Fibre Internet Network for both Government and privately owned firms spans around 12,000 kilometres covering 49 per cent of all districts and 24 per cent of the sub counties. 

Mobile telephone companies, especially MTN and Airtel, have also greatly expanded their services throughout the country with the erection of signal masts. Indeed, UNEB centres have not indicated the lack of internet access as being a hindrance to the registration process. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to repeat that indeed, UNEB examination centres have not indicated that lack of internet access has been a hindrance to the registration process. 

Uganda, as a country, is embracing e-governance, including Parliament of Uganda, to improve service delivery to the people. Online registration by UNEB is a contribution towards better and cheaper service rendered by the Ministry of Education and Sports through UNEB to its clients, the schools and the candidates. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to respond. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. There was a supplementary question from hon. Naluyima on the issue of Namboole land; how you are fencing land that does not belong to Namboole. Take note of that. 

5.47
MR FRANCIS KATABAAZI (NUP, Kalungu East County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. I would like to get feedback on the state of the stadium. At the moment, Madam Speaker, we do not have a national stadium to use. That is why we are being hosted at St Mary’s when we have international matches. 

Of course, we had Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium and I do not know how far they have gone into finishing it. I think there is a developer who brought a nice plan, according to what I was told. But it has taken ages. We have nowhere to play football from. 

In Namboole, I think there are some people whom I heard are soldiers. I do not know what is happening in other stadia. How can a whole country be without a football stadium?

Secondly, about the Kapchorwa training track and field – how far has it gone? When you look at the people bringing us glory these days, you realise they are mainly track and field. In fact, even in the inter-parliamentary games, we brought so many medals from track and field. So, how far has the Kapchorwa facility gone? Thank you. (Applause)

5.49
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the timely responses given. I would like to raise an additional question on the technical institute. I would like to thank him for the steps taken by interdicting the principal. 
However, when it came to the issue of having a contractor failing to perform to the expectations and he is terminated, the second one was contracted but also fails. I would have liked him to move an extra mile by telling this House how safe the finances are – the resources that are supposed to construct this institute. This is because I envisage loss of resources if not well addressed. I would be happy if it is well answered. Thank you. 

5.50
MS VERONICA NANYONDO (NUP, Woman Representative, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister for the statement. Honourable minister, the issue of e-registration – I do not know whether you have followed it up especially in rural areas where you find that in a school, there is only one teacher with a smart phone and the school has no computer. To get data is very difficult. There is an extra charge that those teachers ask or request for from parents so that they can buy data. 

In addition to that, they do not have electricity. They can spend a day or two without battery. They take their phones to the next trading centres for charging. What is the ministry doing for those schools? Are we planning anything or we are going to be left out because we cannot afford e-learning?

THE SPEAKER: As Members of Parliament, let us move away from analogue to digital. That should be the plan. Do not remain where you were. Let us now look at, as Parliament, how do we improve our country to go digital. I have even allowed you to attend meetings on Zoom. I have seen my Member of Parliament for Bukedea is online. 

5.52
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for his submission. However, whatever he is saying is not as correct as he has said it. There is nobody – 

THE SPEAKER: All of it in totality or part? 

MR SSEWUNGU: No, not everything he has said. As a Committee on Education and Sports, unfortunately my chair is there, we handled this matter in the committee about e-registration and we said that because of the challenges we are facing, let the two move hand in hand. 

For a UPE child, Government is paying for them Shs 10,000 per child per year. Now, this P.7 candidate is spending over Shs 100,000 to register on the e-system. 

The minister can testify here that UNEB has never taken training of these head teachers and those in charge of registering students on the e-system. So, we said that as you move on, let us have the two moving concurrently. Those who can afford can move on and those who cannot afford stay on the manual system. 

Let us take a region like Karamoja. I have been to Karamoja. We have visited these places and you will hardly find a computer in some areas. And children are – 

THE SPEAKER: That is not correct. Karamoja is one of the developing areas. Unless you are talking about Kanungu.

MR SSEWUNGU: Very much so, Madam Speaker. They can be developing but challenges come in when it comes to such areas. I think what the honourable minister has failed to understand in this question is that it was about rural areas. 

Let us classify schools. When you talk about Budo Junior School – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, I know you are a teacher. Simply say, let us have a cocktail in the interim. Let us have both e-registration and the manual one and we come up with a way to transition at the end of the day. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Absolutely, Madam Speaker. But you see the problem with education, there are classes of schools that will not argue because they also have their number. When you come to private schools, their advanced stages are well known to all of us. Then there are those particular UPE schools where I have a lot of interest. 

Then lastly, I pray to the minister, through you, Madam Speaker, that some of these issues like the one raised by the honourable member about the technical institute - as a committee, we have done a lot of work and I would like to thank you for interdicting the head teacher. 

However, the committee should take keen interest in going back. Sometimes, there must be a presumption of innocence. A number of schools are striking now. I heard of one in Mbarara. In Masaka we had one at Blessed Sacrament Kimaanya and others. We should go back to our committee and get more usefulness from the committee to handle those disputes as they come in. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: My presumption is that by the time somebody is suspended, the due process must have taken place. And if the due process took place and found the person guilty, what else do you do? You are the same people who raised this matter and it had to be addressed. 

5.55
MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the minister for responding to those questions. Ssembabule District is a drought-prone area and so, we face challenges of water in our schools. Our children walk long distances – 

THE SPEAKER: Now hon. Gorreth Namugga, we are talking about education - 

MS NAMUGGA: I am on education. Our children walk long distances to collect water and less time for school. The ministry, in the current programmes provides for water harvesting, but those schools that have not been considered for construction of new classroom blocks do not have a provision for water harvesting. 

I, therefore, request the minister to take keen interest in the schools of Kasaana Moslem Primary School and St Herman Primary School to help them get that provision for water tanks. Even during the time of drought, at least we can fetch water and put in the tanks such that our children do not walk long distances and lose time for attending class. That is my prayer, Madam Speaker. 

5.57
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a plea to the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

Recently, I had students who were not registered because they sat PLE a few years ago and I was told that their details were not in the system. Registering them manually was a problem. Ministry, please accommodate the two systems in the meantime. 

Lastly, many schools, including some secondary schools, still do not have computers.

A case in point is Bukedi S.S in my constituency. What is your plan? How are you liaising with the ICT ministry to support these institutions with infrastructure development since we are now heading to e-learning and e-programmes? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have Acon and then Emely.

5.58
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for being active in giving education responses. 

Honourable minister, we are aware that for many seed secondary schools, the funds were approved and many were supposed to be constructed. I want to find out why all these funds were sent back to the Consolidated Fund. When will these funds, again, be sent to the districts? 

When you visit some of these schools, you will notice that the students are still studying under trees. I really expected these schools to begin operating or have construction going on. Honourable minister, could you let us know about, for example, Okum Secondary School in Orum Sub county in Otuke District? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I also have a school in Kachumbala County. It is a seed school. Money was disbursed but they said there was a Government instruction that the schools must be constructed by the army engineering brigade. The district could not get a contractor because there was that instruction. Instead the money was returned. We do not have a school.

I also represent a constituency. So - (Laughter)

6.00
MR EMELY KUGONZA (NRM, Buyanja East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister of state for education and sports for the responses given. However, I would like to ask him to pick interest in a school in my constituency called Nyamarwa Seed Secondary School. 

In April this year, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Hon. Matia Kasaija, was asked to be the chief guest at the commissioning of the school but he was not able to do that. He asked me to represent him. However, when we got to the school, we found it in a very sorry state – a brand new school where millions of Uganda shillings had been spent. Together with my Woman Member of Parliament and the district leaders, we distanced ourselves from the commissioning; actually, we did not commission the school. 

The RDC had assured us, together with the District Education Officer that they would bring this to the attention of the Ministry of Education and Sports so that the contractor makes good of the shoddy work that had been done. However, up to now, nothing has been done and I would like to ask for the intervention of the ministry.

THE SPEAKER: Emely, you want to say that the school was not constructed? 

MR KUGONZA: The school was constructed but it was shoddy work. All the buildings had cracked at the time they were supposed to be commissioned.

THE SPEAKER: Did you give that report to the ministry? 

MR KUGONZA: No. The District Education Officer and RDC said they were going to take it up? 

THE SPEAKER: As the leader, did you give a report?

MR KUGONZA: I gave the report to Hon. Kasaija, who was supposed to do the commissioning.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Emely, can you give a report on that school to the ministry. I want an action taken.

MR KUGONZA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

6.02
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to give a supplementary question to the minister for education. 

Madam Speaker, it is clear, with your guidance and passion for e-management and e-governance that everybody in this House embraces the idea that we go e-governance. However, while we agitate for that move, we need to have a corresponding infrastructure. In the event that we do not have corresponding infrastructure, we have to go slowly in order not to leave others behind. 

In this event, Madam Speaker, I want to bring out the issue of Kanungu District and Kinkizi West, in particular, which I represent. I have a sub county called Mpungu; it has no network. It is 72 kilometers from Mpungu to the headquarters of the district. 

There is a school called St. Callist Secondary School. It is a government school but has no computer; it has no network. 

Madam Speaker, when the minister says that UNEB did not report internet accessibility as one of the problems, it is trying to hide its challenges. 

Now, I would like to implore my minister, who is my friend, to take it from us, the representatives of the people, that UNEB is having challenges. For example, apparently, there is a school called St Gertrude, where the head teacher has been in Kampala for two weeks trying to correct mistakes because they failed to resonate with the situation that was prevailing.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, in my area there is a seed school called Nyamirama. It has no computers. There is a school called Bulema; it has no computers. It is a girl’s Government school. Why are we trying to give an impression that we are okay when we know that we have not sufficed these institutions with requisite resources to allow them operate in the e-governance system?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, the findings of UNEB may not be very accurate. You need to look at them. As we move on to the digital system, we cannot abandon the analog system, which can help have everybody in the system. You may need to look at that. Also, look at the infrastructure that is required. 

Actually, when I go to my home I have to climb an ant hill to make a phone call. (Laughter) So, you will find there is a problem also with the masts in those areas. You need to look at that.

6.06
MR SIMON WOKORACH (NRM, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to appreciate my senior brother, Hon. Obua, one, for handling the responses and, two, for regularly being in the House to respond to the pleas of the honourable members in this August House. 

Madam Speaker, the only inquiry I want to make is: honourable minister, you are aware that when we were closing the last financial year, a number of school lists were collected and submitted to the ministry for coding. I would humbly request my honourable minister here to clarify on whether in this new financial year they are captured into the allocated budget for this financial year – all these schools which details have been submitted for coding. Thank you. I submit.

THE SPEAKER: The coding? No one should repeat anything about coding - (Member rose_) - no, it should not be specific; it is for the whole country. We have talked about money for coding; we have talked about seed schools, we have talked about the stadium: which one is new? Yes, hon. Abeja?

6.07
MS SUSAN ABEJA (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank our minister for the statement. Honourable minister, you have talked about a technical school that has not been constructed; but I wish you moved in the whole country and checked on the technical schools where the money has not been spent. 

When we were in Baralegi, I raised the issue concerning Okwang Technical School. It is now coming to 10 years; we only have two structures. I do not know where the money is lying, but that school was directed to be constructed using Shs 3.5 billion.

Right now, Otuke has received only Shs 575 million. So, the rest of the money - I wonder where it is. I ask you to look into that matter.
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to take a look at all the technical schools that have been constructed. Actually, my technical school is worse. The money was disbursed, given to the contractor, but the work has not been done; people fear talking. 

6.09
MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I thank the minister for attempting to answer the questions; when members raise issues here and then the issue of Defence comes in, then it defeats the purpose. But I also want to appreciate the fact that admission was made that only 49 per cent is covered for the fibre. 

The issue that we are talking about cuts across, and I need a response from the ministry, what is the way forward on this e-registration, because the cries of the 51 per cent are coming on the Floor and they demand for a response. A clear way forward must be designed. I submit.

6.10
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This directly -
THE SPEAKER: The problem is that most of you go out, then you come back with the questions. You leave me sitting here alone, you then come back at leisure.

MR OSEKU: The critical question now is, given the challenges that have been raised here and with the time factor put into consideration, we are foreseeing a situation where Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) will pronounce closure of registration, when the majority of the candidates have not yet been captured. 

Honourable minister, already there had issued deadlines for the registration. I would request that the minister comes here to tell us the time when UNEB should be able to conclude the registration exercise and he gives us the update about whether all the schools have been captured. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to go through and find out whether the registration is over. If it is not over, you set a date of extension; set a timeline for the deadline and have all the students registered so that some students do not miss out. So, can we first have a response to what has been raised?

MR OBUA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start with the first question you raised; but before that, let me make this general appeal. Honourable members, the offices we hold are public offices. The schools we build are for the children of Uganda and we are here as representatives. 

I humbly appeal to you that if there are challenges with schools, do not wait for an opportunity on the Floor of Parliament kindly profile the issues in your respective schools and write to us at the Ministry of Education and Sports. I believe we will be able to respond. 

This is my humble appeal, which is a general remark; such that we do not wait for an opportunity here. And yet there are challenges in our respective constituencies, seed schools, technical schools, and primary schools. 

On the issue raised by the Speaker, the first question that we are fencing land that does not belong to us at Mandela National Stadium; honourable members, Mandela National Stadium is a public facility that has been in existence since 1997. As I speak, Mandela National Stadium sit sits on land which is titled under the laws of Uganda. 

The wall fence being erected by the UPDF engineering brigade is being erected on land that falls within the land title of Mandela National Stadium. 

Before the process started, there was a joint boundary reopening according to the land title, in the presence of all stakeholders, during the day. If anyone feels that he has any action against us, the laws of Uganda are clear because we are erecting a wall fence on a public facility with a land title where all due processes were executed. I beg to respond. And stop at that.

On the issue of the Namboole stadium plan and other stadia; two weeks ago, Mandela National Stadium received the approved supplementary budget for kick-starting the renovation and upgrade. 

I notify the Speaker that I have called a stakeholders’ meeting tomorrow of all stakeholders in order for us to meet and agree in terms of time by the UPDF engineering brigade because soon after completing the wall fence-this land belongs to us, we are just custodians. It was being encroached on, we had to first safeguard the land. 

We will start the process of upgrading and renovating Mandela National Stadium very soon because the funding was availed towards the end of the last financial year. 

Other stadia. Uganda has earmarked two stadia to be constructed; Akiibua Olympic Stadium in Lira and Buhinga in Kabarole. These two stadia were cost listed under a Japanese grant, under the forum on China African grant (FOCAG).

As Ministry of Education and Sports, we executed all our roles and responsibilities even during the COVID-19 lockdown. All studies were done. All submissions were made and we are waiting availability of funds from the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, because that is the only process. 

I believe this Parliament should be able to extend this question to the Ministry of Finance because as Education, we are done. This Parliament was told that the ministry was going to attend the (FOCAG) meeting in Senegal and they would give us the response. Uganda has talents. 

As I speak, in 2022 alone, from the months of January to July, seven Ugandan national teams of sports have qualified for the World Cup in different categories; we are there. This used to be a dream. (Applause) It is not me alone; that is the grace of God and all of us.

On Kapchorwa training - this is called Teryet High Altitude Training Facility, which is 2,555 metres above sea level – we are in the final stages of phase one; installation of imported synthetic materials on the surface. Some materials are still coming because we are working on these final touches with materials that are imported from about three countries. We hope that phase one will be able to be concluded.

I think the biggest challenge with this facility was the design. Our engineers who designed it did not take note of the 11-kilometre stretch from Kapchorwa Town to the training facility. We had to go back because the road was so bad to the extent that at one point, the contractor opted to use camels to carry materials to the site; 2,500 metres above sea level.

However, I want to salute UNRA because on the intervention of the senior minister and the First Lady of Uganda, that road was annexed to Kapchorwa-Suam Road. It is now in a motorable condition and that facilitated works at the site.

Soon, we believe we shall be there to conclude and commission phase one and make it operationalised. If more resources are provided, we will proceed to phase two and phase three because this is a three-phased project.

On the issue of e-registration and the appeal, Nakivubo is under a Public-Private Partnership. I joined the ministry as Minister of State for Education and Sports in charge of sports and I found a Memorandum of Understanding, which is a PPP that is still in force. The first one was signed; there was the first and second addendum.

Therefore, however much we push, the contractor will still tell you, “according to my contractual obligation, my time has not yet expired”. That is what I found already duly signed and it is binding to all of us.

MR AOGON: Honourable minister, this is just to get clarification on whether we have that PPP agreement laid on this Table; whether Parliament has a copy of it so that we can also partake of what is entailed in it. Thank you.

MR OBUA: From the time I took over leadership as Minister of State, I want to confess that I have not laid it. If it was laid before – but if this Parliament wishes that the PPP agreements be laid, I undertake to lay them, Madam Speaker. If Parliament was sitting tomorrow, I would even come tomorrow but let me undertake to lay them in the course of next week because they are available. 

On the request on e-registration, honourable members, I believe I have taken note of this; we need to get back. However, you can see that from the registration that we are celebrating, even for this year alone, 1,182,073 candidates had, by 30 June, registered for PLE, UCE and UACE under e-registration.

Let us embrace it. We may be slow but let us move slow and sure. On the issue of the cocktail; give us time to consult, probably with UNEB and the mainstream Ministry of Education and Sports to see. However, to be honest with you, even from the data I have here, you can see that every year, we are progressing in terms of the number of students who are registering under e-registration – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Honourable minister, you might have that excitement about the number, but you do not know what the head teachers have gone through. It has had an impact on the parents, teachers plus the students. You will get the sad information, after the results are out, because you will get to know that a big number stayed out because of those hurdles.

Universal Primary Education schools are supposed to pay nothing. If they are paying Shs 150,000 for e-registration, it is as if they have paid for UPE funds for the last seven years. Are you getting me? So, you either make it free as you gave it to them or not. Otherwise, if you put a charge on parents, children are going to stay without studying next year and they will not be paying because they cannot afford. 

You know very well you are not buying reports for schools and reports are paid for by parents. Those who cannot afford do not get reports in UPE schools. These are facts you cannot run away from; whether in Alebtong or Kalungu. These are known everywhere.

Let us take that keen interest, as the Speaker said, and have a win-win situation. Once parents are impacted on paying, with this lockdown and the economy, that is why you are going – those are the questions. You started with one million children in P.1 but at pre-registration in P.7, you have less than 600,000 children. Where are the 400,000 disappearing to? One of the factors might also be that one. This is in good spirit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us do it progressively and we will arrive where we want to be, at the end of the day. We will arrive where we want to.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, thanks for your guidance. I had indicated that this is a matter that would require us, at the Ministry of Education and Sports, to consult further with Uganda National Examinations Board. That said, in the seven years – because this is not year one or year two; it is year seven that the country is progressively embracing e-registration of candidates. 

However, just like I indicated, as a general principle, we can consult because it is not a matter that I can affirm and commit the ministry to, on the Floor here. Permit us to consult. This has been here for the last seven years –

THE SPEAKER: Can you consult and get back to the House on the decision of the ministry is? 

MR OBUA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I undertake to do that. 

On the issue of water in schools, children walking long distances, new classroom blocks in Ssembabule, Madam Speaker, the partners we get come with their different packages because we are not constructing all these classrooms with funding entirely from Government of Uganda. 

The seed secondary schools, for instance, that we constructed -117 in phase one - were as a result of an arrangement between Government of Uganda and the World Bank and the packages are there. Others may come – (Interruption)

MR OGUZU: I have with me an e-copy of a letter that was written by the Permanent Secretary to about 15 affected districts. Those 117 schools you are alluding to - some do not exist on ground. There are many works that have stalled, some contractors were paid without work being done and nothing is progressing. While you people report here that we have done this and that, out there it is just a white elephant.

I have a copy of that letter here. Can you tell us about your capacity, as a ministry, in absorbing these resources because I have the letter here? 

THE SPEAKER: Can we find out from the Committee on Education; did you do your oversight role? Did you find those schools? 

6.27
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We share concerns with our colleagues, especially about the complaints to do with Inter-Governmental, Fiscal Transfers (UgIFT) schools. 

Madam Speaker, in the last session, we were all handicapped as a committee. We were not able to do oversight to visit these schools as a committee. However, we have been told that in this new session, the committees are going to be further facilitated. So as a committee, we are going to sit and draw our work plan to see that we have time to visit all these schools and we find out for ourselves. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you visit this course and give a report to this House on your findings? 

MR ABIGABA: Madam Speaker, it is going to be one of our core activities in the session because we have a new program which to begin- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you conclude?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, when we state on the Floor that schools do not exist, then before even one minute elapsing, the same member says there are white elephants - Madam Speaker – (Interjections) - absolutely. A member is saying the schools do not exist on the ground but I presided over the commissioning of four of the seed schools: Apac Seed Secondary School in Apac, Aduk Seed Secondary School in Kwania, Ogor Seed Secondary School in Otuke, and Abia Seed Secondary School in Alebtong. 

And we dispatched a team of ministers all over the country to commission schools that had been finished at that time. Hon. Odur is here, a school in his constituency was commissioned by hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny. 

All the schools built under UGIFT phase one, are supposed to be equipped. For instance, computers are supposed to be 28. 

Honourable members, this fight against corruption must be collective. I was in Kwania and I found Shs 272 million that was cause listed for construction of a seed school, diverted. An arrest was ordered. The acting DEO is on interdiction pending investigations because I found only 14 computers. I went with a checklist. 

Therefore, that is the reason I am pleading with you to please give us these reports because we need to join hands so that when I come to your district and order - because the Constitution allows that on reasonable suspicion, that is a constitutional provision - please do not start calling me, honourable minister, so and so, no because I did that even in my own district. I ordered the arrest of my own DEO in Alebtong. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister can you conclude? As you have heard-

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the big question was about the funds meant for constructing the 115 seed secondary schools but which was returned to the Consolidated Fund. May I now conclude with that? 

Honourable members, the unit cost for building and equipping a seed secondary school was Shs 2.1 billion under UGIFT phase one. And that was the approved money for UGIFT phase two and it would run in two to three financial years. 

When we advertise because it is a shared responsibility, the local government and the ministry all contractors who responded in the 115 schools quoted over and above the unit cost because all of us are aware that prices of commodities have gone up. There are those who even quoted beyond Shs 3 billion. No contractor quoted less than Shs 2.5 billion. I think the list was Shs 2.4 billion; only one or two schools, but the rest Shs 2.5 to Shs 3 billion and beyond. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports had to engage with the Ministry of Finance and the World Bank. We agreed in principle that this funding had been earmarked for UGIFT and there was no way one could divert it because all these prices were higher. 

As I speak, the monies have all returned to the Consolidated Fund. But Members sooner or later, might even be in either quarter one or quarter two out stop analyzing and agreeing on what we should do. If the Government commits to giving more money, because Shs 2.1 billion can no longer construct the schools we have constructed and equipped according to the quotations we got - then we will come back to this Parliament to revote the money that has gone back to the Consolidated Fund. And all the 115 contracts will then kick start. That is the state of affairs as far as the fate of the 115 seed schools is concerned. 

The other issues on technical schools over the internet, of course, is that the internet is not our mandate. We work in partnership with the Ministry of ICT. The issues of other schools please I plead with you. We are talking about money for technical schools, please write or come to us, because money released from public funds cannot disappear. 

However, at times we budget and prepare but when the actual release is less than what is appropriated. So, please come to us, write to us; we are at your service. 

Madam Speaker. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for the statement presented. He has clearly stated that the stadia of Buhinga and Akibua that have been planned, the Ministry of Education and Sports has done its bit. And that it is only the Minister of Finance that has been delaying this process. 

Wouldn't it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that you direct the Minister of Finance to come here with a statement to address this matter? I am saying this because this relates to what I want the minister to also confirm, that the President had mooted an idea that Uganda should co-host the 2027 African Cup of Nations. We cannot co-host without having these facilities. Therefore, I would beg that, Madam Speaker you direct. 

And when the minister comes next time, there is an alarming headline attributed to the directorate of education that about 68 to 69 per cent of our learners who are in primary school up to primary seven cannot actually read nor write. It is attributed to the directory from the ministry. 

So, would the minister, in future come here to tell us how the ministry plans to address this? Because even if we register a million PLE candidates, it will be a big success quantitatively, but the quality would be so worrying. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister what happened to that grant for Akibua and-?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance represented by hon. Haruna Kyeyune, presented a statement on the Floor of Parliament. And he indicated that when COVID-19 struck the world, China decided to use the pool of resources that they had earmarked to support African countries, for the procurement of vaccines. And that affected the list of projects that for instance, Uganda had cause-listed which were 27, and out of 27, two were these sports stadia. 

Therefore, arising out of that, and after consultations, the two sports stadia were dropped from the list of projects under Forum on China Africa Cooperation for the period 2018 to 2021. 

He further stated, by then, the Minister of Finance was set to represent Uganda at another forum sitting in Senegal, and they undertook that the issue of the two stadia would be a priority under Forum on China Africa Cooperation Grant for the period 2021/2023.

Probably, I would wish to concur with Hon. Odur on the point that they need to come back and respond to that subject matter, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, can you write to the ministry? We need a response to that effect. According to what I heard from him that time, it was actually not China that diverted the money; we diverted the money. I remember that very well because I chaired the House; we diverted the money because of COVID-19. Therefore, we need to get a concrete statement on that matter.

We have one more question plus the motion that was supposed to be brought by Hajjati and the Ministry of Public Service. We will handle these on Tuesday. I adjourn the House to Tuesday, 12 July 2022 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.38 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 July 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 
