Wednesday, 24 July 2013

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today we will be starting on the debate of the State of the Nation Address and as was decided by the Business Committee, a time frame has been provided for all the sides of the House. It was agreed that this time be allotted to help us manage the debate better.

I have so far received lists from the Independent Members of Parliament and from the NRM but I have not yet received a list from the Opposition. Let it be known that the Government side will have seven hours for this debate. The Independent Members will have three hours and the Opposition, whose list we are still waiting for, will have five hours.

The general debate on this matter, with the indulgence of the House, will terminate on the 26th that is Friday. By that time, we will have exhausted all the necessary debate on this subject and we would have closed.

I also plan that next week, we will have a general debate on the Budget. This is something that used to happen in the past but we have not been doing it since we started this Parliament because normally we have time constraints; we spend all the time debating the State of the Nation Address and then we do not have any time to have general debate on the Budget. However this time, we are creating time next week to enable Members to participate in a general debate on the Budget.

That debate will also take three days and I also ask the different sides of the House to provide a list of those they intend to contribute on this debate, so that it covers both the State of the Nation Address and the Budget general debate.

General debate on the Budget will start on the 30th. That is also the date that we will receive the statement from the shadow minister of finance on the Budget, after which we will commence with our general debate on the Budget, which will terminate on the 1st of August this year.

We had expected that by the 15th of this month, we would have received policy statements from the shadow ministers either in response or setting the pace for what should be done in the governance of this country. I am hoping that by now, they have submitted these and they are duly with the committees, which will be handling these matters appropriately. We expected them to have submitted these by the 20th of this month to facilitate the committee process.

Upon concluding the general debate on the Budget on 1st August, we intend to send the committees to do their work. They are already doing the work but now we want to give them more time to complete the work they are doing currently so that they can finish the compilation of the report and all those things. So we have 15 committees and they should be ready for Plenary on a date I am about to announce.

We have the Committees on Agriculture; Tourism; Health; Education and Sports; Gender; Physical Infrastructure; Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; Public Service and Local Government; Natural Resources; Presidential Affairs; Foreign Affairs; Defence and Internal Affairs; Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Information, Communication and Technology; and East African Community Affairs.

There are 15 committees and that means that the number of days we should be allotting to these committees to complete the debate on their report on the Budget, which must terminate by the 31st August - that means we should count backwards and see that the right number of days are appropriately allocated to the respective committees to do their work.

So as I said, on 1st August, I intend to suspend Plenary so that the committees can do their work. The committees should be able to report by 12th August so that we can resume Plenary on 13th August and we proceed with a detailed debate on the reports from the committees on the budget proposals. So that is information on the debate on the State of the Nation Address, general debate on the Budget and the processes that will lead us into concluding the budgetary process.

I am also informed that we are receiving the Financial Bills today. I am hoping that the ministers are prepared to bring these Bills for first reading so that they can also go to the committees.

Finally, you will recall that there was debate on a motion raised by the hon. Member for Namutumba who is also from the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, which motion was supported by this House. It was agreed that an ad hoc committee deals with the details of the performance of private health service providers in this country so that they can report back. Under the rules, I, therefore, make the announcement that the different Whips should supply the lists of the people they intend to nominate to constitute this committee so that they can proceed to constitute the ad hoc committee to handle these matters expeditiously. Thank you very much.

2.19
MR KENNETH BBOSA KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance moved under our Rules of Procedure concerning the continuous sand mining in Mawokota South Constituency in Mpigi District.

Allow me to bring to your attention the continuous activity of sand mining that is being carried out in my constituency, which is not only affecting the existing swamps but also encroaching on the existence of Lake Victoria in my area. The affected areas include: Kituntu Sub-county, Kamaliba, Nabiwanga and Lwera swamp. This activity is being carried out 24 hours a day. When you move on Kampala-Masaka Highway, you will notice the huge trucks moving this sand from the shores of Lake Victoria to Kampala and I believe it is affecting the ecological system of our country and is also affecting the existence of fish species that we have in Lake Victoria.

I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, to call upon the Minister in charge of Fisheries as well as the Minister in charge of the Environment to look into this matter to safeguard our environment and also protect and conserve the fish species that we have in our lakes. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we have the Minister for Environment here? Any response?

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaaba): Mr Speaker, I thank the Member for raising that issue of sand mining. It has been a concern at our ministry. But I can say that we are trying to address it at the moment. Initially, the technical persons were trying to handle it without the political arm. Currently, what we are doing is to talk to the locals to establish the person now authorizing the mining and who is giving the licenses. But we are also sensitizing them about the implications. We are doing it slowly due to funding constraints. We hope to reach him and take it as a priority. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Let us go on to the next item.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, where is the Minister for Finance? Okay, Government Chief Whip.

2.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the Finance Bill, 2013.

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I beg to read the Finance Bill, 2013 for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. As you know, these are the Bills that fit into the budgetary process.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

2.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to read the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, you have to move that, “The Bill entitled this and that, be read the first time.”

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. However, Government Chief Whip, I hope you are aware that there are some requirements that should accompany those Bills. I am sure being the Ministry of Finance itself, those documents are available.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALEU ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

2.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That Bill is also committed to the appropriate Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious handling.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EAST AFRICAN EXCISE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

2.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That Bill also stands committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious handling.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE TARRIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

2.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious handling to feed into the budgetary process.

LAYING OF PAPERS

I) STATUTORY INSTRUMENT 2013 NO.27, THE TAXES AND DUTIES (PROVISIONAL COLLECTION) ORDER, 2013

2.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, “The Taxes and Duties (Provisional Collection) Order, 2013.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it stands committed to the appropriate Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: Mr Speaker, the Order Paper shows item four as petition by residents - Maybe for purposes of our record and I beg to be corrected, but I think Laying of Papers should be captured as item five. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I noticed that but I was still wondering whether – because there is item four – you are looking at the draft. You should always withdraw draft Order Papers. That is the draft one and you can see it is marked “draft”.

PETITION BY RESIDENTS OF NAMULANDA AGAINST ROSEBUD FARM ON ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That petition is supposed to be moved by the honourable members for Busiro South. However, I don’t see him in the House. Is there anybody prepared to present this petition? Okay, it will be scheduled later.

LAYING OF PAPERS

II) REQUEST TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO $ 20 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO SUPPORT THE DRYLAND INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN KARAMOJA

2.26
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I request that for item 5 (II) and (III) I lay the papers at an appropriate time after getting the proper documents.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, items (II) and (III) of 5 are deferred.

IV) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Public Accounts Committee. Is there anybody to perform this duty?

2.27
Ms Emma Boona (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Office of the President for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it stands committed to the appropriate Committee of Public Accounts.

V) REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF STATE HOUSE FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.27
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the Report and Opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of State House for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

VI) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA ROAD FUND FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.28
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Road Fund for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

VII) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF NATIONAL CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.28
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table, a report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the National Citizenship and Immigration Control for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

VIII) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF DIRECTORATE OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.29
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions for the year ended 30 June 2012.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

IX) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA PRISONS SERVICE FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.29
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Prisons Service for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you. 

X) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.30
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Public Service Commission for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

XI) OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER STRENGTHENING EVIDENCE BASED DECISION MAKING II FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.30
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the Report on the Office of the Prime Minister, strengthening evidence-based decision making II financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

XII) UGANDA HIGH COMMISSION, PRETORIA REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.31
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a Report and Opinion of the Auditor-General on the Uganda High Commission in Pretoria, on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

XIII) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2013

2.31
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Office of the Prime Minister for the year ended 30 June 2013.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

XIV) UGANDA HIGH COMMISSION, ABUJA FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.32
Ms Emma Boona (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a Report on the Uganda High Commission, Abuja, financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and the opinion thereon by the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

XV) MINISTRY OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.32
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a report on the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and the opinion thereon by the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

XVI) MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS UGANDA NATIONAL EDUCATION SUPPORT PROJECT FUNDED BY THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) LOAN AGREEMENT NO: UG-0071 REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE 24-MONTH PERIOD ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.33
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a Report and the Opinion of the Auditor-General on the Ministry of Education and Sports, Uganda National Education Support Project funded by the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) loan agreement No.UG-0071, on the financial statement for the 24-month period ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

XVII) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.33
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Human Rights Commission for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

Honourable members, these papers that have been laid before the House from items 5(iv) to item 5(xvii) as indicated stand committed to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious handling. 

XVIII) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.34
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Revenue Authority for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

XIX) UGANDA BUREAU OF STATISTICS (UBOS) STRENGTHENING EVIDENCE BASED DECISION MAKING II FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE EIGHT-MONTH PERIOD ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.34
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a Report on Uganda Bureau of Statistics on strengthening evidence-based decision making and financial statements for the eight-month period ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

XX) NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.35
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the National Forestry Authority report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

Honourable members, those three papers that have been laid before the House 5(xviii) to 5(xx) stand committed to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for expeditious handling.

DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON THURSDAY, 6 JUNE 2013

“MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 6 JUNE 2013” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have agreed on the procedure we are going to use in conducting this debate. But you will recall that yesterday, there was an incident around Parliament on this matter in item No.7 - this question of St Balikuddembe Owino Market. I am sure all of you know what happened yesterday and it is because some things are delaying in Parliament. Possibly, those situations could have been avoided. I am going to ask – the Chairperson is not here, hon. Amooti Otada? Yes.

2.37
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to request for some more time. The report is being photocopied but we are ready to present today. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we go back to item 6 on the debate on the State of the Nation Address. Debate begins today. We have received the statement from the President and we have received a statement from the Leader of the Opposition so we are now opening debate. But as I said at the beginning, I have not received the list from the Opposition. I have a list from the Independent Members of Parliament and I also have the list from the NRM Members of Parliament. So, we will start the debate in that order. There will be no catching the eye in this session; we will start with the names on the list as it is presented to me.

We will start from the Government side. I do not see the first Members here. Hon. Baba Diri Margaret, you have five minutes.
   
2.38
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this rare first opportunity to debate the State of the Nation Address by the President.

I would like to thank the President, His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for his precise and clear address on the state of the nation. Unlike in the past years where you talk of achievements and challenges, this time around, he first identified the critical areas which will bring about social development in our nation and he has mentioned several of them including energy, modernisation of agriculture, changing ideology so that we have the right minds to do our work and many others. He also talked about human resource development.

I am going to address the issue of human resource development. His Excellency did not say all is rosy. He mentioned the bottlenecks which are dragging our development. If these obstacles or bottlenecks are addressed, we shall take off and we shall see our country develop. 

On human resource, he talked of the important things that make the human being healthy and a useful citizen. He addressed the issue of reproductive health which is very crucial in our development of the nation. A human being begins with conception and right from there up to delivery; if that foetus is not taken care of, definitely the person to be born will either become disabled or die. That is why it is very important that when mothers become pregnant, they must take care of themselves, eat the right food, avoid drugs, and avoid accidents so that we have a healthy human being born.

Secondly, during the process of delivery, definitely the mothers must be taken care of. They must attend ante-natal care so that they are given the right advice and deliver normally in a health centre. That is what we advocate for. However, he has mentioned that the health issue is not yet fine because to date, over 438 out 100,000 mothers die every year. That means every day, 15 mothers die. This is very unacceptable! We need to change this situation. We do acknowledge that we have referral hospitals; health centres III and health centres II down there but our challenges still remain because we do not have enough health staff.

We do not have enough midwives to attend to our mothers who come for the antenatal or for delivery. He has emphasised that health centres III should be well staffed so that mothers can be settled there and deliver normally but our health centres are not up to date. So we still urge Government to add more money to the Ministry of Health so that the issue of staff and facilities in health centres III are addressed.

Also you find that the health centres are very far away from one other at least there should be a minimum of five kilometres. The transport is a very big challenge. The ambulances are only given to hospitals but in districts like Koboko where there are no district hospitals, we do have ambulances which are donated by NGOs but without fuel. You find that in the process of transporting a lady, they may use boda-bodas, bicycles which are slow and the woman may die on the way. Several have died like that.

I would like to urge Government to change the policy so that ambulances which are serving people at a sub-county level are given votes for fuel so that at least if the mother has to contribute, they can contribute less rather than the entire price –(Member timed out.)

2.41
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion thanking his Excellency, the President, for the State of the Nation Address.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said five minutes not five seconds.

MR OKEYOH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was getting scared. I want to support the President on the issue of education especially, the university loan scheme. Countries that started this scheme early have gone far; take for example our neighbour Kenya. The current breed of politicians is a product of the student loan scheme. Many of them went through this process and as a result, they have benefited. I think it is a good idea that we have come up with the student loan scheme. My prayer is that if it can be free of corruption, then the country stands to benefit.

I want to talk on the issue of health; his Excellency the President was spot on when he stated that malaria claims the largest number of our citizens especially those from the islands that I represent. The issue of mosquito nets is welcome but I thank the President for moving ahead to say that if you move a step, use larvicides. This will help to eradicate the breeding areas of mosquitoes and it will go a long way in reducing the burden of treating malaria in many of our health centres and hospitals.

I want to echo the President’s stand on the issue of fisheries. I represent a fishing community and I cannot fail to express the views of my people. Our people still remain hunters for fish and this cannot go on. The President and Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries should move a step and other than collecting fees from our people, they should encourage them to go for fish farming. It is my prayer that our people are helped to start fish farming or else they are bound to remain in poverty. Many of them have gone for loans and most of them have lost their property. By encouraging fish farming, it will help our people to eradicate poverty and also meet their loan expenses.

The President was also spot-on about the issue of East African integration. The movement on the lake and I would like to ask that our Government exploits this opportunity. We have the cheapest means of transport through Lake Victoria and this can go a long way to even reduce the burden on our roads if our goods could be travelling up to Kisumu through Lake Victoria and with a port constructed maybe in Busiro or in Lugala or Majanji. This will help connect with our good road that we expect to have through Mulwanda via Lumino to Namayingo-Musita and then it connects to Jinja. This will go a long way to reduce on the transport expenses and will also help reduce on the depreciation of our roads, as any of our roads depreciate because of heavy loads beyond the axle load. This will also help to improve first of all on our plots in Namayingo and Lumino which will appreciate very fast –(Interjections)– first Musito and Mayuge. 

So, I want to support the State of Nation the Address and say that it is this year that actually I understood the President properly and I would  like to thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Julius Maganda, seven minutes. 
 
2.52
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to second the mover of this motion and also applaud the President’s speech to the nation most especially on how he was trying to direct on how the whole nation is supposed to be managed and his vision for a bright Uganda. 

When we look at how the President articulated his speech, he gave a very big background on how he would wish Uganda to match very well with the development within the continent and most especially along East Africa. He hinted on many areas and departments like education. When we look through his speech, we will find that the President - since 1997, we have been moving on free education which was the first batch of primary education and then we moved on to secondary education. 

But one problem we have encountered in the process is that when you make comparisons where Government would have really managed this process very well, the UPE programme has not been able to help in what the focus of the President is. Government has made efforts to give money to the schools but the way the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Education have disbursed these monies under the capitation grants has left schools in a big dilemma to meet all their budgets. 

We have got a lot of complaints from our constituencies and schools but you will find that even when a school has over 1,000 students, it is only able to have, within a year, an average of 400 who have paid the full amount and the remaining part is left with a lot of debts which the school cannot handle.

Two, when you look at the sciences which the President is emphasising so much is a very good gesture; today we have put science as a compulsory subject where all students must perform in sciences. To move a step from O-level to A-level, at least you must pass some science subjects. The problem right now - we have been having a meeting in the Committee on Education and there is a report that has come that over 100 secondary schools are lacking science teachers and we need 3,000 teachers of science in the whole of Uganda. But the same Government is coming out to say that we want to promote science in secondary schools at all levels - it is the same Government that has put a ban on the recruitment of teachers and automatically we are not helping the programme of the President to see that we nurture our children from the low classes with a mind of science and having that bias which could bring the country to the level that we need them to develop to.

I just want to re-echo what my brother, hon. Okeyoh, mentioned on fishing. I come from a fishing constituency; Samia Bugwe South and I want to tell you that most of us, the Samias, if you have not traded in fish, at least you must have been very close to fish which means you either eat it, trade in it or it is a way of livelihood. But the ministry which could have helped the people at the shores of the lake has not come up with a very good programme to guide the government programme of not catching immature fish. We are asking the government to give us fishing gear as the Samias. The people along the fishing areas are willing to abide by the regulated system. Give us the fishing gear and transport system that can make us move this fish from the lake in a very healthy way to the market. 

We started carrying fish on our heads, we went to bicycles and today, we have graduated to motorcycles. But the ministry can come up with a law and say that you cannot move fish on motorcycles yet the same ministry has not provided vehicles and fishing gear that can store this fish and make it reach the market in a healthy way. We are asking for these facilities so that we abide by the law and improve on the industry. 

Can we have fish caging along the lake? It is a new concept that has come and we only hear it on paper but we have not been involved as leaders who come from these constituencies so that we can help Government to educate our people and change their mind-set. 

The speech of the President is very good but most of the things we are seeing here are still on paper. When you reach the ministries, you find that they are there and we need to begin moving so that we help our President to see that his vision is realised. 

The process of licensing the fishermen is just a nightmare. You cannot tell in the district whether we have offices for licensing. You must either move to Entebbe or to the region. So can we have these services decentralised to the districts so that people reduce on the time they waste moving on roads going for licensing. To even avoid accidents, let us have all these projects done at the district level. 

As I conclude, I just want to hint on an item on water. It is a very good preposition where the President has talked of Mukono as an example that bought its drilling system for boreholes but at the same time, other districts are also trying their best to see that the little money sent to the districts can be very well maximised and used adequately. But the process and programme of sustaining these boreholes is what Government left out. We put up these water user committees at villages and these people are not bothered despite being the ones using this water. It has now gone back to politicians and I believe we must have all suffered this. We are now the ones repairing these boreholes and the problem is that we have no way you can say it is not your responsibility because at the end of the day, they say you are dodging your own responsibility. 

So we want the ministry and the people in the technical offices to come out and sensitise these people so that they own up these boreholes and water sources and use them maximally as well as maintain them. 

As I conclude, there is just one thing I want to put to the House – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member for Kioga, five minutes.

2.58
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, allow me take this opportunity to thank you. I also rise in support of the motion. I wish to appreciate and recognise the Government effort to regulate fishing - and for your information, I am also a member from the fishing community - by putting in place enabling legislation and strategies to enhance productivity and profitability in an efficient, effective and sustainable manner. 

If I may draw your attention to pages 9 to 11, His Excellency the President dealt comprehensively with the issue of overfishing and eating of young fish for which I want to applaud him. Indeed, destruction of water resources must not be tolerated at any cost whatsoever. 

It is regrettable to note, however, that in spite of the government’s efforts to curb illegal fishing, our earnings from fish dropped from $196 million in 2005/06 to $142.6 million in 2012/13. This level of sustained decline for over six years communicates serious strategic defects concerning approaches used against illegal fishing. 

In 2003, by an Act of Parliament, Beach Management Units (BMUs) were established with a core mandate of managing fisheries resources and they were also envisaged to have capacity for fisheries, planning and management. Unfortunately, more times than not, the BMUs are currently engaged in extorting money from the fishers thereby unable to sanction legal fishing. 

Secondly, although chapter 197 of the Fisheries Act empowers police officers above the rank of corporal to enforce the Act, officers of the Police Marine Units use this provision for personal benefit therefore perpetuating illegal fishing. 

Thirdly, since August 2011, strange faces of people carrying authority letters purportedly from the Minister of State for Fisheries have been persistently harassing fishermen in the name of curbing illegal fishing. These enforcement teams come without financial support or logistical support for the enforcement activities yet they need money to lodge, to feed and they also need to hire motor boats for operations and they need fuel. Above all, at the end of the month, they need wages. Where do they get all these monies if not at the expense of fishermen? As far as I am concerned, His Excellency the President does not deploy without facilitation. Is he aware of what these characters are doing to fishermen? They hopefully loot all the fish they come across without due regard to the size. New nets are crossed from one landing site and sold in another. It is only the old ones that probably can be burnt. There are weekly and monthly contributions of money that are submitted to these people and even this is done with persecution sometimes.

What is to note is that there is excessive use of force. If I may bring this to your attention, Mr Speaker, just on the 14th of this month, a fisherman lost his life in the operation of these people purporting to be government fisheries officers. The dead was called Wanjime from Akwon Sub-county in Amolatar. But earlier than that, on 1st March 2011, Mr Oleket from Kayago Landing Site in Namusole Town Council drowned in the lake after being confronted by the enforcement team and the case was reported to Amolatar CPS under Ref. No. CRB –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, at least he has used five minutes. Hon. Yahaya Gudoi, you have five minutes.

3.05
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion to thank the President for State of the Nation Address that he presented to us. I will talk about educational matters. On page 3 of the booklet, His Excellency elaborated on Universal Secondary Education and Universal Primary Education. He cited a number of achievements and lamented about the corruption in the education sector. As a senior educationist, who served in educational institutions for over 25 years, there is a lot Government should do. I will give one example of primary schools and secondary schools. 

Since the second term started, not even a penny had been sent to those schools and as I speak, there are many activities which have been carried out like music, dance and drama, sports, examinations, testing children, feeding teachers and the term is almost ending without money. How do we expect standards because it is from these grants that head teachers get the money and scholastic materials; it is where they get money to buy papers for the children to sit exams. I encourage the government to work round the clock to see that these releases especially for this term are made and money goes next week. Otherwise, when it comes to August, schools will close for holidays.

Secondly, when you look at the whole education system in use, the little money that goes to Universal Secondary Education is not monitored. There are no control measures to see whether the little which goes there is accounted for or not. You call the head teachers only to bring here paper work in the Ministry of Education but in the earlier days, auditors would come to schools and would even look at the things to ensure value for money. If we are to jubilate or walk while our heads are high on this good intervention of Government providing free education, there is still a lot to be desired. 

Lastly, when you look at the whole system especially in primary schools, children are not fed. There are parents who are willing to feed children but as Government, we have always pronounced ourselves that whoever will be found pulling out money to pay should be brought to book. I thought that the educational guidelines are clear; they set roles of parents and roles of Government. So, as Government, we shouldn’t interfere with the roles of parents. There are those who are willing to pay the money but they have been threatened that if they are found out, they will be imprisoned thus making the whole thing very difficult. Some of my members of Parliament here are not fasting but I am fasting. They have already put something in their stomachs; otherwise those who haven’t yet done it, when you go to the canteen, you find them there. What about these young children especially, those in P.1, P.2, P.3 and P.4? How can you allow that to happen? I would like to ask the Minister of Education that one of these days we would like – (Member timed out.)

3.10
MS BETTY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues to second the motion on the State of the Nation Address. I would like to thank the President for the work he is doing for this nation and I will address myself to the issue of education. 

I would like to talk about the students’ loan scheme. The President said that in addition to the 4,000 students the government normally sponsors, he is going to give loans to students. Mr Speaker, I know that even in your constituency, students are already lining up on your doors for school fees. Maybe this will help us to reduce the burden - (Technical interference) 

Thank you, Mr Speaker, once again. I am starting afresh. (Laughter) I was addressing myself on the issue of the students’ loan scheme and saying that when it is introduced, the burden of paying school fees for some of us will be reduced. We appeal that it should address the needy students who are deep in the villages of Rubirizi and even your constituents who have the hope of joining the university but only dream of it after finishing their exams.

What do we need in order for this students’ loan scheme to succeed? There has to be a guideline and I hope they are starting in August, which is not yet here. We also need national IDs to know who will benefit because there are the Congolese in Bundibugyo who might end up being the ones to benefit.

On teachers’ salaries, I know behind every successful person, even for these Members of Parliament, there is a teacher and especially that one who taught you in primary one. We should always remember them by legislating for them. We know increasing their salaries might not be possible but there are other avenues in which we can help these teachers to realise that they are doing what they are supposed to do.

I know salary is not all that inhibits them from performing. There are other things like structures, including their housing. Some teachers walk long distances and go without lunch. When it is lunch time, they survive on empty stomachs like the pupils.

There is a scheme called the service scheme in the Ministry of Education where they can promote teachers according to how long they have served. In that way, they would have eliminated the gap between those teachers and other teachers.

I am going to also talk about health centres. On Friday, we were in Bwera and normally, Dr Bitekyerezo laments that females and males share one ward. I thought he was joking but when we went there as a team, there was nothing to separate them. You can imagine! 

His Excellency was saying the health services have improved. Yes, but we have a long way to go. We need to build wards to separate men from women so that when you want to carry out therapy on a female, you have privacy.

I also come from a fishing area called Rubirizi where we have - (Member timed out.)

3.17
MR KENNETH BBOSA KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also add on what colleagues have said -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have eight minutes.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise in support of the motion to thank His Excellency the President for the precise exposition of government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address. Allow me to also thank the mover for coming up with this motion.

I would like to address myself to the following areas as addressed by the President. First and foremost, I would like to thank the President for his stand in transforming the agricultural sector from subsistence to commercial; that is looking at the mechanisation of the agriculture sector, which is very good. I believe if, for instance, we had tractors in every sub-county, we would have reduced the burden of improving the agriculture sector.

As Members of Parliament, we also believe that the demand from our constituents regarding the agriculture sector may be minimised when this takes place. However, when you look at what is happening on the ground right now, the scorching sun is minimising efforts by our government to move the agriculture sector forward. 

I believe this is an opportunity for Government to consider installing water pumps. Although Government cannot supply pumps everywhere, if there is a water source in areas that have water, water pumps can be put in place to supply the water to distant places. I believe that if Government looks into this matter -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Public Gallery - I can see the children leaving - we have pupils and teachers of Serena Primary School from Kanyanya represented by hon. Latif Ssebagala and hon. Nabilah Sempala. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Proceed.

MR BBOSA KIYINGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Still on agriculture, I believe and honourable colleagues will bear me witness that currently, the scotching sun in our constituencies has left a lot to be desired as far as the agriculture sector is concerned. Government should look into this matter. We need water pumps to supply water to people even in Karamoja. These pumps will help us a lot to push water to long distances.

As far as the economy is concerned, I wish to thank the President for his stand on the promotion of the economy. However, I want to say that Government should also consider empowering the business community with low interest loans of at most 12 percent. Government has the capacity to support promising business entities considering the fact that when the business community is empowered, the revenue base will also be strengthened.

However, we should also consider being conscious of the acts of some of the people that have misused this offer. I want to call upon Government to look at the matters fronted by the business community through KACITA so that they can be strengthened to move the country forwards as far as business and the economy are concerned.

In as far as security is concerned, there are a couple of cases still going on. Mob justice - some cases are seen on Agataliiko Nfuufu; some are not even known. I thank Government for the effort it has put in to ensure that security is paramount, but a lot needs to be done to put in place mechanisms to avoid the loopholes that are being used by some people to carry out mob-justice and to actually affect people that are innocent in the communities.

Also, allow me to thank the President for his stand on bringing up the student loan scheme. Members of Parliament will bear me witness that in your offices you may have more than 20 people coming and asking for support for their education. Where will we get this money? I thank Government for coming up with this. However, I believe guidelines need to be put in place to ensure that it cuts across the country and the majority of the students benefit from this programme.

As I conclude, I also thank the President for having an open door policy of entertaining members of Parliament when we raise a number of issues that affect our constituencies. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.23
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to extend my thanks to His Excellency, the President, for the State of the Nation Address. I will debate on infrastructure. It is important to note that Uganda has attained a level of improvement in infrastructure development. Take an example of ICT and the current extension of mobile networks that is going on throughout the whole of East Africa and Africa.

Although the demand for infrastructure is still high, as I will be explaining or showing the House - for example, on the part of power, in constituencies where we come from, the demand is extremely high. If I can use an example of Kyenjojo District; almost all sub-counties and all parishes now demand electric power. The extension and the information on power usage is too high which shows that the coverage is still low because of the demand. The power for domestic use is expensive and the power for industrial use is low. I call upon the government, at least, to balance the equation because if we do not, the small farmers will fail to use the power.

Our expenditure on infrastructure development is still low. It is estimated at Shs 1.5 billion per year which is little and it is not consistent. If it was consistent, we would be extending at a rapid rate and the demand would be less.

Infrastructure development also helps us in exportation and importation of our products. For example, our goods from the borders of Kenya to Uganda - and we coordinate because we are landlocked. Uganda also coordinates with Rwanda concerning trade. Because of the delay in opening up the faster railway lines, there has been a delay on our imports and exports and it is quite expensive.
Mr Speaker, if it is true that we are embracing the East African Community Market and the Common Market, if we can embrace it faster, we will develop and gain more because infrastructure development is one of the factors that can help us increase and double our income as a country.

Infrastructure development on water is still lagging behind. In our respective constituencies, the construction on small water points is very expensive. Lake Victoria is very expensive. I am giving small examples because the budget for construction on water is too high. I am requesting the government to establish at least a minimum cost or maybe move to the field for evaluation before the budget for water construction is established. Because water construction is expensive, we are still doing badly in communities. We can see the consequences during rainy seasons; Members of Parliament will bear me witness as bearing accusations for not making roads yet it is not our duty. It is because of this and the budget itself and the expenditure that we incur on roads that is not determined - they are determined but not very well established. So, I request that the minister for works and infrastructure establishes what is right and what is well –(Member timed out.)  

3.29
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to comment on the State of the Nation Address. I rise to support the motion to thank His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, for the sincere and accurate State of the Nation Address. His Excellency pointed out the progress made and the challenges faced by Government. 

As a champion of nutrition in this Ninth Parliament, I want to concentrate on malnutrition. As you are aware, the President in his speech highlighted the issue of nutrition on page 3 that it is lacking. Tackling malnutrition requires utmost urgency and should receive top priority when assessing the State of the Nation Address.

The data available indicates that a third of the children in Uganda are stunted. It means that they are too short for their age which hinders their physical and cognitive development. It brings with it poor performance in schools and productivity and earnings later in life. Malnutrition is a source of poverty. 

I would like Members to look at the Uganda National Household Survey of 2001 and the Cost of Hunger to the Government of Uganda in 2013 reports. It has got useful data on malnutrition. Close to five out of every 10 children are anaemic and three out of every 10 women suffer from anaemia deficiency, a factor that is critical to maternal mortality.

Close to 15 percent of all children are born today with a low birth weight, a totally wrong start in life. Annually, over 300,000 children below the age of five suffer from severe acute malnutrition and we are only able to treat 15 of these due to limited resources. If you analyse properly the budget for Ministry of Health, it does not cater for treating malnutrition and I hope this time we shall be able to look at it.

The recent Government/World Food Programme report shows the cost of malnutrition to Uganda as Shs 1.8 trillion every year which is equivalent to 5.6 of our GDP. Malnutrition, therefore, imposes a huge burden to Ugandan children, its future and national development. The government has made high level commitments to tackling malnutrition. The Uganda nutrition action plan launched by His Excellency, the President, gave a clear outline of how the government should respond and the critical solution therefore is improving community and family nutrition practices through behavioural change communication.
 
There are many cultures in our nation here which limit children from feeding on certain nutritious foods and this affects them. Uganda is extremely fertile and food-secure and it is actually unacceptable for malnutrition rates to remain persistently high when Uganda is fertile and we can actually grow food.

Now I would like to suggest the following recommendations: Government has already made a high level commitment into intervention but these require appropriate resources. A cost analysis by the Office of the Prime Minister suggests that addressing nutrition would cost - (Member timed out.)

3.34
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (INDEPENDENT, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank His Excellency, the President, for the State of the Nation Address.

I would like to refer to page 8 of the address where the President talked of cluster enterprises per household. He mentioned that Kapchorwa was one of the districts which are performing very well with cluster enterprises. It is true that our people are hardworking; they are promoting the enterprises which were selected that time when they were called to Entebbe. They are promoting Irish potato, bananas, coffee, wheat, maize and others.

Our main challenge, however, is land. The average land owned per household is one-and-a-half acres and yet in the address, the President is talking of four acres per household. This gives us a big challenge on how to use the little land to rotate all these enterprises. Land is becoming smaller and smaller every day but our people are hardworking. This, therefore, calls for Government to create land or buy land elsewhere so that these people may be relocated to practice this good agriculture.

It is said that the average number of children per woman in Kapchorwa District is 7.2. I think it is the highest in the whole of Uganda. So the people of Kapchorwa are very fertile. We barely have grazing land for our animals and yet milk and other animal products are essential for health. 

Irish potatoes cannot be planted repeatedly on the same piece of land for more than one season. It is recommended that Irish potatoes should be planted one season and then that land should rest for three years before Irish potatoes can be put back on the same piece of land. The reason is that potato bacterial wilt is very common especially when you plant them repeatedly in the same piece of land. Therefore, this calls for more land and yet Irish potatoes are a major commercial crop that our people grow.

Every now and then, the President advises us to move from subsistence farming to commercial farming. In Kapchorwa, this one is hard to do especially in some sub-counties like that of Kabaiwa where the average land owned per household is only a quarter of an acre.

Another challenge is disease. Diseases are common in our area and the government should look for a way of controlling diseases especially through providing chemicals for the farmers so that farmers can control pests and diseases. You have heard recently that we were attacked by birds and I hope you all saw it in the papers. These birds have cleared all the crops of the people of Kapchorwa especially sorghum. 

I recommend that in order to utilise that little land that we have, we need fertilizers so that this can help improve yields. We have been buying fertilizers from Kenya and this has been very expensive for the farmers. 

The President, on page 7, has talked about a factory in Tororo. Recently, we went to Tororo to check on this factory but it is not yet established and it has a long way to go. We, therefore, call upon the government to assist the people of Kapchorwa especially to subsidise the price of fertilizers because all the farmers in Kapchorwa use fertilizers.

Another recommendation is that the government should support the farmers of Kapchorwa through irrigation. The lower side of Kapchorwa has unreliable rainfall. There is land but we need irrigation so that some of the farmers can go down to the lower areas to grow crops using irrigation.    

Recommendation number three is processing of Irish potatoes. Our people produce a lot of Irish potatoes but sell at a give-away price because they cannot store it. Irish potatoes are perishable and cannot last long. Therefore, I call upon the government to provide the people of Kapchorwa with processing machines so that these potatoes can be processed and value is added.

Another one is that because the land is small, our people should be encouraged to do intensive farming. 

With those few remarks, I would like to stop there. Thank you very much.

2.49
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, People with Disabilities Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address that was delivered on the 6th of June. I want to say that the President clearly brought out the issues of achievements, challenges and also proposed intervention in the areas where challenges were.

In the sector of health, whereas we recognise that the government has put a lot of effort in providing for the health sector, it is unfortunate that in the area of reproductive health, women with disabilities still have challenges to access health services - we talk of the braille but we have a communication barrier among the health workers in talking to the deaf patients. I think there is need to see whether we have the curriculum of the Ministry of Health to address this issue so that communication becomes easy. 

You will agree with me that we often talk about HIV/AIDS between a counsellor and a client but this becomes impossible where the counsellor does not know sign language. 
 
I would also like to say that the President said that polio has reduced or has been eradicated but I want to bring it to the attention of the House that we still have disability on the rise. They are on the rise because of some occupational hazards – what I will call quack doctors or health workers in the villages. I was in Kumi and I got 150 children who had been affected by quinine injections, which had been administered by these people in our villages who only care about getting money. Our ignorant parents take the children to them and the children then get disabilities. These children were brought in for operation and the programme officer for Kumi Hospital said that they had registered 400 cases but did not have funding to help them recover. So what does this mean? These are children who are born well but because of the situation that is on the ground, they have got disabilities out of what I would call carelessness.  

My request is that the Ministry of Health could try to regulate health facilities so that these people do not cause us more disabilities because we do not want our next generation to have people who are “funny”.

In the area of education, it is very unfortunate that issues of special needs education have been put together into all the programmes in the Ministry of Education. Unfortunately, when I was monitoring in my constituency - in a school like Madara Secondary School for the Blind, teachers who do not know anything about the braille are posted to that school. So those teachers are lamenting and the children are also lamenting. They both do not know how to come together but I think the ministry does this unconsciously. This is very unfortunate. You cannot post a teacher who does not know sign language to a school of deaf children. How does the teacher give instructions?  

There is need for the government to look at these needs before these teachers are sent to the schools. We agree that people have to move but I think they should move to where they have expertise and not just throwing them anywhere. 
 
The science education being promoted by the government is unfortunate in special needs schools - I do not know whether we have ever imagined hon. Babadiri in a lab mixing chemicals, if she was a student. When you are mixing, who is going to tell you what has changed? I would think that when the government is putting in place a policy for sciences, it would take into consideration some of these citizens who might not be able to participate in these labs. I do not think Uganda is at a level of having compatible laboratories. 

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that in considering the students’ loan scheme which is majorly going to benefit the students with science knowledge, people with disabilities should be given affirmative action. Some of our students who are taking Arts subjects because of the design of their disability should be supported to get these student loans to help them move further and be able to attain independent life like any other Ugandan –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Budiope East, five minutes.  

3.54
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in support of the motion. But before I make my brief submission, I want to make two observations very quickly: One is that, there is an inevitable correlation between the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech which we shall be debating a few weeks from now.  It would, therefore, be important to note that as I highlight the issues in the State of the Nation Address, I will be once in a while giving examples from the Budget Speech. 

Secondly, I also noted that from the State of the Nation Address and the response by the Leader of the Opposition to that address, there is a common denominator which highlights the need for Ugandans to expand the resource envelope. It is especially critical knowing that the aid that we used to get from donors is no longer forthcoming. It is also critical because the money from oil is still several years away from us. It is for that reason, that in my brief submission, I will address myself more to the issue of taxation. 

In the State of the Nation Address, the President highlights that we need to widen the tax base and I understand that statement to mean that we have to formalise the informal sector which, by the way, forms almost 70 percent of our entire economy. By formalising the informal sector, we need to attract those economic activities in there towards the tax float and by doing this, I am particularly looking at a few sectors that have either been under taxed or not taxed at all and these include the real estate sector, which is booming. 

I want to testify that almost a third of the money that we have in circulation today in Uganda is held up by the real estate sector both in lands and also in buildings for rent and for business. What remains for the government to do now, and this is especially directed at the ministry of finance, is to create a digital interface between the Uganda Revenue Authority as tax collectors and the Ministry of Lands so that they know who owns what. 

You may be aware that many buildings in the upscale suburbs of Kampala like Naguru, Munyonyo have got buildings and properties that are rentable, that are earning income but are not at all taxed. I am saying this with authority because I had the privilege to serve in this tax collection body for quite a number of years and I want to testify here further that of all the taxes that are collected especially from the road tax sector, I think the collectable amount is not more than 15 percent of the total capacity of that rental sector. So, this is something for the ministry of finance to interest itself in.

There is another equally booming sector in the financial circles which is money lending and I can say with precision that many of us here are familiar with many of these money lenders. I want also to share one scenario here; at an informal interaction while having a conversation with one money lender and I will not disclose his identity for obvious reasons, he said, “Sulaiman, do you know in only one month, I made a profit of Shs 900 million?” Can you imagine and there are many money lenders. They are not registered and they have not declared their taxable income and yet they are fleecing Ugandans at will – (Members timed out.)

3.54
MR VINCENT BAGIIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to cease the opportunity to thank His Excellency, the President, for performing his constitutional mandate of presenting the State of the Nation Address, which in my opinion was well summarised and to the point. I would like to associate myself with the recommendations of the President especially, when he spoke about the bottlenecks of the Ugandan economy namely, infrastructure in terms of water, the railway system, electricity and ICT. 

Mr Speaker, I will restrict myself to the issue of ICT and specifically ICT infrastructure in terms of a national backbone infrastructure. This Parliament did pass a loan to deploy national backbone infrastructure in terms of fibre optics and indeed the backbone has been deployed and today, it is commercialised as a commercial manager that we will use to generate resources for this government. However, the challenge is, whereas we have this very important infrastructure, the uptake of ICT across government departments and agencies is extremely wanting. You will find that to date, whereas the ministry of lands is implementing the land information management system, land titles are still kept in a store yet these can be digitised. 

The other issue with regard to fibre optics in this country is the reality that the private sector – the likes of MTN, Airtel are implementing fibre optics as well as the government. The problem is that whereas the government has put its infrastructure in the same area where they have deployed, the private operators are also deploying and, therefore, you will find that underserviced areas will continue to be underserved simply because there is no coordination at policy level whereby the government puts a policy in place and insists that if a telecom company has deployed fibre optics in Kampala, for example, the government should not deploy there and vice-versa. If the government has deployed on a route to Arua, the private sector should not deploy fibre in those areas so that we maximise the resources that are in the sector. 

In saying that, we know that ICT can play a role across the sectors in agriculture; extension services can be delivered to farmers via their SMS by taking advantage of this infrastructure that the government has invested in.

In this period of considering ministerial policy statements, my colleagues will agree with me that we have seen ministries and departments sending us enormous ministerial policy statements most of which have occupied our offices. We even have nowhere to sit and Parliament had promised that they would actually relieve us of those policy statements by giving Members Of Parliament iPads. 

Mr Speaker, I want to put it to you that every financial year, a Member of Parliament is given a tablet or call it an iPad by virtue of sending us those ministerial policy statements and I want to be on record. I for one do not read more than three policy statements. I read the one for the sector that I oversee, the one for finance and maybe agriculture and at most, education. The justification being that these policy statements are sent to us and they are totally wasted. It is extremely important that we have them in digital form as opposed to the government wasting money printing these documents that we even never read.  

Last is the issue of connectivity. It is extremely important that the government across the board rationalises the procurement of broadband in terms of bandwidth so that they cut down the cost of internet within government departments. Once they do that, we shall minimise the costs that we pay for internet and also have some quality services across the MBs. 
I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Butambala, you have 10 minutes.

3.59
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for the 10 minutes and if I had an opportunity, I would ask for more because I really want to extensively debate the State of the Nation Address.  

I thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. This time round, it left a lot to be desired on my side. Nevertheless, I want to thank him. I also want to thank the mover of the motion and I support the motion.

I am going to talk about education, health, ICT and governance. Mr Speaker, we all want our children to go to school and we want them to acquire the good degrees that the world desires. Yes, we are trying our best as a country to provide Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education to all the children of Uganda. Our issue now is the quality of education. I am concerned about the quality of education because I also want to see a product of UPE or USE competing in the global market, which is not quite possible when it comes to the nature and standards of UPE in Uganda.

Under the education sector, His Excellency, the President together with the Minister of Finance and Minister of Education promised this country in 2011 that they would construct 80 teachers’ houses in Arua and Nebbi. I would like to know from the Minister of Education whether this has been achieved because this is 2013.

In that financial year also, the minister through the President promised to achieve a pupil-teacher ratio of 56:1 in all government schools. Have we achieved that because I know that in many schools, a teacher has to run up and down to catch up with lessons in different classes especially in my constituency of Butambala?

The President also promised to provide grants to private community secondary schools. In my district, I have about three community schools. Most of these schools charge minimal fees to these children but they do not have any aid from the government.

The government also promised to construct teachers’ houses in specific seed schools under UPET. In my constituency, I have not seen that happen. When we come to opportunities in education, apart from UPE, USE, capitation grants and the quota system, we also get offers from other countries, which aid Ugandans especially the top performing children of Uganda used to go and study abroad. Who knows whose children these are? What are the criteria? I want the minister of education to declare to this House and lay on Table those scholarships that have been offered to Ugandans and those Ugandan children that have been seconded to go and acquire such professional qualifications abroad. 

This is because there is no transparency. We have many children seated in their homes with good qualifications and performance and they have nobody to rescue them. I want the minister to lay on Table, in a transparent manner, the number of scholarships this government has got from those countries that are aiding us and the children from each region; the district and maybe even sub-county so that I can know that my people in Butambala have benefitted.

On the issue of career guidance, it was a song in the State of the Nation Address of 2010 but up to now, we have not made any progress. Children are getting good degrees but when you give them a small interview even at home, they cannot transform those degrees into something practical. The only thing they are thinking about is going and asking for a job. We are beyond that level of having graduates look for where to go and ask for a job.

On the quality of infrastructure, I should be the one to be proud of education because this government had the courtesy to be served by one long serving Member, hon. Bitamazire from Butambala, but up to now, I am still constructing school buildings and my children are still sitting on the floor. They are getting jiggers in Butambala because the floors are not cemented. This is so sad in this century and we are talking about quality of education in the 21st century.

The quality of infrastructure in the education sector is very poor. Therefore, to be proud of education and to be proud of where I come from, I must see a change towards that.

I want to thank Government for initiating the teachers’ SACCO. I am one person who is already encouraging teachers to come and join this SACCO but it has very limited funds. I am looking at Shs 5 billion for teachers all over Uganda. I am glad that when the caucus sat, they debated about increasing it to Shs 25 billion. It is my prayer that each financial year, we can raise about Shs 25 billion. It should not be done for the teachers only but health workers too because they too depend on salaries and spend all their time in the hospitals treating our patients.

Lastly, on education, the President initiated and flagged off a committee of inquiry into the misuse of UPE. We would like to see that report come to this House. We would like to know how much money we lost, how we can recover it and how we can improve. 

The President also promised us an open university in this country. I want the minister for higher education to inform this House on the status of the Open University for Uganda.

I will go to health. The President noted that the challenges in health are maternal health and indeed it is true world over. We are crying about mothers dying when they are trying to give life but what are we trying to do about this? We passed a loan in this Parliament of Shs 130 billion but when we try to track this loan, it is not accomplishing the purpose for which we borrowed it. A lot of money has been lost in the Ministry of Health. Who are the victims of this? The adolescents! World over, 1.2 billion pregnancies are for young people who are below the age of 18 years and these are the major contributors to maternal health.

In this country, we have talked about youth-friendly services. We have talked about mainstreaming reproductive health into the education sector and gender for life skills but nothing is happening. I want to tell Government, through the Ministry of Health, that there should be a comprehensive programme that will address adolescent health.

On HIV, we are now stagnating and it is very unfortunate for a country, which has been on record for progressing and actually winning this battle, to be defeated. I call upon the President and the government to lift up their spirits higher and talk about this danger in our country because that is one of the ways that we succeeded previously.

Let me go to another sector because I see my time is almost running out. I will talk about ICT. Globally, ICT is moving the economies of all the great countries in this world. The President, in his speech, talked about infrastructure and investment highs in technology but when it comes to allocation of resources to the ICT sector, as has been the case before, the ICT sector is not given the attention it deserves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much for that contribution. Honourable members, you will recall that at the beginning of this sitting, I made some communication in respect of item No.7 on the Order Paper. I am informed that the Chairperson of the subcommittee that was created to handle that item is ready but also has an engagement that he has to attend to. So, this might be the proper time for us to suspend the debate on the State of the Nation Address so that we can deal with item No.7 as earlier communicated. We will continue from there with the list as it is.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE HOUSE SUB-COMMITTEE ON THE HARMONISATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION ON THE MISMANAGEMENT OF ST BALIKUDDEMBE (OWINO) MARKET

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, chairperson of the subcommittee. Are the copies of the report circulated? If not, can we do that now?

4.11
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Mr Speaker, I first want to thank you, for that indulgence for calling back this item on the Order Paper because of my engagement. This is a report of the House subcommittee. I want to assure you that it is just an 8-page report. So, I beg the indulgence of the House that I read it as it is. Most obliged.

Background

Mr Speaker, following the debate on the Report of the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs on the Petition on the Mismanagement of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market presented on Wednesday, 17 July 2013, the House resolved to establish a subcommittee of the House to further scrutinise and harmonize the committee recommendations on that petition and report back to the House on Tuesday, 23 July 2013. We were supposed to have reported yesterday, but we requested a little more time. We are glad that we are reporting today.

The composition of the committee

A seven-Member subcommittee of the House was constituted as follows:
    1. Hon. Sam Otada 	Chairperson
    2. Hon. Paul Mwiru	Member
    3. Hon. Oboth Oboth	Member
    4. Hon. Asupasa Isiko	Member
    5. Hon. Flavia Kabahenda	Member
    6. Hon. Nabilah Sempala	Member
    7. Hon. Henry Banyenzaki	Minister for Economic Monitoring

Terms of Reference

In a letter dated, 19 July 2013, Ref. AB 199/199/01, which is annexed to this report, the Rt Hon. Speaker issued the terms of reference to the chairperson and Members of the subcommittee. The committee commenced work immediately. The committee was tasked to look into the following issues:
    1. That the genuine vendors be provided with space to operate in the market.
    2. That the current sub lease to St Balikuddembe Market Stalls and Lock-up Shop Owners’ Association Ltd, be cancelled.
    3. That the ownership of the market reverts to KCCA.
    4. That KCCA registers genuine vendors with a view of facilitating the establishment of an all-inclusive market vendors’ association. 
    5. That the Minister for the Presidency, who is also in charge of KCCA, should brief the House within two months on the progress in addressing the resolutions of Parliament on the petition in question.

Methodology

The committee held meetings and analysed among others, the following documents:
    1. The Report of the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs on the Petition on the Mismanagement of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market.

    2. The Presidential directive to the Minister of Local Government in respect of the lease of St Balikuddembe Market – see annexure two.

    3. The letter of the Solicitor General to the Inspectorate of Government on the alleged interference of the Executive Director of KCCA in the mismanagement of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market. This is also annexed in here

    4. Consent judgment between J.B Kivumbi and others v. City Council of Kampala: HCS No. 947/2001; and
    5. Register of SSLOA Members.

The Issues

While considering the terms of reference, the committee addressed itself to, among others, the issues herein below:
    1. Whether the presidential directive was lawful.
    2. Whether KCCA holds any interests in the market.
    3. Whether all the vendors in St Balikuddembe are incorporated into SSLOA.
    4. Whether SSLOA’s interests in the market is legitimate.

The Preamble

In a bid to economically empower the underprivileged urban lot and lift them out of poverty, on the 19 January 2009, H.E, the President of the Republic of Uganda directed the Minister of Local Government to liaise with the Attorney-General to ensure that the vendors of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market form a proper legal entity that would be given a lease for the management of the said market.

Whereas the President had good intentions of transforming the underprivileged urban vendors by creating an economically empowered urban populace, the process by which the lease offer to SSLOA was managed, left some issues that need to be resolved.

Whereas the committee agrees with the opinion of the Solicitor-General on the legal status of SSLOA and the subsisting lesser-lessee relationship between KCCA and SSLOA, the plight of the underprivileged urban vendors remains in balance.

Observations and recommendations

The Presidential Directive

In his letter dated, 19 January 2013, H.E, the President directed the Minister of Local Government to liaise with the Attorney-General to ensure all the vendors of St Balikuddembe Market organize themselves in a proper legal entity or association to be granted a lease for that market.

The spirit of this directive was to allow the vendors – the underprivileged urban lot – to take charge of the management of the market in issue. According to this directive, the association had to be an all-inclusive. However, SSLOA Ltd, a company that was formed as result had a membership of only about 10,000; it left out some of the vendors.

The same directive had the overall objective of alleviating poverty among the urban poor through economic empowerment. It is also aimed at averting the creation of chiefdom status; that is having another set of landlords in the market at the detriment of the under privileged.

The directive was to the effect that the Minister of Local Government ensures that the vendors’ association was legally instituted with a view of having a lease granted to them.

Lease Offer to SSLOA

Following the presidential directive, KCCA granted a lease to SSLOA for the initial five year but to be extended after redevelopment. However, the terms of the contract between KCCA and SSLOA do not bind some other vendors who are not members of SSLOA. 

SSLOA Ltd obtained loans amounting to Shs 6.12 billion as outstanding principal without accruing interests. This was secured by land comprised in Kyadondo Block 12 Plot 1431 Kibuga; Block 12 Plot 388 and Block 12 Plot 1339; all in the names of SSLOA as the registered proprietors. The bank loans are not secured by the St Balikuddembe Market as the market had 13 years ago been redeveloped jointly by the World Bank, Government of Uganda and to some extent some vendors. The developments are still standard, steady and useful, according to the report of the Chief Government Valuer, VAL 136/274/01 dated 8 January 2010.

The Solicitor-General’s Letter

    1. In his letter addressed to the Inspectorate of Government dated, 18 July 2013, reference ADM/112/02, in response to the alleged interference in the management of St Balikuddembe Market by the Executive Director of KCCA, the Solicitor-General noted that KCCA leased the management of this market to SSLOA in accordance with the provisions of sections 1(1) and 1(2) of the Market Act. He further notes that the Act emphasises the need to have participation of citizens in establishing maintenance and control of the market.

    2. In the same letter, the Solicitor-General notes that SSLOA should operate the market as per the lease agreement offered and also urged the company to pay the ground rent complete for the duration of the agreement.

    3. The committee concurs with the opinion of the Solicitor-General that there exists leaser-leasee relationship between KCCA and SSLOA which gives the leasee an exclusive possession of the market.

    4. In view of the aforementioned, call for cancellation of the lease offer is tantamount to a breach of the contract on the part of KCCA which attracts compensation to SSLOA. 

National Interest vs. Exclusive Rights of SSLOA

Whereas SSLOA is a proper legal entity with an exclusive possession of St Balikuddembe Market, it enjoys this right at the expense of some genuine vendors of the said market who ordinarily should have been part of the subsisting contract with KCCA for the management of the same market.

The continued exclusion of these members from the contract is recipe for another serfdom status. In previous similar incidences like in the Nakasero and Kisekka markets, the Government of Uganda, in pursuit of national interests and for the greater good, took action by compensating the leasee and allowing the vendor to take over the management of these markets. 

Authenticity of Vendors

Apparently, there is lack of accurate statistics on the actual membership of the genuine vendors of St Balikuddembe Market.

    1. Whereas in the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, the figure was said to be over 90,000, on the other hand the register from SSLOA puts the figure at 8,870 vendors.

    2. In the absence of a clean register, it becomes difficult to establish who the genuine vendors of this market are and those vendors who were targeted to benefit from the presidential directive in respect of a lease offer to manage St Balikuddembe Market.

Cancellation of the SSLOA Lease

Whereas the cancellation of the SSLOA sub-lease would revert St Balikuddembe Market to KCCA and ensure that it is managed in accordance with the provisions of section 1(1) of the Market Act, the committee found it prudent not to recommend the cancellation of the lease because of the great implications such as huge compensations to SSLOA as envisaged in the Solicitor-General’s opinion. Besides, there is a legally subsisting contract between KCCA and SSLOA.

Recommendations

In view of the above, the sub-committee recommends as follows:
    1. That SSLOA opens up and admits into its membership, all the vendors of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market, which is in accordance with the spirit behind the presidential directive. This inclusion, however, should be upon payment of membership and subscription fees. The Shs 1 million charged by SSLOA as premium should be optional. Mr Speaker, I want to add here that if members look through the attachments, they will find a Memorandum of Understanding that SSLOA has signed committing itself to admit all vendors into its ranks.

    2. Fresh registration and verification of genuine vendors of St Balikuddembe Market should be done by KCCA within one month after the adoption of this report in order to ensure transparency and inclusiveness.

    3.  Parliament should not approve the proposal to cancel the SSLOA lease, which was made on the Floor of the House on 17 July 2013 during debate on the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs as doing so is unlawful. 

This seven-member committee was fully constituted and we have four signatures, Mr Speaker. I also want to say that hon. Isiko was with us; it is just that he did not sign but he binds himself to this report.

I also want to say that we have one of the members of the committee, hon. Nabilah Sempala, who has a dissenting report. I leave that indulgence to you, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the authority of Rule 194, a Member who has a minority view of the view presented by the majority Members of the committee shall be accorded such opportunity to present that report. Accordingly, hon. Member for Kampala District please present your minority report. 

4.26
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI  (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minority opinion is attached to the report. 

MS NAGGAYI: I am here as a Member of the select committee. I had to take special leave from the Leader of the Opposition to come and take part in these proceedings because of the special interest I have in this report and also that I own the minority report. 

Honourable members, we were given this mandate by this House last Wednesday but due to unforeseeable circumstances, we were not able to meet last week. We were meant to present tomorrow but this morning I arrived in the committee and I was told we have to present today. 

In the committee I realised that all Members were in unison with the hon. Minister’s opinion, among the other deliberations, so I had to really work round the clock to have the views that I think, through our deliberations, I dissented substantially because the issue that was brought to this House as per our mandate was the lease and what it had created. That is why we got this petition in Parliament in the first place.

As an introduction, I took Members through our interests as public managers of public spaces and entities. Much as - I am trying to summarise the preamble - we have described control, that means the exclusivity that SSLOA has, it is overwhelming participation of all vendors. 

Whereas the President may have had good intentions in his letter to the Minister of Local Government dated 19th January and copied to, among others, the Attorney-General and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister - I extract a quotation here for your perusal: “As you are well aware, it is the NRM policy to support the underprivileged. Therefore, the association deserves all the support because it helps to alleviate poverty from the urban poor who are the majority in such markets as opposed to creating another serfdom status; having another set of landlords in the markets.” What was the President avoiding? Serfdom status and another set of landlords. 

In fact, Owino market is the largest market in East Africa. It is the most culturally and ethnically diverse public place in Kampala. Everyday 40,000 vendors and hundreds of customers come to the market.

Brief facts

We create down town Kampala into an international bazaar. This 40 plus year old market draws vendors and customers from all districts in this country and beyond, majority of whom are farmers who bring fresh produce from as far as Kabale, Kasese, Masindi, Gulu and Mbale. 

The product mix is very wide; the market has an estimated annual operating budget of Shs 1.4 billion per year. Collections come to Shs 120 million per month from vendor spaces.

Toilets collect Shs 600,000 per day; vendors’ rates are modest and farmers can rent spaces for their fresh produce every day. Enclosed shades go for Shs 15,000 per month. The market operates at a profit and subsidises many projects around the area. Vendors normally not only come from Kampala but from the Greater Kampala Metropolitan area.

The issues
    1. Whether the presidential directives conferred on the vendors a lease or management rights and whether KCCA holds any interest in the market.
    2. Whether all the vendors in St Balikuddembe Market are properly represented in SSLOA Ltd and if not what is the effect of non representation?
    3. What remedies are available to the parties?

Observations

On the presidential directive, KCCA granted a lease for five years initially to be extended after redevelopment.

The presidential directive was not beefed up by law although the presidential letter had requested the Attorney-General to guide hon. Minister of Local Government. The letter reads: “This is therefore to direct you to liaise with Attorney-General to ensure that the association is a proper legal entity and all the people in the market are taken care of and there after a lease for the market is offered to them.”

The processes that ensued bring us to the legal framework of the whole lease or sublease offer. The whole issue was handled in utter disregard of the Market Act as it would have been conferring management rights and not ownership.

The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act was not followed. I doubt if the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority is aware of this. 

Lease offer to SSLOA Ltd and the subsequent payment of Shs 4.2 billion of SSLOA Ltd created a contract interparty between SSLOA and KCCA. We must note the breach of contract, if any. But the same does not bind the vendors who are not party to this arrangement. They are not party to this KCCA/SSLOA arrangement. So this whole process does not bind the independent vendors who are neither under KCCA nor SSLOA but are in between.

I note under this observation that all vendors were supposed to benefit from the directive of the President on St Balikuddembe. 

SSLOA has obtained loans of Shs 4.8 billion and Shs 1.3 billion from DFCU bank. It has over the years collected Shs 3.2 billion from the vendors who have so far subscribed to SSLOA Ltd as capital contribution.

SSLOA has collected market dues from the market annually to a tune of Shs 1.2 billion ever since the market was handed over to them.

Bank loans now amounting to Shs 6.12 billion was secured by land not owned by St Balikuddembe but other pieces such as Kyadondo Block 12 Plot 31, Kibuga Plot 388 and all in the names of SSLOA as the registered proprietors. The Bank loans are not secured by the St Balikuddembe Market as the market had 13 years ago been redeveloped jointly by the World Bank, Government and to some extent some vendors.

The developments are still standard and useful. According to the report of the Chief Government Valuer No. VAL 13627401, dated 8 January 2010, his opinion is that the building is still valid, secure and sound.

There are sectors that are managed by Government, like public transport and housing in Europe. If people go to London they know there is city housing. In Uganda a poor third world country not only has Government through KCCA and other Government agencies passed out Government pool houses but it is also proceeding to privatise public markets.

The genuine vendors are insisting and rightly so that St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market remains a public market managed by Government and its agency KCCA. These people belong to the category of low income communities. Public markets are a vehicle for social integration and acquired mobility for low income earners.

Maintaining the status quo, that is, SSLOA a private company owning the public market, KCCA or Government will have no legal regime within to interfere in the day today management of St Balikuddembe Market a hitherto public market. That is what the Solicitor-General alluded to.

The sublease will give the 10 or so acres of land to private individuals and not necessarily to the vendors for whom the sublease is purportedly for.

Speculators including top Government officials have bought shares and interests in SSLOA and Government’s lack of interest in reclaiming the largest market in Uganda will be the greatest capitalistic policy u-turn this Government will have done among others.

Recommendations

SSLOA Ltd should be dissolved, fresh registration done in order to ensure transparency. The re-registration should avoid cases of leaving out some vendors as the case is with SSLOA Ltd.

Because it is a private company, dissolution of SSLOWA Ltd can only be done with the consent of SSLOA Ltd. That is something that I noted. After dissolution of SSLOA Ltd, a fresh registration has to be made; an association should be registered; elections held to have acceptable leadership to all.

After words, KCCA should confer management rights to the association but avoid a sublease or lease as that transfers the market to be managed under the Registration of Titles Act as a private market.

We should request KCCA for repayment of premium of Shs 4.2 billion as ground rent and introduce fee to KCCA by the associates. So KCCA should refund the Shs 4.2 billion that SSLOA Ltd gave it, so that SSLOA Ltd can have its interest in the sublease which had been offered to them.

SSLOA should use the securities and the money collected as money due to the vendors to settle the alleged costs on the lease. That is bank interest stated there.

PPDA should institute an investigation into the matter and as per the terms of reference given to the select committee, and the Minister in charge of Kampala should report back to the Parliament on the status of the investigation. 

Conclusion

As an area Member of Parliament, I have seen, witnessed and sadly observed public places being grabbed through collusion between technical officials at KCCA, politicians and greedy businessmen at the expense of ordinary residents and citizens of Kampala. 

Failure by Government to handle this matter expeditiously will leave the other excluded vendors in St Balikuddembe Market no option but to become stuck under the new set of landlords that is SSLOA Limited, a quote I am also citing from the President’s letter. They become destitute but also, they may file other suits challenging the award of the sublease to SSLOA like that one of Miscellaneous Application N0. 147 of 2011 arising out of Civil Suit No. 947 of 2011.

The good will of Government is key in this matter not only to avoid the extortion and blackmail tendencies that has become synonymous with pseudo market vendors’ association but also which are in fact private companies that are registered and stage managed to stealthy take over public markets in Kampala and other towns. 

The Kampala City Abattoir status is one very good example. The lessee of the city abattoir still holds the title, KCCA neither manages nor collects dues from it and the vendors collect money but a clique of people are taking all these proceeds. This is one very good example of the same. There is no legal regime under which it is being managed; the same state could quickly arise in St Balikuddembe if guidance is not given by this House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the matters are now clear before us. You will recall that a debate ensued on the original report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. At its conclusion, matters and whatever decision this House should take became contentious thereby leading to the establishment of this sub-committee to handle some of the details or the tail end of the debate on the report of the Presidential Affairs Committee based on the petition, which details you already heard in the previous debate.

Honourable members, you have a report of the sub-committee and also a minority report. There seems to be agreement on the issue of verification of genuine vendors by both - there is minority and majority opinion and there seems to be an agreement on that. The issue that is in contention is whether the lease to SSLOA- because the main report said that SSLOA should open up and admit to its membership - and we need to establish the legal certainty of that process and the third one that Parliament should not approve the proposed cancellation of the lease to SSLOA. This is the major area of disagreement.

The minority opinion says SSLOA should be disbanded and dissolved which is basically the area of discontention. So we can have a debate on this subject and then we take a decision. Can we agree on a time frame for this debate? Three minutes – okay. One minute – no three. Let us agree on three minutes and a total of 30 minutes. Agreed? Okay let us start with the Member for Ndorwa.

4.44
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Actually mine was to seek further clarification because when I read the minority and majority reports, there are some issues that do not come out clearly and one of the issues is who actually owns this land? So who is the lesser to this other company called SSLOA Limited? To the best of my knowledge of the simple basics of land law, public land in Kampala is either owned by the Uganda Land Commission or the Kampala District Land Board and this does not come out clearly. So who actually leased? Is it the Kampala District Land Board or the Uganda Land Commission? 

Now if it is the Kampala District Land Board, assuming, then how does the Kampala District Land Board relate itself with KCCA which under the Markets Act is the one responsible for markets? If the two are resolved, then a question will come as to who under the market’s authority has vested control and management not ownership of Owino Market? Can I be helped from these reports - both the minority and majority reports as they do not seem to come out clearly on these issues, which I believe are very crucial to avoid a multiplicity of suits if we are to amicably resolve it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the Member for Samia-Bugwe.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you my colleague for yielding the Floor. Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity to give information.

First of all, to respond to the issue of who owns the land in respect to the lease. This matter was first handled by court in Application No 147 of 2011 - miscellaneous application. Earlier on, it had also been handled in a civil suit application in the High Court in the Civil Suit No. 147.

Now court pronounced itself on this matter and in this first application, there was a consent judgement; the two parties consented and the terms were very clear and I would like us to get interested in this. One of the issues, because the applicants contended then that they had been bribed and left out of SSLOA  - and in the consent judgement, the order was as such that SSLOA opens up to have all of them included.

Number two, it pronounces itself that SSLOA then had the right in ownership of the land. 

Number three, that all parties that had complained be included. So, I think, Mr Speaker, that the matter was handled by court at that point in time. Really for us again to come and try to handle it here would be in disagreement of the provision of Article 92 of the Constitution and that is one.

Number two, the other question was about whether there were legal provisions under the Market Act on who should be responsible in these transactions. I must refer to the other report, which was submitted to this House - the committee then did us a serious disservice because then they only quoted part of the law of the Markets Act. They quoted sub section (1) which gives exclusive rights in the employment, establishment and running of authorities, districts and municipalities. But I need to go to sub section (2), which emphasises participation of the citizens in maintenance and management of markets. Therefore, the letter by the  President, the lease offer by KCCA was in the spirit of section 1(2)of the Markets Act, and I hope that one really gives us only one area of debate in as far as the recommendations of the committee are concerned. Thank you. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Member, although the information does not clarify to me who has diversionary interests. I do not dispute the lease but the crucial question to ask before you go to the leaser is, who leased? Who has diversionary interests over these plans and then you can determine what relationship this leaser has with the person authorised under the Markets Act for either its management or to manage himself. That is basically the issue that doesn’t give the answer to my question.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I want to clarify on that issue. KCCA is subleasing SSLOA. Kampala District Land Board gave the lease to KCCA; that is why SSLOA is getting a sublease. That is the clarification to hon. Niwagaba.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is clear enough.

4.52
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the vendors, and I sympathise with them but the committee has done a very good job because we have seen time and again that when we follow an emotional approach, we end up losing a lot of money and we have always been hoodwinked as Parliament to support certain populist demands and in the end, the taxpayer loses a lot of money. The taxpayer we are trying to save ends up losing a lot of money, and I am sure the vendors of SSLOA are looking forward to us adopting the minority report and then they can go and mint billions. Even if the minority report has looked at a paltry Shs 4.2 billion, but when it comes to the costs, don’t be surprised for this to escalate to Shs 45 billion. So, we must really be aware. They say once beaten twice shy. So, I really urge the Members that let us not go back to the past mistakes. Let us be strict and respect the legal part of the report. 

Mr Speaker, last time I chipped in here and I said the capitalist system of governance rules the world and many people do not want to live to this reality. It does not matter but of course for any business person, the priority is to make profits, which we interpret as greed. Of course, a business person will position him or herself to maximize profit wherever there is an opportunity and this is the system that is governing us. We are in a liberal economy; the public has failed to manage it and it is now the private sector. When they say we are a private-led economy, this means that a few individuals who are better organized and are smarter than others will have to run the show but employ the majority. These are the dictates of capitalism and we have to live by that. That is why many of the MPs are affected by loan sharks who have positioned themselves directly here at Parliament and are making our lives very difficult. But the law allows them and that is why you see - I have read in the press about MPs complaining about money; why should we be subjected to this kind of situation? It just shows that we have not understood the dynamics and tenets of capitalism. Capitalism has no mercy on these populist demands that you want – (Member timed out_)

4.56
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the two presenters of the reports. I want to say that we dearly missed the history of this problem because whatever we have listened to here is a tip of the iceberg. Things did not start from the President; at that time, some of us may recall that there was a rush by one of the former mayors to sell off all the markets to the rich fellows around. So, these poor fellows then - people are fond of calling these people “under privileged” - the under privileged then went to the President and that is how the President was dragged in at the time and they came to support and help the poor. 

Of course, after supporting them, they also became rich, which is no problem as far as I am concerned. So, we really missed that and we shouldn’t have missed it. I don’t see any problem with those people at that time also fighting for their rights because those other sharks were eating them up. So, they went and formed SSLOA and then they were supported that way. 

I want to say therefore that I will go with the first report and support hon. Otada’s report so that we don’t really create problems for no good reason. Mr Speaker, markets are not going to end with Owino. Kampala City and the other places are expanding. One day, we are going to have many cities and Kampala city is not going to be the same. Therefore, if we have more upcoming vendors in that business, let Government buy other pieces of land set up markets. Why should we get stuck on Owino? Really, I don’t think this is right –(Member timed out_)

4.59
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I associate with my comrades who have thanked the committee and the movers of the minority report. I asked myself why SSLOA failed to implement what was decided in the consent judgment because still they had recommended or decided that they register these people and integrate them into this company but time has gone and they have not done it; instead, they are ditching people up and down. So, as we recommend- the responsible ministers are here. They should bear in mind that this had been decided previously and it failed so they should devise new means of enforcing what we shall decide here. 

However, we support the recommendation that SSLOA be opened up. There should be fresh registration so that all these vendors that the President had favoured to participate in this business benefit. We should urge Police not to be inclined to SSLOA only and they should desist from beating people randomly.

So, honourable ministers, who are responsible here, protect Ugandans. They are not enemies and we know they are all trading from that market. Let them be protected as we the government in control are solving the problem and streamlining tense issues for the betterment of those people and all of us in Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.01
MS JANEPHER NANTUME (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to concur with the Woman MP for Kampala regarding all that she suggested. This is because of the unemployment rate and the level of poverty in the country. Wherever we may come from, how many people are rich compared to the poor; and yet we give this market to the rich only?

I have read here that they lied about the numbers; 90,000 yet the actually number is less than that. When we were here during the first or second debate on this very matter, people were seated up here and some were for SSLOA and others were against it. If we want to put this country at a standard where we do not follow things like “The rich will become richer and the poor will become poorer”, let us look at these people and not consider things like, whoever wants to join will subscribe. Obviously, these people who were seen to be against SSLOA have already been earmarked and even if they want to subscribe, they will not be allowed to register or subscribe. That means they will be kicked out automatically.

If we are fighting for poverty eradication and if this has been public property owned by Government of Uganda - Even if it was owned by Uganda Land Commission, KCCA or Kampala District, that is all Government of Uganda. If this was government property, let it be for all Ugandans. As Nantume, Woman MP Buvuma, I would not get scared like the Member who said here that if these people take us to court and considering the loans they got, they will win and they will be compensated.

Personally, I would not consider that reason. Look at these people. They are going to become jobless and they are going to be a burden to this country. If they are employed in that market permanently and they are paying the dues that they are supposed to pay to the respective local government, don’t you think these people will be paying taxes to the government?

Secondly, I am looking at the developments that have been made by World Bank and Government of Uganda. According to what I have heard, those developments are still there. That is money that was borrowed on behalf of Ugandans and this is taxpayers’ money. Why do we leave taxpayers’ money to go into the hands of a few –(Member timed out_)

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to correct the impression which the honourable member is creating when she said that those who are dissenting will not be allowed into SSLOA. That is not true because there is a consent judgement that was entered into and actually the High Court directed SSLOA to admit all these members. So there is a directive from court and there is nothing like - (Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I am giving clarification on that information. The clarification I am making is, let us not look at the consent judgement as binding to everyone. Court looks at those people who go it and it is the 12 versus SSLOA. There are 11 names and another cooperative but not all vendors were involved. So we should not limit our information and say that court ordered all vendors to be included in SSLOA as it is not true –(Ms Nantume rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time was up by the way. By the time they were giving the information, your time was up. I will give you one minute to conclude.

MS NANTUME: Thank you very much. I would like to conclude by saying that if we want to be fair to all Ugandans, we should leave these people to work according to their will, pay the dues and develop themselves instead of developing a few. I thank you.

5.07
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the first place, I would like to thank the committee members; both the writers of the majority report and those of the minority report because hon. Sempala made an effort to come up with a minority report singlehandedly.

In the majority report, there is a recommendation that SSLOA should open up. I want to say that this is not going to be the first time that this recommendation is coming up. If you look at the letter the President wrote to the Attorney-General to guide the vendors on how they should open up a legal entity that is inclusive of all the vendors, the Attorney-General advised the vendors accordingly and they went ahead to change the name of the association. 

The initial name of the association was Owino Lock-up and Shop Owners’ Association. This is what led them to change the name to SSLOA, which means St Balikuddembe Lockup Owners, Shop Owners, Space Owners and Vendors Association. In other words, by bringing up this new name, SSLOA opened up to all vendors that if you are in St Balikudembe market and you want to join this association, you are free. They opened up and included each and every one whether you have a lockup, if you are a shop owner or if you have a simple small space; all are accepted in the association.

Therefore this recommendation of saying that SSLOA should open up does not hold because in the first place, SSLOA has already opened up.

Mr Speaker, I also want to comment on the minority report. My sister hon. Sempala has recommended that SSLOA Limited should be dissolved. I want to say that we cannot dissolve SSLOA Limited. In the first place, it is a private/public liability company. We cannot dissolve it because they have a lease, which is running and given the fact that they have borrowed money, Shs 40.2 billion from DFCU Bank, if we make a mistake as Parliament to cancel the lease, that means that as Government, we are going to incur losses and compensate this association heavily. 

In compensation, we are going to go the Basajabalaba way and that is not what my colleagues would want us to go for and that is not what my colleagues do want us to go. 

The President has advised them to make the association legal and this has come before the court. The association should continue with its work. I would like to ask the minority group: since 2001, the vendors have not been paying the Shs 1,000 subscription fee; they have been boycotting it. SSLOA has not rejected them yet. Let them just pay that Shs 1,000 to join this association to run the market because this market is there for them.

5.10
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Members who took off time to peruse all these issues and come up with this report. I further would like to thank the honourable Member who presented the minority report.

According to this report and the minority report, it looks like SSLOA is the registered proprietor of this lease. I don’t know how long this lease is going to take. Otherwise, I think it wise to first let the lease end; we should not terminate the lease. Like hon. Alex Ruhunda said, we will avoid all those costs that we have paid in the past.

In the minority report, the honourable suggests – and I want to support it – that in the agreement that was entered into by SSLOA does not include some of the vendors. So, the business of SSLOA should not be enforced on other vendors. This is because when an agreement is made between two parties, that agreement will only be binding to those. Other parties who are not party to the agreement cannot come in at this stage. That is not legal. I thank her for having talked on behalf of the voiceless people. And so it should be like that. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.12
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the hon. Nabilah Ssempala and the recommendations she has made in her minority report. If the situation was as she took it, her recommendations could have been the best. But under the circumstances, when you look at the recommendations she has made - it will be so costly for them to implement. 

What we are talking about in the market came as a result of the policy of Government to privatize these markets. It was also a policy of the Ministry of Local Government – associations had come out to own these markets, but Government came with a policy which said that they could not lease markets to associations. So, what happened was that those associations turned themselves into companies. That situation is not only taking place in Owino; it is obtaining in all markets in Kampala.

When these associations turned themselves into companies, Government went to give them leases. The problem at Owino is the very one obtaining at Ggaba, Nakasero and Shauriyako markets. And you know this is a Government policy.

So, Mr Speaker, for Government to continue losing money in these unending legal battles between market owners and Government entities, Government should buy land and construct public markets to accommodate vendors. Otherwise where leases have been executed - if we go to cancel them, we should expect to always pay compensations, day in day out – (Interruptions)

MR BAKA: Honourable member, you might be handling broader knowledge on these markets. I have been grappling with an issue that you might know. At what stage are we? Are we still within the five years or we have passed them? If we are still within the five years, what in your view would be the legal position is KCCA, after five years decline to renew the up to 49 years – such that we don’t waste time with these five years – we can count them as a loss. Have they met all the conditions? At what stage are we? The learned Attorney-General is here; he could help us sort this out.

MR SSIMBWA: The Attorney-General, the Minister of Economic Monitoring and the Minister of Local Government whose ministry started this policy of privatizing markets are all here; they can give us information. But what I want to bring out is that if today Parliament resolved that SSLOA relinquishes the lease; we will have opened up a Pandora’s Box. The same issue cross over to all markets in Kampala where upon Government will be taken to court and will have to compensate.

Government made a mistake to privatize those markets – as we talk Government is trying to go back to the situation as it was before. Mr Speaker, my proposal is that Government buys land and invests in the constructions of markets so that the vendors who cannot be accommodated here can be accommodated in those new markets.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform you that we are already doing what is contained in what you are recommending. We have already bought land at Ggaba to construct a public market. This is already starting from your constituency. I will appreciate when you cooperate as the construction of that market is being done. Wandegeya is already done.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, that is exactly what I am saying. Government failed to run the Ggaba Market after it was privatized. Now it has gone on to buy land in Ggaba because it has failed to handle what is happening in Owino – (Member timed out_)

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (ELDERLY & DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Mr Suleiman Madada): Mr Speaker, I have listened to both the minority and majority reports and noticed that they both talk about the poor or the under privileged, but the question is: What is the current global development policy and what is the current national development policy? When you talk about liberalization, privatization and centralization – ever since we got the Preston Wood Agreement that brought in capitalism and which has lead to privatization, decentralization and liberalization, when you want to have a privileged economic growth, you have to first talk about organized society. Therefore, you don’t talk about the poor who are not organized.

The President’s directive was for the people to get organized and be given the powers to run the market. What is true now is that once SSLOA got organized, they were given the responsibility to run this market. So, what matters now is: Is this company limited by guarantee or by shares? The directives that we intend to give can be beyond our mandates because there are laws that govern these companies. 

I agree with the majority report when they say Parliament should not approve the proposal to cancel SSLOA lease which was made on the Floor of this House. I think that way, they are very right and in recommendation 1, when they say let us open the membership of the vendors, they are quite right.  But I have a bit of a problem when they say, this inclusion however, should be appointment of membership because once you have an organisation, it is members who will agree on the conditions. You cannot direct from this end. Therefore, you limit it to that level.

When you go to genuine registration and verification, the point we are making here is that once we say Parliament should not indulge itself in levels of directing what this company will be, because there are rules and regulations that govern these companies - Therefore, I want to support some of the recommendations in the majority report. Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just guide like this; cancellation of leases which are registered and therefore give title to a particular land is the mandate of the courts of law. Parliament cannot cancel leases. It has to be an application to court and you give your grounds then the title will be cancelled and therefore the lease also goes with it. 

Two, dissolution of companies under the Companies Act is done by the courts. (Applause) The High Court has the authority to dissolve companies; Parliament cannot dissolve companies. So, in our recommendation we should see what Parliament can do and restrict ourselves to that and avoid becoming judges and creating a high court to begin dissolving companies and cancelling leases. That might be exceeding the mandate of this House and bringing contempt to the proceedings of the House. 

So, those are legal things that I thought as Chair I should guide the House on so that our debates are focussed.

5.22
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am among the people who are fairly happy because I brought in an observation of how Parliament has been driven several times into costly implications when we determine issues here and later people rush to court. So, I wish to thank the Members who have come out with this report and their observations. It is well observed that when you have a consent and implementing it - I think that one is fair enough. 

Mr Speaker, in this arrangement of giving the responsibility of St Balikuddembe Market, I perused and saw something like a presidential directive. If we are on the ruling side and we are implementing the manifesto we should not ignore the presidential directive unless there is where it states that it was overturned.

Another issue is that, there are procedures of terminating agreements so we are not supposed to just come around and terminate an agreement which has financial implications. Because even when we bring Bills here they always say it must not have a financial implication. What about a resolution, which might turn a person who has taken us to court into a billionaire? 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, it was observed in the report and even in the last report that these people acquired a loan; and if they acquired the loan against the market price after getting permission from KCCA, I think there is a binding lease between KCCA and SSLOA. So, my submission is that we should respect and appreciate the recommendations of the committee which was set up by Parliament so that we at least wait for other things with financial implications but not to come up with something similar to Basajjabalaba’s situation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

5.25
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers' Representative, Workers): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the committee’s report. Much as I advocate for job creation to get rid of the high rate of unemployment, considering the report and considering all the facts in this report, I think what we need to do is to advise SSLOA to sit with those who have not had the opportunity to get into their company; to open up for them, reduce the charges to those who can’t afford so that they can also be part of SSLOA.

We should not go back to the issue of Basajjabalaba. This Government has lost a lot of money in the hands of such people. We must be very careful. This time round, a mistake was made, yes, let us accept and just leave it at what it is and maybe wait for the expiration of the lease. Otherwise, I support the committee’s report and let us try to ask SSLOA to come and accept those who have not been members to join but be lenient to them to allow their poor remuneration into their membership. Thank you.

2.26
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have guided very well that we cannot touch the issues of the lease and so forth. That is true. However, some things should come out clearly. What is the length or period of the subsisting lease? If we know that, then we will be saved the danger, because right now what we are talking about is that the centre of control and management automatically shifts from Government to SSLOA. 

Now, with that centre shifting to SSLOA, the fear of hon. Naggayi is, giving the example of the abattoir, we are going to lose a lot of money as Government because we will not be having control over the market management and even the dues.  That to me therefore gives a reason why we should incorporate her last recommendation of the PPDA investigation to be constituted so that if that is done and we get a report back we are sure that this is a free market economy and that is okay. But where there is capitalism we must have very - the liberalisation of trade and business must have very stringent regulatory provisions. 

So, in that way we would be able to protect, just like the hon. Member said here - SSLOA were actually the most vulnerable group by then; when the fear of giving out the market by the former mayor came out they ran to the President. Now they are the bourgeoisie - the loaded guys- and as they get loaded they are injuring more guys whom we need to protect. 

And if we go by what honourable member said that, yes the membership is open except the other vendors are not willing to pay the membership fees and yet the hon. Member from Mbale was saying, to become a member there could also be other conditions prescribed by the SSLOA members. That, to me, gives the reason why at least we should include, from the minority report, that PPDA should institute an investigation into the matter. 

As per the terms of reference given to the select committee, the Minister in charge of Kampala should report back to Parliament on the status of their investigation so that we help our endangered vendors. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. He wants to give information to Parliament on the status of their investigation so that we help our endangered vendors.

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, there is some additional information I would like to give. It is still within the mandate of Parliament to implore the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs to investigate what was presented here as acts of brutality against the people that were seated up there. So, it is within our mandate and we can ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come up with a statement to explain why the people were being harassed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we need guidance on and Member for Bulamogi you might need to help us draw this issue to a conclusion. The point raised by the Member for Kampala District is valid and she has the experience. We handled the issue of Kisseka Market, she was my Member and I was chairing that committee; so we have some experience on these issues of markets.
The point being raised is, yes, there was a directive that vendors form themselves into a group that is legal in character. In the process of constituting this legal group, what is now being seen apparently is that some people were left out and yet the effort was to put up SSLOA and bring everybody on board.

The question that we should be giving answers to is, What is SSLOA as of now and what should it have been? Once we deal with that question then next leg is, Who are the proprietors of SSLOA now and what should it have been? Who should have constituted it? So if you have a situation where all these are together then there is no issue. But if you have a situation where there is a disparity in the proprietorship of SSLOA vis-à-vis what it should have been in the interest of the policy directives given by the President and the Minister of Local Government, that is where the issue is. How do you provide the way forward to resolve that issue?

5.32
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From what was contained in the report, we found that the total membership of SSLOA was expected to be about 80,000 people and those who are registered with it are less than 20,000 people. So it means that the majority are actually outside this. I think that is the reason hon. Nabila finds herself in a very complicated situation when the majority are outside what is supposed to cater for them.

I am trying to find something that could probably offer a solution to those ones who are aggrieved and are outside SSLOA, bearing in mind that issues of law are there and we cannot afford to say cancel this or dissolve the company. We cannot do that and we are not party to the company.

But if there are issues of illegality, for instance, if there is breach of the PPDA Act then there is a right cause for these people to take action for which reason I would suggest that we need to adopt a recommendation of hon. Nabila with some amendments.

When we say the PPDA should open investigations in the matter as per the terms of reference of the select committee, I do not think that the PPDA should go by terms of the select committee. I think they should investigate the matter but at the same time if those members are unwilling to go by the recommendations of -(Interruption)

MR ASUPASA: I thank the Member for giving way. I am a Member of the select committee and the spirit behind our recommendation was about inclusion. We looked at whether all the vendors could have a way of getting included as per the presidential directive so that everybody could be part of SSLOA.

The order of court was to that effect and on that note SSLOA registered a resolution. There is a company resolution and section 3(a) reads: “To bring together and unite financial prosperity for all the vendors and the persons who own stalls, lock-ups and operate in the open spaces.” In short, they were supposed to register almost everybody in St Balikuddembe. Court ordered them to open up and they made a resolution opening up and the resolution was registered. 

The issue for us as Parliament is to make a recommendation to make it even easier for all the vendors to use these resolutions and join SSLOA and everybody gets included so that SSLOA is no longer seen as a capitalistic entity but a public entity where all the vendors are inclusive.

MR LUBOGO: I thank you honourable for the information you have given but I want you to also take note of what hon. Nabila said. She said there are only 12 people who went to court and the other over 70,000 - so the consent judgement of court does not bind over 60,000 people who are not party to it. So, if that be the case that is the reason I want to say that hon. Nabila should probably advise these people if they are unwilling to join thinking that it is an illegality, they can go to court and challenge the whole process.

5.37
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the majority report but I would also like to commend hon. Nabila for the minority report. She puts up very pertinent issues; however we are constrained in the circumstances to move in her direction and I would like to state my point.

Following the very first civil case that was put in court in 2001, which also gave birth to a consent judgement, what was ordered has been implemented. What is very fundamental as per your guidance is to see whether the SSLOA we are talking about now, what it is and what it should have been by the order of court.

The order was that it should be all- inclusive and I think that that has been dealt with as per the resolution registered on 17 February 2010, which says this is all inclusive and it ordered accordingly to change name from “shop and lock-up owners” into “St Balikuddembe lock-up owners, space owners and vendors association” being all inclusive. By the resolution the door is still open for whoever is grappling to enter. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think we have cured that.

The issue we should be dealing with is as to whether the register of the vendors that we have put in place is representative of all the vendors. Our recommendation should be to order the Minister for Kampala to verify whether the list is all inclusive. I did move a step; there is a presidential advisor in charge of markets who was in charge of implementing this order, and he accordingly wrote to KCCA in 2012 indicating that we have complied in terms of inclusion. This is what I want to read verbatim, from the Director of KCCA in response to formalisation of this order and she writes thus:

“Incorporation of all groups in St Balikuddembe Market into SSLOA. Reference is made to your letter - Kampala Capital City Authority has noted the efforts towards forming a unified vendors’ group in St Balikuddembe Market and congratulates the vendors’ group on this positive achievement. KCCA is committed to working with these groups for successive development.” 

Mr Speaker, maybe the other order now we can give – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, I would now propose that we recommend that the Minister for Kampala also verifies and reports. 

Finally, having had the very petitioners in 2011 going to court and petitioning the Miscellaneous Application No. 947 and the ruling of the court being that following the consent judgment, the rest of the items which shall not be handled cannot be handled by this court and therefore the application was actually dismissed. I do not think that we have the locus now to continue in that direction when court already dismissed their claims. The order was that the rest of this can be dealt with in the company by the company. Mr Speaker, I propose that the rest of those issues, if they are there, should now be dealt with under the companies law by the directors amongst themselves. I thank you.

5.41
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a document which I found in my pigeon hole and as I was going through it, I found that it was written to you. I tried to really verify what this SSLOA is. But according to the document written on 19 July 2013, SSLOA is the “Stalls Space and Lock-up Shops Owners Association” and it has clicked my mind that today when you see the confusion in Kampala, in Kisseka Market and Owino Market, there is difference and the difference comes in that these people who are in Owino Market registered, are the owners and they are organising themselves to safeguard the property they have. You see in investment what they call “investment” is a committed resource to achieve an objective. If I commit money, I safeguard it myself as the owner. You cannot come around and say, “Please, I want to be part of you” when you did not do anything.
 
I have gone to page 2 of the same document where these people are saying that what they did since 2006 is that they have paid a premium of Shs 4 billion – this is a group. They have gone ahead to pay ground rent of Shs 400 million and gone ahead to purchase resettlement land measuring in acres. This is a lot of investment and the only way out is for the Minister for KCCA to make sure that members who want to join, how do they join, and is the list of 10,000 people there? And if it is not there, then they should allow these people to be accommodated like it is suggested in resolution number one of the committee. 

These “guys” in their conclusion in the letter they wrote to you, Mr Speaker, they said that in conclusion, “We expect Parliament to handle this matter in line with the laws governing this country.” Of course, we are going into a global trend or public/private partnership. This public market where Government has not provided a service, it can hire people who can organise themselves and manage them. And by the way, in 10 to 15 years, you may never find those markets there because the scope of how KCCA is trying to modernise the city will be different.

So, my humble request is just to say that we adopt the recommendations made by majority committee and then maybe that amendment that the Minister in charge of KCCA ensures that other members are accommodated and we forge a way forward.

5.44
MR HOOD KATURAMU (PWD, Representative, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I wish to thank the Members who made the majority report for their observations and recommendations as well as the minority report of hon. Nabilah Naggayi.  I think that on this matter of Owino and other markets, we might be addressing symptoms of the problems but not the root causes. 

The initiation of building markets by Government is a welcome idea and these will help the poorest people – the urban poor. What I know as one who has ever worked with KCCA is that, money that Government uses to build these markets is normally generated from one of the sources being the World Bank, KCCA and then vendors. 

I wish, Mr Speaker, to be clarified especially by the minister that if Government has borrowed money from the World Bank to build markets, Government has done that on behalf of the people of Uganda. Therefore, ownership for that market is totally for Government and in this case, KCCA.  So there is no vendor, for example, in Owino market, the people who own it are in categories. There are people who own lock-up shops and market stalls and you find that the people who are owning the lock-up shops and market stalls paid for them and they belong to them. They have letters from KCCA showing that these are their properties. 

Now we want to know whether these people who own some property in Owino have their interests protected. Where is it protected because if SSLOA – SSLOA should be an agent of KCCA and they should work under terms and regulations offered by KCCA. If it does not do that, then it is abdicating its responsibility to protect the urban poor.  

The other issue that I wanted to be clarified on is, the question of capacity of Owino Market because there is no way we can say all the vendors must be accommodated when you cannot establish – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member for Kyadondo and then I will have the members for Kioga and Namutumba.

5.48
MR ROBERT SSEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was going to say that if there is no more new information coming in, why don’t we conclude this matter because we have specific recommendations. This matter has a historical background; it has been debated before and this is the second committee that has made more light on the points that were highlighted by the previous committee. So, there is no new information, why don’t we conclude, isolate the recommendations one by one and then we conclude the matter. That is my view.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a motion? What is it?

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, may I move a motion that a question be put on the recommendations as has been guided by the sub-committee of Parliament? I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, motion is seconded. Honourable members, we shall give a direction because we are going to go through the resolutions one by one. Okay? I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, let us go to the resolutions. Recommendation No. 1 which we will now adopt as our position if it is agreed that SSLOA opens up and admits in its membership all the vendors of St Balikuddembe Market (Owino) which is in accordance with the spirit behind the presidential directive. This inclusion, however, should be upon payment of membership and subscription fees. The Shs 1,000,000 charged by SSLOA as premium should be optional. That is the recommendation. Can we get some clarification from the chairperson?

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, there is a Member who raised concern about our recommendation that it should be upon payment of registration and subscription fees and wondered why we should not leave that into the hands of SSLOA to be determined. But I just want to give information that SSLOA already as it is, the members determined the fees and subscription fee which we are saying should be a condition for joining, which is Shs 10,000 which is a one off. The yearly subscription fee for the vendors is Shs 50,000. It is already determined by SSLOA and that is why we made that recommendation and the Shs 1,000,000 that we say should be optional is actually one of the things that was making it difficult for other vendors to join and that was a development fee.

So, we are saying that there are some members of SSLOA who actually do not want to be part of the development; they just want space to operate their businesses because SSLOA actually means stalls, space, lock-ups and so forth. So, we are saying that for those who may not want to be party to the building, let the Shs 1,000,000 be optional. That is the justification, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that clear, hon. Members? I put the question to that recommendation, which now becomes our resolution.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “Fresh registration and verification of genuine vendors of St Balikuddembe Market should be done by KCCA within one month after the adoption of this report in order to ensure transparency and inclusiveness.” You also need to explain to us why the minister is being left out of this because KCCA does not report here.

MR OTADA: Well, I do not think I have understood the second question, Mr Speaker, but the justification I want to give on behalf of the committee for our second recommendation is the fact that – what is the second recommendation again? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Registration and verification.

MR OTADA: Most obliged. The justification is that as we speak, there is a verification list that we received that SSLOA undertook and I think it has about 9,000 members. This list was certified by the Ministry of Local Government and on the ground, the committee report that we should always refer ourselves to gives something different; gives us about over 90,000. 
So, our justification is that it looks like SSLOA may not be the best verifier in this regard and, therefore, since KCCA is the leaser here and also has administrative functions anyway to ensure the proper management of the city, let them be an independent group because even if it is in the hands of SSLOA, they will simply submit for what they have already verified which is actually under dispute. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can I put the question to this? Honourable members, we have debated these matters. Do you have an amendment on this?

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I disagree with the beginning of the statement that “Fresh registration should be done.” But I agree that verification be done and we should be recommending to an authority, which reports here because we are expecting feedback. We cannot direct KCCA. In the very first place, if you look into the history of this wrangle, even KCCA has been noted somewhere but now the supervising authority is the Minister in charge of Kampala City Council. So, I propose that we amend to delete “fresh registration” and then begin –(Interjections)– yes, let me give my justification.

Mr Speaker, there has already been registration only that there is a discrepancy in the two lists: one submitted to the committee and then the one which was certified. Therefore, if you say we are going into fresh registration, that will amount to poking again into the business of the company and that is why I am saying we should leave out “fresh registration” and recommend for verification and give this mandate to the minister to report back to this House.

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Speaker, I support to maintain “fresh registration” because at one time, KCCA tried to register there and a certain group hired kanyamas and they beat them up. They do not even have the information. So, we have to emphasise fresh registration of these people even though some of them may refuse to be members of SSLOA but then KCCA or Government should know the number of these people there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there is difficulty with the word “fresh” can we just say “registration”? Sometimes words just give different meanings to situations. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I think registration, fresh or not, should be done. The reason is because of the 8,870; others are saying 9,000. So, I support that. I am just moving an amendment that could read like: “The Minister for Kampala should ensure that a registration exercise and verification of genuine vendors of St Balikuddembe Market be done by KCCA within one month after the adoption of this report in order to ensure transparency and inclusiveness.” This is to ensure that the minister reports to us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, Members? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The third one is that “Parliament should not approve the proposal to cancel the SSLOA lease, which was made on the Floor of the House on 17 July 2013 during the debate on the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs as doing so is unlawful.” I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any recommendations from the ministry report that can be adopted or not because there seemed to be Members who thought the procurement process should be looked at but if it is not the opinion of the members – honourable members, we have come to the conclusion of this unless the Member for Mawokota South has something to say. 

MR BBOSA KIYINGI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. With all due diligence, Mr Speaker, I humbly request that you accept this recommendation to also be put into consideration; that a thorough investigation be carried out regarding the actions of the police officers operating in St Balikuddembe Market. Action should include allegations of brutality against vendors of the market and allegations of bribery and connivance with SSLOA and the Minister of Internal Affairs should report back to Parliament in two weeks. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a recommendation from the Member for Mawokota South. I put the question to that proposed amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want assurance from Government especially from ministers on our people who are being harassed down there because they go to the Police and are not helped; they are beaten by the kanyamas. Should we have such a situation in our Government? What should we do? I want assurance because we have no interest in brutality. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For purposes of the Hansard, hon. Member, you may have to clarify on “down there.” (Laughter)

MR SSEMUGABA: I am sorry, I withdraw that but I mean the harassment of some vendors in St Balikudembe market should be stopped by the ministers and they should assure us-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is something that the government should take up seriously but it does not have to come by way of resolution.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, we have concluded the report on St Balikudembe. When my colleague from Kyankwanzi talked about the brutal nature, as I talk, the same situation is happening in Ggaba. One section of the vendors is in prison for payment of compensation to another group like we are talking about SSLOA. 

Since Parliament has pronounced itself on issues concerning Owino and there are other markets in Kampala with the same problems, could I request Government to take up the issues in those markets even before they come to the Floor of Parliament so that we solve them? Issues of connivance between those who are at war with companies that control markets are real; there is also connivance in courts. I am talking about Ggaba and I know these issues well. 

As I talk, a group including your RDC of Kumi who was the RDC of Kampala were taken to court and the court is to compensate the other group Shs 700 million, which is in the same line with SSLOA and now vendors in the markets are being run after and put in -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to keep it brief? I think the point is made.

MR SSIMBWA: Because the minister was shaking his head and that is why I wanted to clarify -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point is made; that it is serious, that there should be law and order in those places and minorities and majorities should be protected. That is the point being made.

MR KATURAMU: Mr Speaker, I am in support of the recommendation but I seek clarification on Recommendation No.2, it talks about genuine vendors, are the genuine vendors those that are considered at the time SSLOA took over, before that or after that? We need to be clear on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, SSLOA is a company and it already has a list of people but they are saying the list in the company register falls short of the total membership. So they are now saying, go and include the total membership of that place and then advise people on how to move.

MR KATURAMU: So that during the registration and verification exercise, everybody is on board otherwise we shall have a recurrence of problems particularly on genuine membership.

MR ROBERT SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Now that we have resolved issues concerning Owino market, Government had a plan to build five markets in Kampala and all those markets have delayed apart from Wandegeya. If we made a mistake and agreed to build markets on land with disputes, can a resolution be drafted by the minister and brought back to Parliament so that we can allocate these markets to other areas? This is because the loan has delayed and we are not implementing the markets. We took a loan from the World Bank and these markets have not been built and yet people are clamouring for market space. Can we please get information from the ministers on whether they are doing anything in regard to those markets?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The ministers responsible for markets? (Laughter) Please, I think that is Local Government and also general monitoring of the situation - the two people who can help us with this matter on those markets that were approved. I do not know who else -

6.04
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have devoted US$ 56 million to building seven major markets in Uganda and one of those markets is Wandegeya in Kampala. We also have Jinja, which will be complete in October, as well as Hoima, Lira, Gulu, Mbale and Fort Portal. Those are the seven markets, which will be commissioned in October this year.

We have also negotiated another loan of US$ 120 million to construct 21 more markets in Uganda. I cannot recollect the list here but at an appropriate time, Mr Speaker, I can bring it to this Parliament. They include major municipalities like Busia, Kasese and others. We have the list, which we can submit to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we conclude this matter, please Members?

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, mine is just to -

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: Honourable minister, there are issues of border markets. Busia is in the border and there are other borders.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, mine is just to thank the House for adopting our majority report. On behalf of my colleagues, members of the committee, I want to thank you and maybe say one or two things just to clear the air. One, the lease that we are talking about is a five-year lease so nobody should be worried about a 49-year lease.

I also want to make an observation that going forward, I think that as a Parliament we should begin to scrutinise petitions that we receive for consideration because sometimes we begin fighting other people’s wars in this House. This is a matter that is purely legal and at the end of the day, somebody has to accept that someone must start something.

Mr Kayongo started this thing and it is against that background that the President identified him in the market, and he thought it wise to appoint him a presidential adviser in charge of markets. That is an issue that one Member on this side of the House was saying, “This group cannot join Kayongo’s group” this is Museveni’s adviser. 

I think that is one of the problems that we have because some of these members just refused to join saying, “This is Museveni’s group” or “Kayongo’s group.” So, I wanted to clear that and let the House know that this Parliament should not be dragged into fighting people’s wars and that we should begin to scrutinise the petitions that we receive because some of them will simply be wasting our precious time.

Like you said, Mr Speaker, when the session opened, that from next year, we shall not be very active in this Parliament so we must use this remaining session to do serious legislative work for the people of Uganda. I beg to submit and I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the petitions, we have not been very strict with the rules and it is beginning to cause us problems as Parliament. Rule 29 is very clear on petitions. In sub rule (2) it says, “Petitions shall be filed with the Clerk who shall immediately notify the whips and Table them before the Business Committee.” So this should be a verification process for the establishment of sources so that Parliament can know the propriety of a particular petition and whether we should get involved with it.

If you got to sub rule (5), the Speaker can direct that the petition be referred to a particular committee. In sub rule (6), the Speaker can also direct that a petition be sent to a minister. If it can be better handled by a minister then there is no point bringing it directly to involve committees of Parliament. We can just say this matter is specific to this ministry and the issues are within the Executive functions of the minister; so give it to the minister to handle and report to the House since the petition was to the House.

So, we will now be applying this rule strictly. This issue of coming to the Speaker’s House with cameras and then you present petitions - we will not be taking that line because it has tended to drag the Speaker’s Office into some controversies that now do not make sense.

So, we will be following these rules strictly that petitions by members should be filed with the Clerk to Parliament. It is the Clerk to Parliament to present them to the Business Committee of Parliament for a decision as to when it should be brought to the Floor. The Speaker will decide whether it goes to some committee or to a particular minister. For example, if it is a petition on a particular Bill and that Bill is still at committee stage, it will of course go to the appropriate committee. That is how we will be handling petitions from now onwards to avoid clashes of interests other than those of the House.

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, thank you so much for that guidance because that is precisely why I wanted to rise to supplement on what hon. Sam Otada said. Sincerely speaking, I know that everything that we get involved in is very serious, in one way or another, but there are also so many ways of solving the problems that come to us, precisely the way you have put it.

More often than not, I think I find myself at pain when I realise that at the end of the session we are counting by way of one, two, three Bills that have been passed. To me legislation is really the core business of this House. We should do our best to use other avenues of handling matters that we face and also to remember core activities of this House. So, I support your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, there are items that remained standing in 5 (II) and (III). Are we ready now so that we can have them laid before we adjourn?

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UPTO US $20 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO SUPPORT THE DRYLAND INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN KARAMOJA

6.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow upto $ 20 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the Dry Land Integrated Development Project in Karamoja. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable, Government Chief Whip, we have a disparity. Here it is indicated as “A request to Parliament on the proposal to borrow...” but you have tabled a brief to Parliament. A brief to Parliament is given upon the request being made – the minister will send a brief to the responsible committee. So, is that a brief or the request itself?

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, the document I have in my hands is a brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think we need to harmonise it. We can deal with it tomorrow.

MS LUMUMBA: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for what we have been able to achieve today. Tomorrow – yes, there is another item. No, that is the same situation. Isn’t it? Okay, harmonise so that we can deal with those two items tomorrow properly.

Honourable members, thank you very much. Today, we have been able to take many things out of the way. We also started on the debate on the State of the Nation Address. I must congratulate the Members of the independent side because they followed the instructions of the Business Committee to the letter; that you identify a Member to speak on a particular subject and allocate the time to that Member. That is why we had the honourable member for Butambala speaking for 10 minutes but with other Members speaking for eight, seven and so minutes and I know that hon. Sam Otada will be speaking for 30 minutes. But for you it is five minutes, the subject you are covering notwithstanding. So, the spirit has been lost on this side. But hope we will keep improving on it. 

House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.14 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 July 2013 at 3.00p.m.)
	
