Thursday, 23 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you have noticed on the order paper and as I communicated yesterday, there is a motion that was introduced last week. We referred it to the committee and had assigned ourselves the responsibility of debating it today. That is why it is on the order paper as item number four.

Last week also, various statements were raised by members in relation to the problems regarding malaria in Northern Uganda and as you can see in item three, there will be a statement on malaria.

I had ordered that the Tobacco Control Bill be off the order paper until due consultations were held between the Members who had interest in this matter and other people so that a compromise would be reached to make it move forward in a faster way.

This morning, I received information from the hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, Minister of State for Health and the mover of the Bill, the hon. Member for Sheema District, hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro, that the due consultations had been carried out. I was given some framework of agreements that was drafted to facilitate this process. That is why that matter is coming on the order paper as item number five. We will be seeing how to proceed with this matter and I will be asking whether the due consultations were done and upon confirmation, we will proceed with the business as it is.

I had also made an undertaking on item number six. I will be making the necessary communication when we reach that item. Thank you.

2.11
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I am a member of the Bugisu Cooperative Union, which deals in coffee. I have been interacting with my colleagues in other unions; fellow chairpersons - I am the interim chairperson of the unions.

I am one of the interested persons in tobacco, on behalf of the unions and farmers. I have not been consulted. So, when they say they met and consulted, the farmers have not been consulted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was there consultation?

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Yes, we have been considering the Bill and the other day you guided that in order to create harmony and also expeditiously process this Bill, we needed to consult, especially the movers of this Bill and those who were raising objections to some of the provisions in it.

Indeed, we carried out consultations yesterday to the extent that we even met members from the Tobacco industry; it was a delegation of about five members. Hon. Sarah Opendi and I represented the Ministry of Health, hon. David Bahati was also there because they had raised a petition to the Minister of Finance who delegated hon. Bahati to handle it.
When hon. David Bahati consulted us, we thought it was okay in the spirit of your guidance that we could sit and harmonise.  Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro was present too. 

There are over three to four points that were raised. We had a cordial discussion and – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in this House, we have the ministers, movers and those who represent the farmers. You asked the question as to whether there were consultations. The Minister of State for Health, the initial mover of this Bill is going just around saying he met representatives from the industry yet never met us, who raised the issues and who represent farmers. The question is: is it procedurally right for him to continue yet he never consulted with all those concerned and he is now giving us a wrong story about people he met?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was waiting for him to confirm that he consulted you but if he did not, then we will come to that point.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think the honourable member should just be patient and not emotional because you guided us to consult widely including consulting Members to build harmony. We did consult and some of the issues, which were raised, in the spirit of give and take, we conceded a number of them and agreed.

However, I also had discussions with hon. Benjamin Cadet who is not here. Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has had strong views, but we contacted him only that he was not in town to be physically present in the meeting. Otherwise, hon. David Bahati had a long chat with him. I would like to request you, Mr Speaker, to allow him comment on the discussions he had with hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

Otherwise, we reached out to a number of members and we generated consensus. But also let me add that in the process of handling this Bill, it is not true that farmers were not consulted. The Committee on Health where I sat before I was appointed a minister, travelled as they put in the report, to western and Northern Uganda and West Nile and had deep consultations with the farmers. 

In addition, farmers brought petitions to the Speaker, which were forwarded to the committee and were listened to. These farmers included those from Rukungiri and Kanungu. Therefore, the committee had deep consultations. Unless you are saying that coffee farmers also wanted to be consulted; we thought this was a Tobacco Control Bill.

So, the answer to your question, Mr Speaker, is that yes we did consult and reached out to many members. We feel we should proceed but I request that you allow hon. David Bahati, who specifically was in touch with hon. Nandala-Mafabi over this matter. We feel that debate and discussion are healthy and all views should be brought out so we can settle them the usual way we handle Bills in this House. 

I would also like to add that there is deliberate effort to stifle the processing of this Bill – (Interjections) – yes, I have to put that on record - but as Members of Parliament let us not allow to be used by other players outside. Let us debate this Bill the way we debate other Bills here. If anybody has any view, they should bring it, we take a decision as we finish with it.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was very particular. He did not talk about individual farmers; he talked about those unions that bring farmers together because the union leaders carry the voices of the farmers. Therefore, it would have been pertinent for the minister to state categorically how many unions he met because that is the context in which hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised the procedural matter.

Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to derail the arguments in the House and begin imputing a bad motive on colleagues who have interests and are union leaders?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you do not have any information and cannot substantiate that there are deliberate attempts to stifle debate and processing of this Bill by Members or other people, I would ask you to withdraw it.

DR BARYOMUNSI: If I was misunderstood, Mr Speaker, I withdraw the remarks. But the point I would like to make is that our understanding was not that we take over the work of the committee, which was done by opening up the Bill to the entire public and invite union leaders and so on. The point of emphasis I was making is that, as far as I know, the Committee on Health - (Interruption)  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have high respect for Dr hon. Chris Baryomunsi. In fact in our area we call him Baryembusi because that name would mean someone who eats goats. (Laughter) 

I have no interest in derailing the debate. I categorically said I am the Chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union and in those unions they have elected leaders. Unfortunately, I happen to be the leader of all those unions including those that produce tobacco, tea, cassava and cotton. 

I have been in Parliament since 2001 and I am not fond of derailing debate. So, is the hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, in order to say that some of us who are raising issues, which affect the poor farmers are doing it to derail the debate with ill motives? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I have just ruled on that and he has withdrawn the statement.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. I beg that honourable members remain alert because that had been finished. The point I was making, Mr Speaker, is that our understanding of your instructions was that the committee is not going back to carry out nationwide consultations because I do believe those were concluded and - (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, for giving way. Mr Speaker, before I became Chairperson of the Health Committee I was an active member of that same committee. And if you look at our report, honourable colleagues - see page 11 – you realise that we have reported that we had a very serious interface with tobacco farmers and these are some of the things I would like to read verbatim for clarity.

 The tobacco farmers, as advocates of economic growth, opposed the Bill, especially in its move to repeal the Tobacco Act and incapacitate the tobacco buying companies from extending voluntary support to communities in form of cooperate social responsibility. Using ecological and cooperative reasons the farmers in Kinkizi, Kanungu, where the minister comes from, said that soils in Kanungu cannot accommodate any other crops.

Secondly, they said one cannot just stop them from growing tobacco and that 90 per cent of the tobacco that is grown is – but I would like to inform the House that even in the committee when we were recommending, we said we cannot repeal the Tobacco Act because of what the farmers did, for purposes of making sure we do not ban tobacco growth. 

That is why I would like to allay –the fears of those who have got anxiety - the committee was very thorough in making sure - even in the recommendations - we do not want you to repeal the Tobacco Act because that will cause problems. Thank you very much.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Dr Medard Bitekyerezo. To add more information to that is that the fear of the farmers was that this Bill would be banning tobacco growing and smoking, which is not the case? One of their fears, for example, was that there was a proposal to repeal the Tobacco Control and Marketing Act of 1967, which is the law that governs the trade and legal regime dealing with tobacco. Indeed, when we consulted with the committee, we agreed that we would save this Bill so that issues like licensing of tobacco companies and how they relate to the farmers are not affected.

Therefore, there is no need for worry. The concerns of the farmers, as raised in their petitions and as we met them in the different parts of the country, have been accommodated in the amendments by the committee, which we have conceded to as movers of the Bill.

We do feel, Mr Speaker, that if there are any issues to raise on this Bill, they should be handled the usual way we handle other Bills. They can be raised in the debate and then we make progress and move forward. But I also would request that you allow hon. David Bahati to comment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the honourable member has his own right; you do not have to plead for him. If he rises, I will recognise him. If he does not, I will not force him to stand.

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much. As the hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi has said, following your instructions to do further consultations, especially on the issues which appeared to be controversial, some Members of the tobacco industry appealed to the ministry and I convened a meeting, which enabled us to narrow some of the differences. 

Regarding consultations with hon. Nandala-Mafabi, yesterday before the House sat, we met with him and requested whether we could have a meeting in the evening; he was not available. We also requested whether we could have a meeting in the morning, but he said he was committed. We asked him to forward some amendments so we could look at them and he said he would come back to me. I know is that he has been raising are issues that the mover of the Bill can concede to.

In the spirit and interest of the public health in this country,we proceed with the Bill. I know that some of the issues hon. Nandala-Mafabi was raising had to do with repeal of the old Act and farmers. But these are issues the mover of the Bill and Ministry can concede for us to move on. 

The other issues of the industry have been narrowed down to some extent and where we disagreed, we have been able to point out and handle it that way. So, consultations were done and how wide they were depended on what we could do in the interest of time. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Minister of Finance for giving way to enable me to seek clarification. I would like you to comfort some of us to know the categories of people or industries you consulted with. One of the objects of the Bill is to regulate the manufacturing. But much to my interest is that the public use of tobacco products - did you, as we have read in the media, also consult with places where tobacco is consumed more? Public places like hotel owners, bars and others. That would comfort me if you have their positions and their concerns – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I do not want a mistake made on what I instructed the members to do. What I said here was that I had seen Members who were very interested in the Bill and those interests had to be taken care of. So, I let them go and consult and come back. I said I would not put it back onto the order paper until they had reconciled and got a framework of agreements on the amendments and how we would proceed. So, I did not instruct anybody to go and start wide consultations in the press and everywhere. Please, do not enlarge the extent of my ruling.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, you have narrowed the answer for the Minister but that is what I wanted - can he state the categories of people he consulted? Who are these people who were consulted so that we are comforted? We need this on record so that we harmonise this and move forward.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I recall very well when you made this ruling. The background that informed that ruling was that Members were moving to make several amendments. So, you guided us, Mr Speaker, that if we brought very many amendments at the committee stage, we would end up writing a law different from the one we gazetted. And it was upon that guidance that you ruled that those who were moving amendments – there was hon. Nandala-Mafabi; there was the Member for Kibanda had also wanted to re-commit a certain clause; and I also had wanted to move an amendment. So, it was upon that background that you ruled that we go consult again. My understanding is you just advised and guided us so that we do not come back here to move several amendments that would affect the Bill that was gazetted extensively. 

But now that none of us was consulted but the team chose to consult outside this House - did they move on properly in accordance to the ruling you had made or most probably they did not – (Interruption)

MS OLERU: Thank you, my sister, hon. Betty Nambooze. The information I wish to give is that the movers of this Bill and the committee consulted some Members today in the morning. So it might be a bit wrong for you to say that they only consulted outside because I personally participated and I am one of those who represent a district that is growing tobacco. So even, the farmers have been represented through me. Thank you.

MS NAMBOOZE: I am happy that my colleague was consulted. Mr Speaker, all I wanted to say is that we should recall the background upon which you gave this ruling and according to me – some colleagues have met – we have not been consulted to harmonise issues to avoid moving many amendments at the committee stage. Thank you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Please allow me to raise a matter of public importance. (Laughter) Oh! You are still on that matter? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy with our colleague from Rubaga South because he has made us smile a bit.

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, I am a good friend to hon. David Bahati. First of all, we come from the same profession and we do discuss a lot of professional matters.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member let me just make a disclaimer. I am not aware of the good relationship between the two of you. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know sometimes we say, “My learned friend.” Anyway, I would have been very happy but today I have been disappointed by my colleague, hon. David Bahati, for saying he consulted me.

Yesterday, indeed I was in the corridor talking to hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro – the mover of this Bill. She told me they had been at the Ministry of Finance with hon. David Bahati and the other players, the cigarette manufacturers. I asked her: “But I am an interested party; why were we not invited and you instead invited the manufacturers?” She told me that hon. Bahati would come to brief me. 

And indeed while we were still there, hon. David Bahati came and asked whether it was possible for us to meet after Parliament sitting. That is when I told him it would not be possible because I had a commitment. He then asked if we could meet the following day. But still I told him it wouldn’t be possible because I had a group of persons coming from outside the country to meet on consultancy matters. I even told him about the business I was going to do, as a colleague and professional accountant. That is when we agreed that on Monday afternoon we would meet.

But at 9.37 p.m. – I have the phone record here and that is why I was checking – hon. David Bahati called me but I never picked his call because I was in another meeting. I eventually called him and he said: “If you have proposals, kindly send them to us.” I told him: “But David, we agreed that we would meet on Monday afternoon. Why are you now changing?” 

So, if he says that the consultation we had – I am a Christian and I know that he is a saved man – if he denies that this is what we discussed, I will be disappointed and I will never believe in other saved people because you are the only one I was left with. I gave up on the others. (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi – my friend – to force me to disclose other avenues I used to reach him or to disclose private things that we talked about at night about important issues like these, in public? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, he has just given you the authority to do so – so proceed. He has just given you the authority to disclose. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. Well, we cannot disclose many of the things we do together. But what is important is that I was not consulted because I was waiting for Monday afternoon to meet my brother –(Interjections)– it is true that you said you wanted my amendments to come to you. But I remember telling you that I would not be available the following day and so you would have the amendments on Monday.

So, Mr Speaker, I would be very glad that we have some Members of Parliament raising issues but who would have been consulted and not the manufacturers; we have issues with the manufacturers. Some of them are underpaying our farmers and so we have a lot of issues with them. We would have been happy if you consulted us before we could deal with it at an appropriate time. That is what I wanted to say.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I think we might need to take a decision on the way forward in regard to this issue.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, at least you have confirmed that we reached out to you several times.

Secondly, there are also some Members of Parliament who had a breakfast meeting over this issue. But I think in the interest of progress of the Bill, let Members who have amendments present them, we look at them and move forward because we cannot open up consultations afresh. If you have amendments, we can look at them and narrow the differences and pass the Bill. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was the purpose for me to request you to go and consult, harmonise positions and come back here with a document that we can use to process the Bill. But when we start now, we shall start moving from one amendment to another and one clause could take a day yet we do not have many days to spend passing one clause of a Bill. 
So, my ruling still stands that you go back, harmonise these positions and come back when you are ready on Tuesday for us to proceed. A Bill with just a few clauses like this should not take us a whole day. It should take us one hour to be done with it but that is if the positions are properly harmonised with the people who have interests in suggesting amendments. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking some clarification from you. I am not challenging the ruling but we have consulted the mover of the Bill, the chairperson of the committee and the ministry and narrowed down the differences. 

We would now like to be guided about who else is going to be consulted apart from hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Nandala-Mafabi because we do not want to come here and another member comes to say they were not consulted?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just appoint a time when you will meet and notify the members who are interested to show up in the meeting and you harmonise.

MR BAHATI: Okay, we will have a meeting tomorrow at 9.00 a.m. in the Members’ Lounge.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. That is it. Thank you. Yes, honourable, on what matter do you rise? No, you did not come to my office. What matter do you want to raise?

2.38
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, you asked me to explain and I wrote a letter to explain this morning which I forwarded to your secretary. Please allow me to raise a matter of public importance in protection of the Constitution of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, on two consecutive occasions, through this Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received a letter from hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi this morning about the issues he has been raising with the Prime Minister and which he has done twice – about the deployment of UPDF soldiers in Burundi. 

He had wanted to raise it last week but I told him that the Prime Minister had said he did not know about any deployment. I asked hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, if he had facts that could help me to reintroduce this matter on the Floor because this House cannot be drawn into rumour mongering – at least not when I am sitting. 

I need concrete information that this is happening. You asked the question twice before these Members here and the Prime Minister said that he did not know what you were talking about and did not have information to that effect.

But the hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi wrote me a letter that by me asking, I was now indulging in debating. That is the letter he wrote to me this morning.

But honourable members, let us not make it very difficult to earn respect from other people. Please, let us respect each other. My objection to you, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, for all the time coming out with rumours; it is not right for this House. If you have the information and I ask you about what information you have so that I can put it there. He he said he cannot tell it to me.

Let us respect this House. There are rules we use. Information that you want to bring to this House should have some basis. Which facts can you not disclose? If you do not produce the facts now, I will rule you out of order.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am producing the facts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is why I respect you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And you have a very funny way of showing that respect. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, on two consecutive occasions, I informed Parliament, through the Prime Minister’s Question Time, that the UPDF had been reported to be in Burundi to protect President Nkuruzinza. 

The Prime Minister did not deny what I said save that he said that he did not know anything about that deployment. In accordance with Article 108 (a) of our Constitution, who beyond the Prime Minister would know about that important fact? 

Mr Speaker, I wish to bring it to the attention of Parliament that it is true that the UPDF has been deployed in Burundi and that deployment, if true, contradicts the Constitution of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is if it is true, not so?  

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: It is true, Mr Speaker. In line with that, the same deployment would contradict Article 2(4).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, is there a deployment?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes, let me come to the facts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Establish for me that fact.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes, let me bring that information. According to the news broadcasts of Press TV of Iran, released on 18 July 2015 at 10.00 a.m., the UPDF has 200 soldiers in Burundi protecting President Nkurunziza – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek procedural guidance on how we are going to proceed with news from the Iranian television. A copy of the recording is not availed to us to verify the report and more so that the honourable member, a member of the rules committee, is on record saying that he put it to the Prime Minister who said he did not know. Was that not a denial or not? 

Mr Speaker, are we proceeding well in this regard that we are getting – I have not been to Iran myself; the Member is not disclosing whether he was in Iran or he watched or he has a copy - are we proceeding well? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is important that we take this House seriously. I am careful when I am sitting here because the Hansard readers in future will say that Jacob Oulanyah was presiding when these kinds of statements were made and he allowed them to go on. They will not look at me properly and my children may refuse to take my name in future. (Laughter)

So, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, there are places where you do things. There are places like the National Theatre and others –(Laughter)– where you play things. But when it comes to procedure of the House, please respect it. Now how are you quoting for us the Iranian television? Really? I do not even know what channel shows Iranian television.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I want from you hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, and I am going to request for it strictly, for you to give us information that there are Ugandan troops deployed in Burundi. Put it on the record.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. We are in a digital world and any information published anywhere in the world is vital internationally and unless one has information to disown it, one cannot stop the flow of information. 

In line with that –(Laughter)– what the television quoted is that 200 Ugandan troops dressed in Burundian military uniform are in Bujumbura protecting President Nkurunziza.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to mislead this House by saying that when you are in the digital world, whatever is produced in the media is taken to be true yet he knows that there are people who misuse the digital world he is quoting for their personal gains. When you challenged him to produce the facts he is quoting to take the media to be true, is he in order to continue moving in circles without giving something of substance to this House and therefore ending up wasting the precious time of this august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi if you have proper information, this House would be interested in having you lay it before the Table and we will ask the necessary people to handle it properly. But, you are not proceeding well please.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the guidance. I think as the Whip of the Opposition, I would want to request you that we go back and we package the information which our shadow minister has before we can come to the House and lay the facts on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That comes from states people.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I entirely agree with what hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable member, you might have to consider withdrawing the letter you sent to the Deputy Speaker because the tone of that letter did not go very well.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have Bilal Moslem Day and Boarding Nursery and Primary School represented by hon. Otada Sam and hon. Kahunde Hellen MP Kiryadongo District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have St Agnes Catholic Girls Boarding School Nagalama represented by hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko Robert and hon. Kusaasira Peace. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

In the public gallery also we have Sure Start Project under Mifumi they are here to observe the proceedings please join me in welcoming them. We also have Kooki Farmers Association represented by hon. Mandela Amos and hon. Mutagamba Maria. Please join me in welcoming them. You are all welcome. (Applause) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON MALARIA OUTBREAK IN NORTHERN UGANDA

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the past few weeks, honourable members raised questions to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister on the upsurge of Malaria in Northern Uganda, and also the other day the question was raised and I did promise to bring a statement to the House to give a detailed explanation about what is going on in Northern Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for according us the time to make this statement.

The Ministry of Health with support from the United States Agency for International Development and the President’s Malaria Initiative started conducting Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) in 2009 in 10 selected districts of Northern Uganda due to the high burden of Malaria in those districts. Those districts are: Apac, Kole, Gulu, Amuru, Nwoya, Pader, Agago, Kitgum, Oyam and Lamwo.

In September 2014, the indoor residual spraying was transitioned out of these districts to other 14 high burden districts in Lango and Eastern Region of Uganda. These are: Alebtong, Amolatar, Dokolo, Lira, Otuke, Kaberamaido, Serere, Tororo, Pallisa, Kibuku, Budaka, Butaleja, Namutumba and Bugiri. This decision was based on the evidence from the centennial sites and routine Ministry of Health monitoring data that is captured in the Health Management Information System, which showed that indoor residual spraying in the former 10 districts had achieved the desired objectives of markedly reducing the mosquito vector population and Malaria parasite prevalence as well as the disease burden in those 10 districts.

Starting April this year, there has been a gradual increase in Malaria cases in the whole country but most especially in the former 10 IRS districts above and this increase was above the seasonal increase which was expected after the rainy season compared to what has been happening the previous years. This increase in Malaria cases was observed from the health management information system, which is a national data base of aggregated data from all the health facilities in the country.

There is an increase in both admissions and outpatients Malaria cases in those districts and the most affected districts are: Kitgum, Gulu, Amuru and Lamwo.

The statement, which is on our ipads, outlines the districts and the outpatient cases which we have recorded this April in those districts and the inpatient cases as well as the deaths that have been registered. With your permission, I could read the detailed figures for the record:

    a) In Agago District, we have registered 3,656 outpatient cases of Malaria and 1,783 cases of inpatient malaria cases and registered 11 deaths in that period.
    b) In Amuru District the outpatient cases have been 38,405, the inpatient have been 2,249 cases and we have registered four deaths.
    c) In Apac District the outpatient cases have been 44,363 and those admitted 3,278 with 13 deaths.
    d) In Gulu District we have recorded 76,904 outpatient cases of Malaria and 2,713 cases were admitted and 41 deaths have been recorded.
    e) In Kitgum District the outpatient cases of Malaria recorded are 34,355 and the inpatient are 5,382 and 22 deaths have been recorded over the period this April.
    f) In Kole District the outpatient cases have been 1,818, the inpatient cases 661 and no death has been registered in Kole.
    g) In Lamwo District the outpatient cases are 33,467 with 2,097 patients admitted and seven deaths have been registered.
    h) In Oyam District, the outpatient cases have been 31,706 with 2,119 cases admitted as inpatients and 26 deaths recorded.
    i) In Nwoya District, 18,828 cases as outpatients, 1,146 admissions and 12 deaths have been registered.
    j) Lastly in Pader District, 25,340 cases have been registered as outpatients, 1,444 as inpatients and four deaths have been registered.

The above gives us a total of 352,077 cases registered as outpatients for Malaria and 22,872 as admitted cases for Malaria and 140 deaths.

These are statistics from our health facilities. But I have also been informed that our health facilities have gathered that an additional 25 people have died in the communities, giving us a total of 155 but what is recorded here are the health facilities-based deaths in the various districts.

Mr Speaker, the reasons for this outbreak is that the five years of indoor residual spraying in these districts successfully lowered the Malaria burden by killing mosquitoes. However, this success also resulted into loss of immunity in the population against Malaria because people were no longer bitten by infective mosquitoes. Usually, immunity is built by an offending organism entering your body and it elicits a response through production of antibodies to give that immunity. Once the IRS was successful, it meant the mosquitoes were not biting the population and the immunity went down. This is a scientific phenomenon which is known everywhere where IRS is done. The only difference is that this time the upsurge is too big beyond what we expected as usually happens. 

The cessation of the Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) led to proliferation of the Malaria vectors and increased infectious bites in a population with reduced immunity to Malaria.
 
Secondly, over time, the population became a little bit complacent and relaxed about the dangers of the disease. This is usually a challenge that when you have reduced cases, people think probably the disease is no more like it has happened in HIV/AIDS when ARVs became available, people think the disease is no longer a big challenge. There was an element of complacency. 

The third reason is low utilisation and misuse of the long lasting insecticide-treated nets and other Malaria prevention methods. As honourable members recall, we did distribute mosquito nets for all communities in this country but we still receive report in all parts of the country including the North that a number of our people misuse these insecticide-treated nets. Some use them to tether goats, others for roofing, poultry farming etcetera. These are reports we receive from different parts of the country and we want to call for your support, as honourable members; we must continue to educate our public on the proper use of the mosquito nets.

We also think health education was probably inadequate and behaviour change communication has been slow. These are some of the factors we believe are responsible for this upsurge of Malaria. 

The coming of the rainy seasons acted as a perfect breeding environment for the Malaria transmitting mosquitoes, which found an already vulnerable population, low stocks of antimalarials and poor epidemic detection ability by the district’s health system. All these factors we believe have contributed to the current outbreak of Malaria in Northern Uganda.

What has been our response as Government and Ministry of Health?

Since the onset of the outbreak, there have been a number of activities by the Ministry of Health and other partners to support the districts to investigate and respond to the Malaria outbreak. The Ministry of Health, through the National Task Force (NTF), activated the Public Health Emergency Operations Centre (PHEOC) to coordinate the response to this outbreak under an appointed Incident Management Team (IMT).

The National Task Force meets regularly to receive updates and give strategic guidance to the response with the focus on the epidemic prone area of Northern Uganda.

The Ministry, working closely with partners, has developed a national response plan to address the outbreak –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, a very sad story concerning the death of our people in Northern Uganda is being told to us through a statement by the minister. However, I have continued to see hon. Nyombi Thembo and the Minister for Ethics, and hon. Rukutana, laughing. Surely is it in order for members of the front bench to continue smiling and laughing when we are talking about deaths of Ugandans in front of those children who are watching you from up there? Are they in order? Instead of crying, the Minister of Ethics is here –(Laughter)– smiling and laughing as if a good story is being told to this Parliament. Are they in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have two sets of rules when it comes to conduct in the House. We have rules governing members speaking and also rules governing members not speaking. There is certain conduct you must observe and it has come to the attention of the Speaker that there has been some laxity in following that particular rule.

Honourable members, when the television is relayed and a matter of this nature is being raised and you are seen laughing, you do not look very good to people especially when you are a minister it even looks worse. (Laughter) 

When a serious matter of death afflicting the people of Uganda is being raised on the Floor and you have your teeth out celebrating whatever is amusing you, it does not make a lot of sense. Therefore, Members, let us observe those rules and give courtesy to this House. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health, working closely with partners has developed a national response plan to address the outbreak of Malaria in Northern Uganda. 

The objectives of this response plan are:

    i. To rapidly bring down the numbers of Malaria cases to the pre-outbreak levels.
    ii. To effectively manage Malaria cases so as to limit the impact on the population.
    iii. To put in place an effective exit plan so as to safely wean these districts off the indoor residual spraying.
 
The Ministry of Health is undertaking the following measures to contain the epidemic:

Rapid outbreak investigation and support teams were immediately dispatched to the affected districts to investigate the outbreak and support the district taskforces. These teams have supported the districts to re-activate the district task forces and develop district specific epidemic response plans, because we had first of all to establish that this was Malaria and not any other condition causing fever and this has been established that it is Malaria.

The Ministry of Health has deployed four multidisciplinary teams composed of epidemiologists, clinicians, entomologists, data managers and laboratory technicians to provide technical support to the 10 districts. These teams have been given clear terms of reference.

Thirdly, in order to ensure effective treatment of cases, anti-malarial medicines including second line anti-malarial drugs and medicines for severe Malaria and other supplies including the laboratory reagents have been delivered to all the districts of Northern Uganda. Those are the additional supplies to complement the ordinary supply, which the districts received.

The districts have been requested to monitor the use of these medicines and make immediate emergency orders in case of depletion of stocks –(Interjection)– I beg that you listen and raise the issue after. The health workers in these districts have also been oriented in the management of both uncomplicated and severe Malaria. Therefore, we have delivered sufficient doses of anti-malarials and laboratory reagents to ensure that everybody is handled.

The Ministry of Health is also working with the National Blood Bank to mobilise enough blood from other regions to cater for the management of increased requirements due to the increase in the number of cases of severe anaemia in Northern Uganda. As you know, Malaria causes anaemia. Gulu Regional Blood Bank is currently being stocked with enough units of blood to ensure that those who require transfusion can be given the service in a timely manner.

We have also started presumptive treatment of all the cases that present and actually are found with fever. This has already started in Gulu and Lango. This means that our teams move in communities and whoever is found to have fever is given a dose of anti-malarial treatment. This is an appropriate measure approved by the World Health Organisation and is known to reduce parasitemia in a community that is heavily affected by Malaria. 

This is different from mass drug treatment where you treat everybody. There is no technical evidence to show that if you just apply treatment to everybody in the case of Malaria that you will achieve results. You may receive short-term reduced parasitemia in the population but in the medium and long-term, there is an upsurge. Therefore, WHO does not recommend mass drug administration but treating all those with fever has been known to be a cost-effective measure that can bring down the epidemic. 

Indeed, the records we have show that in the last two to three weeks, there has been a remarkable decline in the cases of Malaria in the 10 districts. We are going to expand and ensure that all the affected districts are given presumptive treatment of fever using anti-malarials which we have, especially Coartem.

Plans are also underway to re-activate the community-based treatment of Malaria by Village Health Teams and Integrated Community Case Management of Malaria, especially among the children in those affected districts. 

The Ministry of Health is discussing with partners the feasibility of conducting at least two rounds of indoor residual spraying in those districts in order to quickly cut down vector density and Malaria transmission. We actually require about Shs 24 billion to carry out two rounds of indoor residual spraying in those 10 districts. We are engaging with the Ministry of Finance to see how we can mobilise the resources to undertake that intervention.

There is continuing and intensified surveillance from the Ministry of Health Epidemiology Surveillance Division and the District Health Services to monitor the epidemic. All the health units in the affected districts report on a daily basis to the Ministry of Health so that we can monitor properly the burden in those districts.

The last one is about health promotion, behaviour change, communication and sensitisation. We are giving out health messages, which are being run on various radios in Northern Uganda in collaboration and partnership with various partners who have programmes in the region.

Challenges

Some of the challenges which we face, Mr Speaker, include limited funding to address this outbreak. At the Ministry of Health, we have the capacity to ensure that every Ugandan is healthy all the time but we have a limitation of resources. We would like to call upon Parliament to support us. Like I said, we need Shs 24 billion, immediately, to carry out two rounds of indoor residual spraying in those districts in order to completely bring down the parasitemia. “Parasitemia” means the amount of parasite in the blood of the population.

The other challenge that we would like to report to Parliament is that we still have poor health-seeking behaviour in our communities. I am sure all of us represent our people. The health seeking behaviour remains poor and we need to work hard to make sure that our people can be responsive. 

We have also increased blood transfusion requirement because of the effects of severe Malaria, causing anaemia. The main cause of the deaths I have reported about is the late health-seeking behaviour and the severe anaemia that has been diagnosed in these cases. Therefore, we would like to call upon the honourable members of Parliament that we need to mobilise our people. They should not remain in their homes once they start feeling feverish or when they get any symptoms; they need to rush to the nearest health facility because the facilities are able to give support and treatment to all those who –(Interjection)- report to the facilities -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister finish then you raise your issue.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, once again I would like to say that it is our duty as political leaders to remind our communities to always heed to the health advice given by the professionals and take the recommended interventions against Malaria such as sleeping under insecticide treated mosquito nets every night, and also to stop misusing these nets. As I reported earlier on, we still get reports from communities of those who do not use the mosquito nets. 

We should also get rid of all mosquito breeding areas around our homes and go early for treatment in the health facility and avoid self-medication because it results in resistance to the drugs that we use to treat Malaria and other illness. 

The Government calls upon the public, especially those in the affected districts, to stay calm as all possible measures are being undertaken to contain the outbreak.

Like I said, in the last two to three weeks, we have seen an appreciable decline in both the prevalence and incidence rates of Malaria in the districts. It is my plea that all of us should empower our people to protect themselves and their family members from unnecessary ill-health and death due to this Malaria upsurge. 

Malaria can be prevented and we call upon everybody that we work together to ensure that we pass on the right messages to our people. We shall continue to do our part as Ministry of Health to ensure that we contain this epidemic in Northern Uganda. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as per the rules, this can require some quick responses. How long do we want to make our contributions? Two minutes? Let us use two minutes. I will start with the Chairperson of the Health Committee.

3.15
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Health for giving us this comprehensive report.
Mr Speaker, I am a clinician of internal medicine. Recently, I said that the remedies for curbing Malaria in Northern Uganda are three:
    1. We have to spray and destroy the breeding sites.
    2. We must treat. 
    3. We must give insecticide-treated mosquito nets.

However, there is research showing that most children under the age of 15 years are carrying Malaria. These are mostly school-going children. 

I have evaluated the amount of money which has been spent in Northern Uganda as far as deaths are concerned. I was valuing each death and burial to cost Shs 4 million x 140 people; it means Shs 66 million is needed to bury these people. From the money used for treating these people, I put a dose of Coartem at Shs 15,000 plus a mosquito net and when I totalled it, I found that surely had we done this, we would have spent only Shs 20 million.

In other words, Mr Speaker, preventing Malaria in Northern Uganda is less costly than treating sick people and burying the dead ones. 

Mr Minister, maybe what you never told us is how much money the team you have dispatched to Northern Uganda went with. It is because they must sleep in hotels, take wine and do everything. They are going to consume more than Shs 300 million to treat these people here!

The whole issue is the non-functional District Health Offices (DHOs) and we have got 112 districts and they have 122 DHOs. Every DHO must be having a Community Health Officer who is supposed to teach people how to use these things. Giving these people things is very cheap but the Ministry of Health has very many cars which consume fuel. Most of the money that we give to the Ministry of Health is consumed at the centre here. In fact, these fellows are –(Member timed out_) 

3.18
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this House, I raised a matter of national importance on the manner in which the mosquito nets were being distributed. They eliminated the Village Health Teams and the DHOs and were instead using the UPDF. I raised it in this House because my district officers had complained. When I raised it in this House, the State Minister for Health said they know what they are doing.

The complaint was that they were not sensitising people on how to use the mosquito nets. We are now looking at the total outcome of neglecting the Village Health Teams and the district officers in the distribution of those nets. Having said that, Mr Speaker, and now that there are some lessons to draw, let me hope we shall not have others to learn from NAADS.

When the minister was speaking - of course, death is a very touching matter but I know he is good-intentioned - he kept on saying “only” 140 persons died; as far as I am concerned, death is death, honourable colleagues! Therefore, I want the minister to clarify what was the spirit. It may be that as far as Government is concerned, there were a big number of people admitted about 22,000 but they only lost 140. It may not be too big a number to worry you yet in my opinion, even death of one person is actually very important. 

I appreciate the effort which the ministry has been putting but I would like to understand the context under which you are saying it. I know you are a very good person but I do not know under which context you are making it. Thank you.

3.20
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health upon making that statement, which concerns the increased incidences of Malaria.

It is common knowledge - at least in military strategy - that when you tackle an enemy in one area, that enemy will most likely flee to the neighbouring place. Therefore, as the mosquitoes are being sprayed in Northern Uganda, they have now sought refuge in Busoga in my district. (Laughter)

I therefore would like to request the Minister of Health that as he plans interventions to stem the incidences of Malaria in Northern Uganda, let Buyende be one other area where these interventions must be embraced. I thank you.

3.21
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From the minister’s report and the likely reasons for the outbreak, there is a point where he says that after spraying, people forgot about the dangers of Malaria and they became complacent and this has left them vulnerable.

I am putting it back to the minister because when planning for the country - you are a scientist; you know the likely effects of every intervention. Why should the ministry keep the country complacent when they know very well the danger has not been effectively gotten rid of? How are we going to trust you, as our scientists, if you leave us in such a state? One hundred and forty (140) deaths is a very big number! Some of us have only managed to sneak to Parliament by 80, two or 20 votes but imagine 140 people dead! These are serious voters and taxpayers and we need to condemn seeing Ugandans dying of a preventive death.

I am going for blood donation tomorrow in Fort Portal but we need to encourage every leader to see how much effort we can contribute to enable our people access these services. We have Cancer which is a very big killer in the country. It is even spreading in our areas and we do not know. If you go to the referral hospitals in these regions, there are no facilities to check cancer patients.

Mr Speaker, the crisis in these referral hospitals is pathetic. Rwenzori Region has over three million people but if you go to the referral hospital, you can fail to access even the basic services. I think the ministry needs to take this seriously. I know the minister is new and fresh and he has been a backbencher like us. We need that zeal in you to see how you can create reforms in the Ministry of Health.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The contributions are two minutes and I will now take hon. Baba Diri.

3.24
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving this report. 

Mr Speaker, I am sorry about the deaths and I wish to express my condolences and sympathy. I wish all those who are sick a quick recovery.

I blame the Ministry of Health for this epidemic. I have been in this House for a while. When the Ministry of Health was going to do the indoor residual spraying, there was resistance in this House. We said this indoor residual spraying could cause side effects and it could not help but the minister convinced us that Malaria has been eradicated from the developed countries through indoor spraying. That is why they sprayed Northern Uganda. To me, it seems Northern Uganda has been used as a guinea pig for experiment. For sure, if you knew that indoor residual spraying would be the measure to eradicate Malaria, why didn’t you spray regularly so that you get rid of the mosquitoes? Why did you allow the mosquitoes to breed so much to cause epidemic?

Therefore, you did not plan well the Indoor Residual Spraying. Tell us how you are going to do it. Otherwise we, the people of Northern Uganda, should not be used for experiment to make us die like flies as we have been dying before. Before you start any experiment, you must verify and make sure that it will not cause havoc. Our people are dying because of your carelessness of introducing the indoor residual spraying without any proper planning.

Please work hard to ensure that we eradicate this malaria. We were used to malaria in the sense that it attacks you but you recover. However, when you brought indoor spraying, we forgot about it and that is why people have died –(Member timed out.)

3.26
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Member who raised this issue. The high spread of malaria is not only in those mentioned districts. Adjumani is one of them. 

When I interacted with the community in Adjumani, the biggest challenge we have now is that people have developed resistance to the available drugs. I had two dependents that were treated but after every three weeks, they would still fall sick and get admitted. The ministry should therefore tell us about the different types of drugs, their effectiveness and when to use them. 

Take, for instance, areas along water bodies. Although we may have mosquito nets, when it comes to the dry season, one cannot enter their house very early because of the heat. People enter their houses late and the mosquitoes find them before they enter their nets. Therefore, I feel that indoor spraying should be spread to all parts of this country. 

Lastly, the minister did not tell us the amount of money that they have already spent. In his first statement, he had indicated how, earlier on, they had support from other agencies. Are we also getting support from other agencies in this intervention? How much have they contributed? How much are they promising? Thank you for this opportunity, Mr Speaker.  

3.29
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) was tried in the North, there was a campaign against it by the pharmaceutical companies. However, the ministry moved ahead. 

Let me speak for Tororo County. My own house in the village has had IRS done twice. The last one was done about 40 days ago and I was there. When this spraying is done, you can hardly enter your house. I went there thinking there were no mosquitoes but I could not sleep. I consulted the Director of Health Services and was told that IRS only kills the female anopheles mosquito that causes malaria. Still, you get the bite and the discomfort. 

Mr Speaker, it was not until I lowered the net and ordered for insecticides that things became better. The honourable minister is trying to tell us that the method has been effective and that immunity went down but the chemicals you are using in IRS are very ineffective. They work for only one week and after that, you find mosquitoes in the house. 

If I, a Member of Parliament gets that kind of situation - I think the pharmaceutical companies do not want this thing. They say that it brings immunity and it should be abolished. However, we need to test the chemicals that we use and also train the people using them. 

In fact, Mr Speaker, I have told my mother that I do not want anybody to enter my house. I can hire experts, like the way I used to do, to spray my house. This is because I used to have my house free of mosquitoes for one or two years. I really want to tell you, honourable minister that the chemical you are using is very ineffective and useless. 

3.31
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. I also wanted to quote one of his points, which stated, “Presumptive treatment of all those with fever has now started in the districts of Gulu and Lamwo.” He also said that, “It does not require one to be tested first to be treated.” 

Mr Speaker, I agree with those who say that the chemicals that are used are ineffective. I think it is important for the ministry to give us the best options that are likely to work. This is better than marketing a product that is not bearing results. 

With the migration that somebody was referring to - If the migration is towards Busoga, Busoga should not get excited. This is because results have not yet been seen in the North. What do you want to see in Busoga? 

I would like to call upon the Ministry of Health to educate me on why Chloroquine, which was the most effective first line treatment for malaria, was disowned. I have known cases of children who are now gaining resistance to malaria because of the new types of drugs such as Artemisinin. What is that went wrong that caused malaria to be disowned? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.32
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will realise that Gulu is worse off than any other district. The minister should tell us about village health teams because I have been in the village a number of times and the people there are complaining of facilitation. If we could treat our village health teams better, they would be able to reach out and help the people. 

Occasionally, I pray deep in the villages and I remember two of the villages I went to pray in such as Bobi and Oduku. There were some children with very high fevers. The saved people believe in putting their hands on the sick and they get healed. However, I insisted that they should take those children to get malaria treatment. 

Therefore, we need a lot of sensitisation. If we can also reach out to the small churches, they would play a crucial role. This is because it is important to help our people. 

In Gulu, the situation is still bad. We cannot only advocate for spraying but also that village health teams should reach out to every part of those deep villages. These people who are deployed from here may not be able to reach those villages. I would like to thank you. 

3.34
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the response and condolences to the families, which have lost their dear ones. Malaria is indeed one of the greatest- (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Earlier on, you made a very wise ruling to the effect that the way we conduct ourselves in the House matters a lot, whether one is speaking on the microphone or not. 

Mr Speaker, the Leader of Government Business is sleeping. We are talking about a very serious matter where about 140 Ugandans died in a very serious epidemic. Is the Leader of Government Business in order to sleep while we are debating a very serious matter?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are very weighty matters. The Prime Minister was in deep contemplation. (Laughter) I have never seen a human being in deep contemplation with the eyes open. Please, let us proceed. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to add my voice to the issue of village health teams. My district was one of the areas, which had a big number of malaria patients at one time. However, we had the Malaria Consortium Project, which assisted the village health teams and we registered very positive results with declined numbers of malaria victims. Since the project closed, the ministry promised to take over. The health teams are always demanding for drugs because they no longer receive them.

This was of great assistance especially to remote areas. For example in my district, we have over seven sub-counties without health centres III. Therefore, the case to do with village health teams as a first instance of treatment was very important.

I would like to know from the Ministry of Health how far you pushed the issue of village health teams. They gave them ram shackled bicycles without spare parts and now, there are no drugs – (Member timed out.)

3.38
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for having come out with a report in time. I think he is doing well compared to other ministers’ ability to work on their reports. He really came out and brought the report on time and I would like to thank him.

Mr Speaker, last week I had a bacterial infection. When I went for a check-up, they prescribed for me the drugs to take. When I went to the pharmacy, the drug they gave me was expired. I asked myself, suppose it was someone who did not know how to read and he or she was given this expired drug, what would happen to him? 

Therefore, I would like to know the extent to which the Ministry of Health is coming out to check and make sure that drugs sold in pharmacies countrywide, are not expired. 

Secondly, we know that we have achieved peace through the barrel of the gun and that we no longer hear gunshots and bombs from rebels, although we still have the so-called terrorists who come around. However, Ugandans cannot be peaceful when they are sick. To what extent is the Ministry of Health coming up to fight brucella, malaria, typhoid and hepatitis so that we know that there is an improvement in health? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what do you think? It should be time for the minster to make some responses and then we see how to move forward. Honourable minister.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank honourable members for the contributions and questions raised. I will just quickly and briefly respond to the issues raised.

Hon. Bitekyerezo, who chairs the Health Committee, made wide ranging allegations that a big proportion of the money that we pass, as a Parliament, is spent at the headquarters of the Ministry of Health. To the contrary, that is not true. Actually, a big bulk of the money that we pass – 

Actually, the committee has the powers to guide the ministry but the information I have is that the biggest proportion of the money we pass goes to the National Medical Stores directly to procure drugs and other essential pharmaceutical supplies and also to the District Health Services.

The money that remains at the headquarters is mainly for salaries and also procurement meant for the local governments because sometimes we do bulk procurement for all the district; local governments. Therefore, it is not true that the Ministry of Health headquarters consumes the largest part of the budget of the ministry. 

It is also not true that we have redundant vehicles at the ministry. Sometimes, what you see at the Ministry of Health are old vehicles that we get from the countryside and then we dispose them off as a ministry. I just wanted to clarify on that issue raised by honourable –(Interruption) Just hold on a bit. The other –(Interruption)

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, honourable minister. The information that I would like to give you is- I hope you are also aware that we are also supplementing your budget as Members of Parliament by sending money through Mobile Money services to patients. For example, today I spent over Shs 2 million on the same disease; malaria in Kween. In fact you should congratulate the Members of Parliament for supplementing your budget. (Laughter) 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. If I had time, I would discuss with you what kind of malaria can be treated with Shs 2 million. However, we appreciate the support that Members of Parliament give because I also know that Members of Parliament have been procuring ambulances and supporting service delivery on the ground.

Hon. Bitekyerezo commented that the district health offices are non-functional. I would like to add that district health services are directly supervised by the Ministry of Local Government. However, we work closely with the Ministry of Local Government to ensure that the services and facilities are functional – (Interruption)– Just hold on and I finish my sentence.

Yes, there could be challenges in regard to delivery of services but it is not true that health offices in the districts and lower levels are not functioning. They are functioning and they are in charge of supervision of health service delivery in the decentralised Government. I will take the information.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give the honourable minister is that according to the Local Government Policy Statement 2014/2015, of the 111 districts in Uganda, 64 of them do not have district medical officers. When it comes to the issue of public health assistants, the situation is worse. That is the information I wanted to give.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Nambooze. That is true and we have that information. However like I said, the decentralised services, including health services, are directly supervised by the Ministry of Local Government. For example, the district health officers are recruited by the District Service Commission but we give them support when they invite us to do so. We are also working with the ministry to ensure that all the vacant positions are filled.

We are also embarking on a restructuring exercise for both the central level ministry and also the lower level governments as far as health is concerned. We are going to ensure that we have enough manpower, both at the Centre but also in the local governments.

Hon. Mwiru raised the issue of UPDF being involved in the distribution of nets. I do not find that a problem because what we want is for the nets to reach the families. However, I do not think that was the policy because I participated in the exercise in Kanungu and I did not see the UPDF. It could have been possible that in your area, especially where there are barracks and other units, the UPDF could have participated but it was not a policy that in the whole country, the UPDF had to distribute the nets. What was important, in any case, was to ensure that the nets were delivered in our communities and to the families.

In addition, the delivery is accompanied by the health education and community mobilisation, which is done by health workers and other officials in the districts. 

I am sorry if I created an impression that the deaths were few. That was not my intention because you were saying that I used the word “only”; even one death is extremely important for us to note because these are human beings; behind these statistics and figures are people. Therefore, even the death of one person is tragic enough and it is not the intention of the Ministry of Health to say that the deaths are few. Even one person is a big problem to us.

It is true that mosquitoes migrate and a mosquito can fly as far as one kilometre. If they have now gone to Busoga – I heard the honourable member whispering that they have also gone to Sebei. 

Our intention, as a ministry, is to address malaria in all parts of the country and to apply a multi-pronged strategy of first of all treating all those who present and are diagnosed with malaria and providing insecticide treated nets like we did and that measure covered the whole country. The third approach is that of indoor residual praying. If resources were available, we would spray the whole country.

We are now carrying out some studies – [Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi: “Clarification”] – I thought I am very clear.

MR KEN- LUKYAMUZI: Thank you for giving way. You know how environmentally active I am. Therefore, I would like to seek some clarification. Are you aware, Mr Minister, that USAID donated medicament, which included a variety of material medicament and mosquito nets? Are you aware that among the most sensitive groups of those that are affected by malaria are pregnant women and children below five years? What quantification, in terms of efficacy, did you reach to gauge that what we required was the spraying of residual medicament other than the alternative? Are you serious? You are talking about DDT when DDT was outlawed. Be serious, Mr Minister. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Concerning indoor residual spraying, it is true that the exercise was effective when it was being done, even in my district of Amuru. 

From your presentation, you were not very clear. You made mention that you were thinking of two more rounds of spraying. However, you went ahead and said that there are financial constraints. Therefore, you were not very clear on what will happen in case you fail to get the resources. This is a matter of national urgency and it should be handled urgently since we have over 100,000 people affected with malaria.

Secondly, I would like to find out the interventions you have in place to test school going children. When I was visiting one of the schools in my area, I found more than 10 children lying under a tree because they were sick of malaria. Many of our medical personnel wait until a child is brought to the healthy centre. Do you have any plan to test malaria right from institutions like schools so that if possible, patients can be treated before they are taken to the medical centres? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to wind up. There is a lot of business.

MR LUBOGO: I am seeking a small clarification, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister. I would like you to state it clearly to this nation how effective the use of mosquito nets is, as far as the control of malaria is concerned other than simply promoting convenient sleeping. This is because mosquitoes do not wait for somebody to go to bed before they bite that person. Therefore, have you found mosquito nets to be an effective way of controlling malaria?

Secondly, you have talked about the practice of some of our communities who do not respond to calls to go for treatment. Are you aware that most of these health centres do not have drugs? As I speak, almost all the health centres III in Kaliro District have no drugs. People cannot continue going to health centres where they are diagnosed and told to go and buy drugs. They do not have the money. They either go, get diagnosed and get treatment or they do not go at all. What are you doing about the lack of drugs in these health centres? Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The Speaker has guided that I have a little time so - (Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, honourable minister. The clarification that I am seeking from you is on the statistics because they are not disaggregated by age. My question concerns those who are dying. Are they pregnant women or children under five years? This is because when mosquito nets were being distributed, this was the target group. Has it been effective or not? How do we know that the many deaths we are looking at here are the under-five years or pregnant women? Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. Starting with what hon. Nyakikongoro has raised, yes, it was an omission that I did not go into the details but definitely, from an epidemiological point of view, you will find children and women bear the biggest burden when it comes to malaria. Therefore, if you disaggregate data, most likely we shall find children and women constituting the bigger proportion of those affected by malaria. I apologise that I did not give those details but we can provide that information to you, honourable members.

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raises issues of indoor residual spraying. I do not want to turn this afternoon into a lecture on malaria and how it is managed but there is incontrovertible scientific evidence to show that indoor residual spraying is highly effective in containing malaria. There are various chemicals that we use including Carbamates, which we are currently using, Organochlorines like DDT, which you are taking about,  organophosphates, Pyrethroids and many others. All these –(Interruption)

MR KEN- LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order pursuant to Article 39 of the Constitution of Uganda which says, “Every Ugandan has a right to a healthy environment.” Aware of that content of a constitutional nature and knowing very well that you have started spraying people’s houses, what assurance can we have from you that you are using the right dosage in terms of toxicity? Do you have the moral authority to subject us to toxicity, in general terms, without specification? What are you talking about? (Laughter) Are you in order to talk in open ignorance of Article 39 of the Constitution?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I am here as the Minister of Health and I think this is a serious matter. Let us not reduce it to a debate of water is better than fire and so forth. Let us treat this as a serious matter. Indoor residual – (Laughter)

MR KEN- LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the Constitution of Uganda is very clear. Under Article 2 of the Constitution, the Constitution of Uganda is supreme and binds any organ of state, including hon. Baryomunsi. After quoting the contents of Article 39 related to the health of man and woman, is the honourable member in order to assume that my quotation and reference to the Constitution was reduced to a debate of that magnitude? Is he in order to ignore the constitutional content and should he continue to be minister under that cover?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is a law student and he is very conversant with the provision of the Constitution, particularly Article 39, and I think a lot of his knowledge is in that area - (Laughter)

However, Dr Baryomunsi is a medical doctor to whom issues of the Constitution might look like water or fire - (Laughter). He might have difficulties distinguishing them. Dr Baryomunsi, the member for Rubaga South is talking about constitution matters, please proceed.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker for the wise ruling. The point I was making is that Indoor Residual Spraying is a tested measure in the prevention and control of Malaria.

We do not have time to go into details of the science of the various chemicals, but the chemicals used are-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you do not have time to continue.

DR BARYOMUNSI: As I conclude, it is not true that Northern Uganda was targeted for indoor residual spraying. The reason as to why the spraying was first done in Northern Uganda was because of the endemicity patterns of Malaria. We know for instance that in the whole world, Apac District registers an area where you get the biggest number of effective mosquito bites per unit time in the world. It was because of the epidemiological character of the disease that Northern Uganda was sprayed first. But I did say –(Interruption)– I do not have time, okay let me first finish my point.

However, I did say last time that before Northern Uganda was undertaken, the ministry of Health carried out Indoor Residual Spraying in Kigezi, notably Kabale, Kanungu and Rukungiri. That was part of the measure to give confidence to Ugandans that indoor residual spraying is safe. The only point I would like to add is that, these chemicals usually last for a period of time; six months or one year in the case of DDT, that is when you do another round.

The challenge in this case was the exit plan which was prepared by the ministry, which we are now trying to correct, so that as you exit from IRS, you put proper measures to ensure that you address those challenges of immunity and expected upsurge Malaria but, indoor residual spraying is a tested measure, in the control of Malaria and we shall continue using it.

3.59
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and members. I have been listening in to the responses of the minister. However, there is a matter that seems to have eluded your response.

What is at stake is that there are already reported 140 fatalities and as we are debating in this Parliament, as a strategy to combat Malaria, Government convinced this House about the efficacy of indoor residual spraying.

What we expected as Parliament is- what remedial measures, urgent in nature because 140 is a big number- and you can see the concern across the political divide - 165 fatalities is too much a number for you to handle in a normal way. 

Can the minister stop glossing over this matter and taking it as if it is normal? Address us on the immediate steps being taken by your ministry to reign in on these deaths, because they are worrying. When go out there, what shall we tell the public? That we listened for two hours and ended without a clear and robust response? Mr Speaker, we await such a response from the minister rather than the way the statement is reading.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, it is only English language which is used to communicate in this House and my statement is written in English.

I have outlined the measures that we have undertaken as Government to contain the epidemic including increase in the supplies of anti-malarials and reagents; increasing starting the presumptive treatment of fever in the communities. The statement has a full range of measures which I read. I thought hon. Ssekikubo was following, unless he has any measures which he thinks technically –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I raised this in good faith, because there was a very strong debate on this Floor, and we chose Northern Uganda and I think in good spirit.

However, now having raised the stakes, mosquitoes and Malaria has come back with vengeance and the people are vulnerable. We are saying, even if it invokes an emergency intervention by way of funds and facilities, we needed it –  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No it is a point of procedure

MR SSEKIKUBO: To that extent, Mr Speaker, let the minister inform this House that we shall need this amount of resources and he comes to this House; we are ready even if it is a supplementary or an emergency intervention.

However, we exposed the people of Northern Uganda to Indoor Residual Spraying now Malaria has hit back, the minister is helpless; he is reading a statement as if it is a casual policy statement, yet we needed robust and clear responses on this.

Honourable minister, to assure you, I was listening carefully; you did not address the core concern of this House, the emergency steps you are taking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please allay the concern of the members.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable members for the concern. I thought I did demonstrate that the Ministry of Health is in charge and is containing the epidemic.

I did say that because of the interventions that we have undertaken in the recent past, the trends show that the epidemic is coming down.

The immediate challenge which I paused was that we need Shs 24 billion immediately, which we are discussing with the Ministry of Finance. If it requires coming to Parliament, we shall definitely come for the support –(Interruption) 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I am incensed by our former friend who used to be pro-people, now he is pro-caucuses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a rule against imputation of improper motive, please observe the rule.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I withdraw that other word, but the point of order I would like to raise is; is the honourable minister in order to tell us so many other things which failed before we introduced this new measure of spraying?

Now the spraying is not working, we are asking him, what is the unique intervention that you are providing to at least help the situation? And he continues to gloss over bombastic words, medical terms; we are not interested in that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a point of order?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issue is that there needs to be some clarity on the interventions you are making right now.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I actually did restrain myself from using difficult medical terminologies. However, I did say that we have sent a team of specialists to support the district health services, which they are doing. We have increased the supplies of anti-malarials, laboratory reagents and other pharmaceutical supplies required to contain the epidemic. 

We have started on the training and retraining of village health teams. We are introducing community distribution of anti-malarials especially to children. However, we have also already embarked on the presumptive treatment of fever, which is a known strategy that can contain an epidemic, plus community education through radio and mass sensitisation of the people in northern Uganda. 

Due to this robust intervention by the Government, we are already seeing a decline in the trend of the infection rates of malaria. That is the point I made. I would like to emphasise that the Ministry of Health is in control. It is not necessary at the moment to declare the area an emergency are in the technical sense because the epidemic is being contained by the Government.

Hon. Ekanya was questioning the chemical that we use. I do not know which chemical he used to spray his house but like I said in my statement, the chemicals which we used in northern Uganda registered success because they were able to kill mosquitoes for a period of time. It is just that we got resurgence – (Interjection) - I do not have time. I am being reminded to wind up.

Chloroquine - because of the resistance it was withdrawn and replaced with Artemisinin based combinations especially Coartem, which we use now. We are reviewing the VHT strategy with a view of exploring how we can motivate –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of order in protection of the Constitution and the lives of our people. It is common knowledge that no chemical of a spray nature by residue standards in northern Uganda has ever been approved. Is the honourable member in order to tell lies in the open without facts on health matters?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please give this House a chance to proceed properly.

DR BARYOMUNSI: In response to that, Mr Speaker, we have the National Drug Authority in Uganda which checks and tests all the chemicals and pharmaceuticals including veterinary products that enter this country. They have the required competence to do that work. It is, therefore, not true that there is any chemical that enters this country for vector control or pharmaceuticals for human consumption or veterinary use that is not checked by Government and found to be effective and efficacious. I just want to put on record that Government checks and tests all the chemicals including drugs that come into the country for both human and veterinary purposes. 

I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know the area of health is an interesting area but we are there as Ministry of Health to ensure that we work with Members of Parliament so that we can provide health services to the people of this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, and thank you, members, for the interest you have demonstrated in this matter. It is a matter of great concern and we encourage the Ministry of Health to seek support where it is required so that appropriate response is given to this situation.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Nasa Parents Primary School represented by hon. Ngabu William Kwemara of Kyaka and hon. Rwabuhoro of Kyegegwa District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have Pick and Learn Primary School represented by hon. Kiyingi and hon. Namaganda Susan of Bukomansimbi. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) We also have, from the same area, St Peter’s Kitenyi Primary School represented by hon. Kiyingi and hon. Namaganda Susan. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have Kakamba Memorial Primary School represented by hon. Lubega Sseggona Medard and hon. Nansubuga Seninde Rosemary, Member for Wakiso District. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 179 CLAUSE (4) OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW COUNTIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that this motion was moved by the Minister of Local Government last week and I had initially given two weeks to the committee to respond. However, there were issues of activities that are already going on that required a more urgent response to this situation by the Committee on Local Government. Therefore, we had scheduled the committee to report after one week and today is the day they are supposed to be reporting. I now ask the chair to brief the House on the report on the committee. 

4.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Grace Freedom Kwiyucwiny): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity you have given to the committee. I want to report that we have worked hard and diligently. We have met all the key stakeholders and petitioners and at this moment, we are writing our report which is not ready. I would beg that you permit us to report next week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you be ready to report on Tuesday? 

MS KWIYUCWINY: We are trying to do our best to work this weekend and we shall report on Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is therefore deferred to Tuesday when the committee will be briefing us on how we proceed with these matters of creation of counties.  Thank you. This matter will come back on Tuesday afternoon. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTIONAL (AMENDEMNT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, two reports were presented to the House, the majority report and the minority report. Debate was deferred and it was supposed to commence today. 

However, in the course of the proceedings, a matter was raised by the Member for Lwemiyaga, citing a case in which he and his colleagues are involved in the Supreme Court. He cited our rule 64 that the handling of a particular proposed amendment to clause 83 would affect or would be sub judice. 

Honourable members, I did say that I would be making a ruling on that matter and guide the House on how we are going to proceed with this matter. Let me give a preliminary position on this issue and then we see how to proceed from there. Honourable members, there is a rule that designates what Parliament must do. That rule was more graphically put by a professor of constitutional law, Prof. Dicey. He stated that, “Parliaments or legislatures have the right to make any law to do anything under the sun, except the power to turn a man into a woman.” (Applause) That is what Prof. Dicey said. 

However, that particular statement has been qualified by our Article 79, which clearly states that, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” That draws from what Prof. Dicey says, but that is the rule. That is the general rule that we should all understand. 

However, this Parliament, in its wisdom, created an exception to that rule. The exception is that when a matter is before another institution which has competent jurisdiction to handle other matters, this Parliament will not interfere because it will be sub judice. It does not stop there; it defines what amounts to sub judice. Under rule 64, sub judice means if it is likely to prejudice the rights of the parties in the contest in court - if the debate in Parliament is likely to prejudice that.

We, therefore, need to establish two things: first, if the matter is sub judice in the ordinary sense of the word; and two, whether a debate of that matter is likely to prejudice the rights of the people who are before court. I will deal with the first issue: Is the matter sub judice? In simple words, it simply means that the matter is under judicial consideration; sub judice is the Latin phrase for that. Is the matter of Article 83 under judicial consideration? The answer is straight forward; yes, it is.

The next question is: Would it prejudice the rights of the people who are at the moment in court if we discussed this? [Hon. Member: “Yes”]- That is your answer. (Laughter) I have not reached that far in establishing in clear terms, in a way that will guide this House for a long time, what sub judice really means so that we are clear every time we want to raise this matter. 

We want to avoid a situation that happened when the Parliament was considering the case of HABA Group. You recall that the minute that the matter came to Parliament, some people went to court that same day, knowing that Parliament was going to begin sitting at 2 o’clock. They went and filed court papers early morning and they showed up in the afternoon and they said the matter was now sub judice and they presented court papers. It also happened in the case of Mr Geoffrey Kazinda where an attempt was made to block the proceedings of Parliament just because of the sub judice rule. The people who were responsible for these sectors made determinations on how they were going to handle this matter. 

It also happened in the case of Maracha District, Terego and the others. The matter of sub judice was raised. It also happened in the case of hon. Kipoi. I received the documents when court papers were filed to try and stop the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline of this House from considering whether the Member should be removed because of his failure to attend for more than 15 consecutive sittings of Parliament. We want to avoid this abuse.

Therefore, the ruling that I will be making must be clear to guide us, so that the process should not be abused and the sub judice rule should not become an avenue of blocking Parliament from handling things that it should legitimately handle.  (Applause) I have not reached that far. (Laughter) The far that I have reached is that this matter is under judicial consideration and that makes it sub judice. However, will debate on it jeopardise or prejudice the rights of the people who are in court? I have not gone that far and you will forgive for that.

In the meantime, what are we going to do while I prepare my substantial ruling on this subject, which will guide this House for a longer time than I will be here? In the meantime, I will stay debate on Article 83 until I make my final ruling on Tuesday afternoon. In the meantime, let us have the general debate on the principles of the Bill, excluding any discussion on Article 83 and then we will see how we will move on Tuesday when this matter comes back. Therefore, let us discuss the general principles of the Bill. The motion that is before us is for second reading of the Bill and we shall be discussing the principles of the Bill - why it is necessary to make these amendments to the Constitution. 

As I said earlier, there is a preliminary decision point that we will need to make when we come to that point. When the Bill was read for the first time and referred to the committee, as I said at the beginning, concerns were raised that the proposals in the Constitution (Amendment) Bill were too limited, that they did not capture all the interests. A proposal was then made that another Bill should have been brought to deal with those issues. 

I guided by saying that the vehicle that can now move us as a House to handle all these matters should be a Bill which has already been brought before the House. So any Member, person or interest group that has any matter relating to constitutional amendments can now go to the committee. I urged the committee not to close doors to any of the proposals and the committee did not. I am grateful for that. They listened, they received petitions and even carried out field visits and they came back and have reported. 

The report they made was to the effect that they received so many proposals for amendment and many were outside what was catered for in the Bill. In their conclusion, they said that there was need to consider these proposals but they could not be considered within the framework of this Bill. They said there was need for the Government to appoint a proper constitutional review commission or committee to handle this in a progressive way. That was the basis of the minority report.

The minority report said that there was sufficient time and the members had listened to everything but they had proposals that should be entertained now. So, the preliminary point that we have to take a decision on is whether to enlarge the ambit of our decision to consider all the other amendments outside the Bill or not. 

For now, let us discuss the principles of the Bill and the debate begins now, of course with the rider on Article 83. Can we start the debate? We agreed that each Member would contribute for three minutes. Is that what we agreed?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We want to amend the Constitution, which is our mother law. It would, therefore, be better that this is digested and debated in earnest. Would it not be procedurally right for Members who are going to debate the constitutional amendments to be given sufficient time so that they can talk and exhaust their points, so that when we amend the mother law we will be in line?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What time do you propose?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I propose that 10 minutes are given to Members to debate. Of course, there will be those who will not even need two minutes but for those who have issues to raise, at least a minimum of 10 minutes would be sufficient to deal with it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I propose seven minutes?                 

MR SSEMUJJU: Rt. Hon. Speaker, you have ruled on a matter that is before court –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Preliminary.

MR SSEMUJJU: Yes. However, you have also said,  if I got you right, that we will need to decide on whether we go beyond what is proposed in the Bill or not. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to take a decision on that? This is because our debate would be in vain if at stage A, we make a decision that actually we will not consider the other issues. It will then be a ceremony for us to come here and debate all the other issues that are contained, for example, in the minority report, when actually we are going to deal with a Bill, which is about seven pages.

So wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we first take that decision before we debate and exhaust ourselves on all the matters as they are contained in both reports?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is part of the principle we are going to discuss and we cannot take a decision before debate; it will not be regular. We have to listen and see what the arguments are, for or against, and that would guide us on how we make a decision.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, you made a ruling in the Parliament that for the matters that are not contained in this Bill, the interested parties can go and appear before the committee. The committee then returns with the report in total defiance of your ruling and says, “We did not consider them”-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not what they said. The report that was presented here said that they received many petitions and considered them but they did not have sufficient time to handle them. That is what they said. However, the minority say, “No, we had enough time to handle them and here are the proposals.” That is why I am saying that we should have the debate and then we will come to that decision when this debate is exhaustive on the subject. Please, let us not do procedure now; let us start debate. If you are not ready to debate, I will adjourn this House. (Laughter) Let us debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we have a procedural issue and I would like to raise it. I recall I was here during the Seventh Parliament when you were the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. They brought a lot of amendments in the Bill and by then, the current Attorney-General, hon. Ruhindi, got up and said, “I think we must push some of these to the next Parliament and only deal with some.” I can tell you that none of those proposals that were brought, which should have come in the Eighth Parliament, have ever surfaced. 

Here again, we have brought a few proposals, even the ones we had wanted to come then, and there is already a sub judice aspect on which you are going to make a ruling next Tuesday, Mr Speaker. Supposing I debate today and next Tuesday you come up with the ruling and I want to debate that same item, will you give me another five or 10 minutes? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we first look at hon. Ruhindi’s proposals of 2005, we look at the current proposals, look at your ruling of next week and we wait after collecting everything? This is because we are not going to die – (Laughter)

The proposals we should have debated in 2006 were not done and we are now in 2015. So, there is no hurry. You even have the power to extend Government for another six months if you wanted. I believe that with constitutional amendments, Mr Speaker - you have been around – we should not be in a hurry. You have said you want to make a ruling that will survive the test of time, whether you are still here or you are not. We also want to make sure that we make constitutional amendments that will stand the test of time whether we are still here or not.

So, Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we wait for your ruling of Tuesday, agree on time and look at the amendments of hon. Ruhindi, now the Attorney-General, so that we can move on well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a Bill and that is what we are discussing. That Bill was sent to the committee – 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For once, I am inclined to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. (Laughter) I am saying for once, and only in respect of one observation. (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the first time hon. Rukutana came to this Parliament, he was actually a UPC member. He stood against the son of the late John Wycliffe Kazoora. I remember that time the President and the First Lady were on the other side. He had hon. Kanyomozi on his side. Even when we went to attend his party, we were singing UPC songs on Entebbe Road. (Laughter)

At that time, he was actually agreeing with the former Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Is he, therefore, in order to lie to Parliament that for the first time he is agreeing with hon. Nandala-Mafabi? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was not in Rushenyi neither was I on Entebbe Road. I did not hear the songs that were being sung anywhere. I cannot rule on this subject. (Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you for your ruling, Mr Speaker. For the record, by the time I came to this Parliament, I was already an NRM member. 

Going back to my substantive submission, as I said earlier I concur with hon. Nandala-Mafabi only to the extent that it would make better sense for you, Mr Speaker, to first make your ruling on the sub judice question so that when Members are debating, they debate wholesomely, instead of severing the Members’ debate. Members have to prepare their debate in such a way that it flows. Even on our side, we think it is more prudent to first get the entire ruling so that the debate is thorough and conclusive instead of handling it piecemeal. As I said earlier, that is the only point with which I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are there Members who wanted to debate but they are not interested in debating Article 83? All of you want to debate Article 83? - [Hon. Members: “Yes”]- I should not have asked that question. (Laughter)

Honourable members, what about on the question of whether to enlarge or not to enlarge - the question on whether to bring things that are outside this Bill or not? Can we have a short debate on that, so that we use the time? Honourable members, there is an issue which the member for Kyadondo East raised, that we should determine that matter first before we go forward. Can we have a debate on that particular issue - whether we should confine ourselves to the Bill or we should allow other things to be brought to the Bill? We can have a short debate on that and then we defer the decision to next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the Leader of the Opposition. You can start with a smile because it helps. (Laughter)

4.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, it is not time for smiles. I do not know why we are splitting the atom. You earlier guided that we were going to have a bus or vehicle to receive all views and deliver them. They have delivered the views and they should therefore be seen as one. In that regard, I do not understand why you are insisting that we should separate them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Yes. You are saying that we should debate the views that were not in the Bill now and then wait for the views that are in the Bill after you have ruled on the issue of the  MPs. I really seek your clarification or guidance as to why you are insisting on that, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition, the Speaker cannot insist.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: We need guidance because it is you who is saying that we should now use the remaining time to debate matters which are not in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not what I said. Maybe somebody else heard me better.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Just to clarify, if I understood the Speaker correctly he is not insisting that we must discuss issues outside the Bill. The Speaker is leaving it to the House for us to decide whether we should proceed with the Bill as presented by Government in Parliament or we should proceed with the Bill together with the issues that were brought to the committee through its public hearings. That is the issue that the Speaker is putting before this House to debate and decide on. He has not taken a decision and he has not insisted, in my judgement.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, but we have agreed with the advice from the Attorney-General, supporting what hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, that if we are looking at it as a whole then we need your ruling first before we can debate the two reports together.

MR MPUUGA: I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. If my memory serves me well, before the committee went on a retreat to consider the Bill, I remember the Speaker’s ruling about the matters outside the Bill. I recollect that it was to the effect that members of the committee should go ahead and consider all matters presented in petition. Now, when it comes to deciding whether we should debate the output or outcome of the report, I wonder whether we are proceeding well or whether the Speaker is rescinding on his earlier decision on that matter.

Actually, the majority in the committee defied the Speaker and refused to consider matters as directed by the Speaker. I am meant to believe that your directive then, Mr Speaker, has actually been considered by the minority’s coverage of the other issues which the majority seems to have ignored. I need your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was very clear in what I said. I said that they should receive everything and come and advise the House on how to proceed. Those were my words; you can bring the Hansard and look at them again. The committee was supposed to come back to the House and advise the House on how we proceed. This is why I am saying that the majority of the committee members were saying that some of these things could not be looked at and the minority members are saying that they have had time to look at everything.  That is why it has become a contentious matter because it is a report from the committee. 

4.42
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have read of a story of one wise man and two little naughty children. The wise man would tell you what you were about to do or what you were thinking before you got to him. One time, these two naughty children went to the wise man and they were holding a butterfly in their hands– this is a famous story. They wanted to trick the wise man and they said to themselves that they should go to the wise man and ask him what they were holding in their hands. If the wise man said it was a butterfly, they would ask him whether it is dead or alive.

The children had agreed that if the wise man said the butterfly was dead, they would release the butterfly and it flies. If he said that it was alive, they would squeeze it softly and it would die. When they got to the wise man, they asked him what they were holding in their hands and he responded that it was a butterfly. They then asked the wise man whether it was dead or living. Wise as he was, the man said that if he said that it was dead, they were going open their hands and it would fly and if he said that it was alive, they were going to squeeze it.

Mr Speaker, today you are putting an equivalent question to us on whether we should narrow or widen. The practice in this House in the few years that I have been here dictates that this matter should be handled like any other committee report. An attempt to solicit our minds here would attract the intervention of a wise man. Those who want it to be open or narrowed would be dictated the way we debate here. 

My thinking is that we leave this matter. A Bill is a Bill and this is a Bill sponsored by Government. If we are going to go out and if what the committee received from the people outside there was not able to influence their writing of the report, Mr Speaker, then it is the question of the wise man and the butterfly. If the minority report has appealed to some of us, it would still be the question of the butterfly and the wise man. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence that this Bill remains as it is with the report from the committee, both majority and minority, so that we get to intertwine and interface when we are debating it. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I think there is an agreement, from what I have heard, that we need to discuss this thing in a holistic way and that there would be no need to start any phased debate and then continue on Tuesday. That being the wish of the House, and having no other item on the Order Paper –(Laughter)– that calls for me to do only one thing - to cause the sitting of this Parliament to be adjourned. 

However, before I do that, we had agreed in the Business Committee and in other meetings, even in the House here it was mentioned, that when we come to this process of doing the constitutional amendments, we would be sitting morning and afternoon. It is a matter of urgent public importance. So, would it be the time for us to now start, from Tuesday next week, at 10a.m. or 11a.m.? 

Let me put the issue clearly and then we see how to proceed, so that we can take a decision on what time to start, maybe with the exception of Wednesday if there is an urgent matter in Cabinet. Of course, we are going to urge the Executive to now respect the timeframe. This is your Bill and this is a matter that you need to process and time is of the essence. We will also be asking the Executive to phase off Wednesday morning so that we can also meet on that day. You can postpone Cabinet to Friday or Monday because we shall not be sitting on those days. If it is okay with Members, we will start plenary on Tuesday at 10 or 11 O’ clock.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity again. I have just been reading here something in the Constitution; what is the role of a Member of Parliament? One of their roles is representation.  That means I come here to represent the people of Budadiri West. If I am here representing them, I must bring their views to the House. We are going to consider constitutional amendments and I have not asked the people of Budadiri West what they want; it is only the committee which went – (Interjections) - Let me make my case.  I am happy that some Members have asked but I know that most of them are always here in the canteen and around Parliament; they cannot even reach their places because they know the problems they are going through.

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be prudent that Members are given –(Interjections)-  I am happy you are asking, “Where do we get the time?” Why did you bring it now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was a procedural point. You cannot give information on procedure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am happy some Members have consulted but if they had consulted, there was no need for Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to go and consult; Members of Parliament would have gone to the committee to take their views. However, the committee was in Mbale, Gulu and not in Budadiri West.

The procedural issue I am raising, Mr Speaker is: don’t you think for us to be given one week or two weeks – For those who are talking about time, we are not the ones who told the Government to delay. They have come late and they should allow us to talk to the people. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for Members to be allowed to go and take these constitutional amendments to the people and their people will indicate their views? When I come I talk as Budadiri West.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the time you take oath here as a Member of Parliament, your representative role is immediately commissioned for you to do whatever is possible to provide effective representation to your people. This particular Bill was gazetted on 17 April 2015 and my recollection says it was read for the first time on 30 April 2015. So, this Bill has been with you and we have facilitated you to go every week to your constituency on various matters including Bills that are before the House. (Applause) This is one of the matters that is before the House and it has been before the House since 30th of April this year. 

Debate on this matter, we have agreed, will start at 10a.m on Tuesday. So, the items that we should expect will be the item on the creation of counties and then the one of constitutional amendments. These will be the two major issues. On condition that there will be thorough consultations on the Tobacco Control Bill, we might also have time to handle it. There are also other matters that will be processed according to the Order Paper. I am just pointing out what is outstanding for now, that we must handle. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your guidance but I would wish to take this opportunity to ask the ministers responsible for registration of voters to also update us because we are discussing this thing holistically. The Minister of Internal Affairs was supposed to come to the Floor of Parliament to clarify why the Electoral Commission has decided to adopt the data captured by the ID project and why the Electoral Commission retired its register. We feel that there is a bit of conflict and there are quite a number of people who have been left out of the registration and yet we are moving towards elections. 

I thought we could use some time, however short, to allow the two ministers to clarify on the issue. You are already aware that there is display of registers for verification and yet there are many people who have not actually been captured by the new ID project. I thought we could use this opportunity to have it clarified.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was an outstanding matter that the ministers had agreed to come and brief the House about. As soon as they are ready with these matters, we will accommodate them on the Order Paper. However, I am talking about the main items that we should go thinking about, which will be those three: One is the Constitution (Amendment) Bill and we are going to discuss the motion for the second reading, the other is the Tobacco Control Bill and then the motion on the counties. Those will be the three main things that we should come back reflecting on. This House is adjourned to Tuesday 10 O’ clock.

(The House rose at 4.54 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 July at 10.00 a.m.)
