Thursday, 4 July 2013

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just two things to mention. First, last week there was a Supplementary Schedule No.3 which was referred to a committee. They had their consultation and have come to the conclusion that those matters are no longer tenable and therefore we should be able to get an opportunity to analyse and get it off our order paper as pending business. So at an appropriate time, I will call the chairperson of the Budget Committee to make a statement once the copies of the report are circulated so that we can continue with the rest of the business.

Secondly, yesterday the honourable member for Kigulu North, hon. Baliddawa, made a statement in relation to matters of tourism and some requests were made. The minister was expected to do something and advise the House on how best to deal with the situation and also explain what remedial steps are being taken in the meantime to mitigate the impact of this tax on those who made their bookings before this tax came into place. The minister is expected to advise Parliament on how they plan to handle this to avoid it affecting our tourism sector. Although we did not give this request a time frame, the minister should tell us how she intends to handle it so that the tourists and hotels are not affected. Thank you.

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for bringing up this matter of Supplementary Schedule No.3. All I want this House to note is that quite a number of our civil servants cannot be paid because we delayed to move. Our regrets as a ministry; but as a country, we also have to bear in mind that we cannot continue employing people without paying them. I wish Parliament to take note of this and we see how best to move in order to solve this problem. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FOLLOWING:
    A. OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
    B. MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT

2.22
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2013/2014, covering votes 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment, Vote 150 - National Environment and Management Authority, Vote 157 - National Forest Authority as well as the funds disbursed to local governments under the conditional grants arrangement. I wish to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for their action.

THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FOLLOWING:
(C) MINISTRY OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS
(D) INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the policy statement for Vote 103 - Inspectorate of Government for the financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands committed to the appropriate committee and we hope that the minister will improve on the quality of the statement because we have moved away from those - nevertheless, we are not into its contents. (Laughter)

THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FOLLOWING:
(E) MINISTRY OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(F) MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. By the time the order paper was drawn, I am sure that the ministers responsible for those portfolios had indicated their presence. And even in the circumstances that they are not available, they have colleagues in the House. Now that we are going into a very important business of scrutinising those policy statements, is it procedurally right for ministers to allow such an important item of laying policy statement on Table and yet they themselves abandoned this process and we know that Government is fully represented and there is no reason? Cabinet ministers are looking at each other and they cannot even offer an explanation. Are we procedurally right to proceed in this manner?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, of course, we are not right to proceed this way. It is not right for the ministers to look at the order paper and the time allotted to them and they don’t act accordingly; they are not in the House. It is not good for the government to make the House behave in this manner.  Honourable member, the Speaker is speaking. We should also note that for this financial year, the ministerial policy statements have come early because the deadline is supposed to be 15th of this month. Oh! sorry, actually they have come late; the deadline was supposed to have been 30th of last month. So procedurally, the ministers – I do not know who is holding the place of the Leader of Government Business because I need somebody to make a statement on this. Why are we behaving in this manner?

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to apologise to you and the House for the slight delay by some of my colleagues who have not yet arrived here. Actually, if you looked outside, the rain is quite heavy and I think some of them might have been delayed. As you can see my jacket, I came dripping. Nevertheless, as you know, Mr Speaker, this is a new procedure and sometimes communication between the Clerk’s Office and our offices is not complete but we know we are supposed to lay these policy statements today and I want to apologise to you for the mishap and hope it is not being -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you suggesting that the honourable ministers are dissolvable; that if they were attacked by rain they would dissolve? Is that what you are proposing to the House?

MR NASASIRA: No. You know we sometimes fear threats at different levels. With the heavy rain going on, I said that might have been a possible cause for delay but I am sure they will come. I did apologise and I hope, Mr Speaker, that you will take my apology on behalf of my colleagues.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. We were given money for vehicles and I do not think that rain can go through these vehicles. Most ministers have drivers who are paid by the government and they also have escorts who are able to get umbrellas so that after getting outside their vehicles, they are escorted to the Parliament building. Is the minister therefore right to tell us that the rain has disrupted these ministers? Can I seek clarification?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The purpose of laying these documents on Table in time is to give us enough time to read them. I want to be very clear on behalf of the Committee on Education, where I belong, that it is Education, which is always giving their presentation at the end. The ministers in charge of Education always delay to give us these reports. Why? Because they want us to go through these reports hurriedly and pass things, which we have not internalised.

I have already read the order paper. In fact, whenever I get up, I first look for the order paper to see what is contained therein then I take my time to prepare what I will present in Parliament. If these documents delay - some of this is deliberate. Honourable acting Leader of Government Business, kindly talk to these ministers; we want to read these documents, we do not take them for the sake of keeping them. Some of us take time and read, internalise and debate appropriately. 

Mr Speaker, I want to put it on record that the Ministry of Education delays to come to the committee because they know that we are going to question them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, this House has a time frame. Regarding these policy statements you are bringing today, the people from the Opposition are given up to the 15th July to make responses to what you have presented. If by 30th July, they are not yet here, you will delay the whole process and yet we should complete this process by the 31st of August, which is next month. These delays are really not necessary.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I did apologise but I mentioned rain as causing some delays. As you can see, Members are still coming in the House; even the honourable member on the other side who raised the matter, they are 50 percent present. I did apologise and I promise that as we go on - we are here and ready with some policy statements and others are on the way. Some were also laid yesterday. I do apologise. (Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us finish with the ones that are there then you can raise the guidance issue.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR:
A) MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT
B) MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology policy statement comprising of Vote 020 - Ministry of Information and Communication Technology and Vote 126 - The National Information Technology Authority, Uganda for financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay it on the Table.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee.

THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR MINISTRY OF HEALTH

2.33
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Health - Vote 104.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee.

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Rosemary Najjemba): Mr Speaker, I wish, on behalf of the Ministry of Lands, to lay the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much. (Hon. Dr Mutende rose_) Yes, which ministry is this; East African Community Affairs?

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Dr James Mutende): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I am standing on behalf of the Minister of East African Community Affairs, and I lay here a ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee. So we have not received reports from the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development today. Please pass the message that these policy statements should come to the House.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The guidance, I was seeking is, since some of these policy statements have not been laid, can we get a time frame for all of them to be brought so that we can have ample time to study them? This is because the dictate is the time and we do not want to delay this budget process. I am seeking a time frame so that everything is included and distributed to the different Members of Parliament or the various committees. Let us get a time frame that at least by the end of the week, all the policy statements will be in and some of them laid on the Table. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, the extension of time is given until close of business today for all the ministerial policy statements to be laid before the House to enable the committees do their work. We will not extend this time, please do it today. So you need to consult with the ministries that have not brought their policy statements to bring them today. (Hon. Ssekikubo rose_)

Honourable member, you know the rules. You have not briefed me on what the subject is, so I will not be able to allow you to address the House on a matter of urgent - I do not know what the subject is. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we did work up to clause 81. We had a discussion on clause 82 but did not conclude our discussion and decision on clause 82. That would be the clause now if we are ready to proceed. What were the amendments proposed? We had adopted the amendment brought by the learned Attorney- General. There was also an amendment that was proposed and that was supposed to be housed separately by the Member from Serere District. Are we ready with them now so that we can conclude this clause? Did you work on the draft?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you. I just still have the other very raw draft. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please proceed with it.

MS ALASO: The other thing that I have not resolved and where I still need guidance is about where to house this amendment because it didn’t seem to fit into any of these.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it was supposed to come as a new sub-clause 2 of clause 82. Wasn’t it, learned Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, if I may help my colleagues on the appropriate place – we can give comments after she has moved it. It would be sub clause (c) of clause 82 whereupon we will have clause 82 (a), (b) and (c) because in (a) it is a person. You will recall that we improved (a) by saying, “A person is either under investigations or about to be charged or has been charged”. In (b) we talk about a situation where a person has been convicted of a crime and (c) will talk about a person who has died before any investigations or charge. I am sure that is what she wants us to capture.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Does that capture your interests, hon. Alice Alaso?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also thank the Attorney-General for the guidance. That now helps me. The proposed phrase will reads as follows: Clause 82(c), notwithstanding any other provision of this law, an authorized officer may proceed to obtain an order –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the proposal by the Attorney-General shortens it; you don’t have to deal with the word “notwithstanding” because it is still within the same clause. We are just giving it another angle from sub clauses (a), (b) and the new (c) about a person who dies before any investigations commence.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, in that case, I want to propose that it reads as follows: “Sub-clause (c) where a person dies before the commencement of investigations, an authorized officer - ”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that will come with the rest of the closing paragraph. All you need is that part of paragraph(c); the last bit covers all the paragraphs (a), (b) and (c). Is that okay and agreeable to all of you, Members, including the hon. Kabajo?

MR KABAJO: Just a small clarification, Mr Chairman. She has talked of a situation where a person dies before investigations have commenced but the word “Where” is already covered up in there; we don’t need to indicate it here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Those are details. So, the word “Where” will be covered in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) on a situation where a person dies before the terms proposed by the honourable member. I now put a question to that proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 82, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 83

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, here I thought we have amended to remove the phrase “confiscation order on conviction.” I thought we agreed that court, among its decisions, will issue an order for confiscation. Why are we having this phrase here?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It still comes in because a person can be convicted but such property can be discovered later. We just need to improve on it to deal with that particular aspect where property is discovered after the conviction. 

You will recall we dealt with that subject in clause 80. Can somebody help us phrase this so that the confiscation order on conviction can only apply to that property that is discovered after the conviction? Those that might have been discovered before the conviction would have already been covered by the direct confiscation order from court.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I think all that one has to do is to refer to clause 82 and the relevant sub-clause (2); the rest can proceed as they are, because under clause 80, there is a part whereby if later, after conviction, other tainted property is discovered, the authorised officer can apply to court for an order to have them also confiscated. All the person needs to do here is to refer to the relevant sub-clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the only change then would be: where an applicant -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, my colleague from Kiboga is right. Clause 82 (1) does not need to relate to this clause 83 because that is one of the issues; the tainted property is already a subject of the crime. This will require the authorised officer to apply for a new order to take care of those other interests in property that might be discovered after the conviction.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, would you need to insert sub-clauses here?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with you that there is no need for us to do that because for as long as you insert the phrase “where an applicant” - that is captured as a consequential amendment. So, when you say that under clauses 80 and 82; you are only being broad, but only meaning that where there is an application by an applicant, it doesn’t refer to a clause where confiscation is part of the sentence logically.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, because there is no applicant in sub-clause (a); that order is part of the record of the court.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, a crook will reason that although under clause 80, the court was supposed to issue such an order, under clause 83, there should be a new application. We are doing all this to protect clause 81 that talks about notice of application. What I am saying is that where an applicant applies to court for an order of confiscation under clause 80 (2), (3) –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is no application for such an order under sub-clause (1) and so there can never be an applicant; because that one is by the direct order of the court. So there is no way somebody can show up and say, “I am an applicant and I am applying for a confiscation order under that”. So is somebody proposing for an amendment on 83(1)? Where (a) an applicant applies to the court for an order of confiscation under sections 80 or 82 – so the substitution is only for those in the place of authorised officer. You substitute it with the word “applicant”. I put the question to that. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)
 
(Clause 83, as amended, agreed to.)
 
(Clause 84 agreed to.)

 (Clause 85, agreed to.)

(Clause 86, agreed to.)

(Clause 87, agreed to.)

(Clause 88, agreed to.)

(Clause 89, agreed to.)

(Clause 90, agreed to.)

(Clause 91, agreed to.)

(Clause 92, agreed to.)

(Clause 93, agreed to.)

(Clause 94, agreed to.)

(Clause 95, agreed to.)

 (Clause 96, agreed to.)

 (Clause 97, agreed to.)

Clause 98

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in clause 98(a) at the end they say, “For its official use”. The moment you confiscate property, which is a subject of crime, I think it should not be put to official use. It should be maintained and after that if the person loses the case, it should be sold. But if you put official use, then you would be making it ware out. 
 
So, I propose that it should not be put to any official use. Supposing Government loses and yet you have used the property; he can claim for damages. So, let us delete the term, “For official use”. If you confiscate my car, you should not drive it – if you confiscate a house, may be you rent it but the income which comes out of it should not be for official use. It should be put on the confiscation account which we are talking about; unless government pays for it.
 
MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, I would like clarification on the actual meaning of the words, “Official use” because we accept the plea of the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If the plea of the Leader of the Opposition is answered, then you may not even need to understand the meaning of “Official use”. 
 
MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: The Minister of Finance is out, but I think this entails – if the property is now for government, then it shall be put to official use by government; and not to any other person. So, I think official use refers to official use by government – it is transferred; it is confiscated property. 
 
MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I am trying to understand clause 98(a) where they say, “Retained or transferred to any government agencies that directly participated…” How do you define the agency? Does it mean all confiscated properties will be going to those authorised officers? Should I think that it is the authorised officers that come from the agency that has directly participated? Should I think that it is caught by court which issued the order? What is the import of this direct or indirect participation in the freezing, seizure and confiscation of property?
 
MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, first of all, I think there is a typographical error in clause 98(c); “The proceeds from its sell be deposited in the confiscated assets fund established under section – it should be (100) not (101) of this Act.
 
Having said that, this expression, “For its official use”; we need to look at the entire clause 100; that is the section that establishes the confiscated assets fund. In clause 4, I notice that there are spelt out activities to which this money should be deployed. The authority may authorise the following payments to be made out of the fund; (a) up to (f). So when they say, “For official use”, it relates to these activities. 
 
MS ALASO: So do I take it to be that the Attorney-General is actually telling us that clause 98(a) and (b) may be deleted because they sound redundant, given the provision of clause 100 and the details thereafter? 
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you look at clause 98, it means Government is lacking what to use, so it wants to confiscate somebody’s property to use. This is how it looks like. Whenever a property has been confiscated under this Act, the court may - (Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Let me just make some clarification. This is confiscated property out of a conviction; it is no longer somebody’s property. It is now in the hands of Government and these are the ways in which Government can use this money or this property:
 
One, that it shall be retained by the financial intelligence unit or transferred to any government agency. That means Government now owns the property. It can say Police remain with that building; financial intelligence unit also own that building. It is a two storey building and it is for Government.

Two, it can be sold off and the proceeds from such sale are transferred to any government agency that participated and that may involve costs that they have been used to pursue this one.

Three, the proceeds from the sale may be deposited in the confiscated assets fund that we are creating. Those are the three ways.

MR SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Chairman, the clarification I am seeking - when you look at clause 98(a), like the Leader of Opposition said, he is talking about now retaining that property. This means that depending on the agency, it will retain the property it is interested in. The Attorney- General talks about clause 100 and he is talking about a fund; so should we go with (C), because I see (a) and (b) becoming totally redundant. It is only (C) that remains because it talks about the proceeds that may go to the consolidated funds account and the money can be used. But when you leave (a) and (b), it is as if you are talking about the hunters sharing out the spoils and whoever gets the animal first must be considered.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, looking at clause 98(a) and (b), I am really convinced to say that we should amend it to say that, (a) “… retained by or transferred to any government agency” and we stop there. It should be up to the Government to decide whatever property has been confiscated and where it can be most profitably used. It may not be necessarily the Police or whichever agency that was involved in the confiscation that should be the one to profitably use that property. This law would be unduly tying the hands of Government to say that any property that is confiscated can only be transferred directly or indirectly to only those agencies which participated. There is no need for those parts. I would propose that we just say, “… retained and transferred to any government agency” and we stop there.

In part (b), where it says, “… sold and the proceeds from such sale transferred to any government agency.” I do not buy the argument about recovering the costs which they used in carrying out the confiscation. A government agency would be doing its work using funds appropriated from the consolidated fund. So if you want to refund the money which was used in carrying out the confiscation, then you might as well attach the consolidated fund because that is where that agency got the money for its operations. So, I would propose that we do not go into this business of transfers to agencies which directly or indirectly participated but we just say that it will be retained by and transferred to any government agency.

The decision of where to transfer the property will be left to Government; even when the property is sold, the proceeds from such a sale will be transferred to the confiscated assets fund not to a specific agency.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Honourable member, we concede on that; (a) and (b) may be deleted.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, when we retain, who is retaining? He maintained the word retain.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, we on the Government side want to accept that amendment because if we leave it drafted here, one agency that has participated in confiscation of that property may not necessarily be in need of that property.

Now that an agency or department has participated does not necessarily mean that it is in need of that property, or the usage of that property. So Government should be given a leeway to give it whoever they think would use it most profitably. Therefore, we are conceding that his proposal is carried.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So who would be retaining it then?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Well, Mr Chairman, it is reading retained by or transferred to any government agency - I am in the application for confiscation order. That to me would be included; maybe this could come in the regulations but disposition of confiscated property, I am not clear. Can I restate the case, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let the minister restate it.

MS ALASO: I am not sure whether this will really help, but what I would like to understand from the minister is that given that in clause 100, they envisaged some kind of authority and then we are talking about property being retained or transferred to Government. Why don’t we pick the authority from clause 100 and make it at least the receiving agency, because I thought that Government is just too big and too broad that you would not know who in Government is responsible; is it Parliament? Everybody here is Government. So would it help if we say, (a) retained by or transferred to or through the authority - something like that and then we delete the other words in front.

I am just thinking about how all this animal called Government will deal with the process of retaining and transferring. If we centralise the work of the authority in that retaining and transferring, would it help?

The other thing I am thinking about is, if we delete (b) then we improve (C) by bringing the import of selling and the proceeds from being put in the confiscated assets fund so that we also know all of it is being done by one agency, that particular authority. I do not know whether it would help the process.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Here the property is being disposed of. I want us, Members, to know that all the income we shall derive from it is what we call non-tax revenue and non tax revenue is always deposited in a Consolidated Fund and it is appropriated by Parliament. Any agency of Government which wants property to buy, it always brings a budget to say that they need capital development and we need to do it. 

So, Mr Chairman, we should find a way of how to deal with this. One, is to retain and transfer the property; it should be   Government; but it must have shown the need because failure to do that, somebody can confiscate somebody’s property and say there and then the need is here. So, if it has confiscated the property and Government shows -

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Disposition of confiscated property: Whenever property has been confiscated under this Act, the court – so we are now talking about the court and not Government. The court and we are giving court options to either make it to be retained by the agency that participated directly – [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] - and the agency they are talking about is not any other agency but the Financial Intelligence Unit; not any other agency, not Police, not Defence but they are talking of a particular agency which has participated and which has authority. 

Then two, court may decide that that property be sold and the proceeds from such sale be transferred to any Government agency that participated directly and we must stop there. 

Three, that the proceeds of sale go to the Confiscated Assets Fund. So, in making arguments, we must - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, does confiscation confer property automatically to the person who has confiscated it?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So how do you talk of retaining it?

MR RUHINDI: I see the problem and we might have to clarify it but my understanding was that this is court. I agree with the deletion of these expressions that “participated directly or indirectly in the freezing, seizure or confiscation of the property for its official use” and even in (b) we should also delete the expression that “participated directly or indirectly in the freezing, seizure or forfeiture of the property”. 

Now having left what is there, to me the matter is in court, there has been an application or where there has been no application, there have been prayers – yes of course - thank you and most obliged. (Laughter) You know when you are on the microphone, you may not like the person who is just seated looking at you. (Laughter) So, there are prayers in the application that this property be retained by a particular government agency maybe the one that owned it before or be transferred to another government agency and the court may in accordance with the law or in accordance with this Act, order that property be retained or transferred to that particular government agency. That is my understanding on the face of it.

MR EKANYA: Clarification?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clarification from Tororo.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I am Ekanya Geoffrey. I just want to ask the Deputy Attorney-General that under the existing environment, we have a legal regime for transferring or confiscating property. Are you saying that this law once it becomes an Act, the current procedure shall fall in abeyance? Because you may confiscate a property that has more than one interest that needs to be disposed of, and you also need to make it known and therefore you need to transfer that property using the right procedure. You do not just retain because when you retain it, the current legal regime makes that action null and void. 

I participated in a similar arrangement somewhere and I was advised and educated very well. Even with the court, the procedure is – if you want me to say it – you have to advertise and follow the procedure so that any other interest within and without should come up. You have to transfer the property properly to the right institution, and you do not just retain it with its complication. So are you saying that the current legal regime of transferring property will fall in abeyance once this law comes into force?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, the honourable member for Kiboga.

MR KABAJO: I thank you. Mr Chairman, I do not know whether this property we are talking about here would follow the normal property that the honourable colleague who held the Floor was talking about, because this is now tainted property and the court has considered the different issues and has decided to confiscate it even if that property had more than one interest, but since it is tainted property, may be even that other party should also have been convicted since he also had an interest in that tainted property. 

Apart from that, Mr Chairman, I was still thinking that the proposal from the honourable from Serere could also be considered whereby in part (a) we would say that the property could be retained by the Authority which has been set up, or if in the prayers, it is already indicated, to any specific government agency. 

And then in part (b), if the property is sold then the proceeds from such a sale should be transferred to the Confiscated Assets Authority, or whatever it will be called and it is that Authority which in this Act, should be given the authority now as in Section 100 where it would decide how to dispose of the assets in the fund.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, shadow Attorney-General then we shall have Tororo Municipality.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think this clause was not well thought out. You see that once the property has been confiscated, it is actually - for example, if it is land, it still remains in the name of the person or organisation in which it was registered. So, who retains it therefore?  

Confiscation is by order of court but the property still remains in the name of the previous owner. So the correct word should be transferred and then it can be transferred by a court order to either a particular agency of Government provided for under the law. 

My own view therefore if the Government can concede, retention does not arise because nobody is retaining it. Having said that, we need to look at three situations of property: One is land, two could be cash and three, it could be a charter, for example, a ship and the processes of transferring and retention are different. But what I am grappling with is, if for example, it is cash, do we have a blanket clause which says this organisation should retain it or are there other laws that govern what you would call non-tax revenue, because it is some sort of non-tax revenue. Do we have a law that provides that this money goes directly to the Consolidated Fund or the ministry which is in charge and I think it is finance or the secretary to the Treasury because that is actually the law? Who owns Government property and which department, which institution of Government? (Interruption)

MR KABAJO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Through you, Mr Chairman, I thought some of the questions he asked were answered by section 100, because they are establishing an authority which will be known as the confiscated – “there will be established a fund known as the confiscated assets fund” which means that that money which has been confiscated, if it is cash, would be transferred to this fund. 

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, for giving way. Mr Chairman, let us be realistic here. This money from whatever property as far as Government is concerned is non-tax revenue and we have rules on how to manage that. Non tax revenue goes to the Consolidated Fund. So, even if you have an authority, that authority cannot utilise that money without the authority of Parliament through the normal way of appropriation. So, we better sort that out and move on. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR KATUNTU: Hon. Tim Lwanga could not have put it any better because that is what I had in mind. This money as it comes has to be appropriated. If you create this fund under clause 100 and I see, Mr Chairman, that you have even given that authority powers to even use it, it is dangerous. So, there are already rules or financial regulations on how Government utilises non tax revenue and Parliament should be able to appropriate these resources and so forth because it could be too much money. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, hon. Katuntu, in my view, is bringing a matter that should come when we move to clause 100. Here, we are talking of disposition of confiscated property but how that property eventually will be utilised, we shall find in clause 100. So, I do not know whether we are really proceeding rightly by bringing that matter at this particular time. We are confusing disposition of how things should go vis-à-vis the usage. There is a difference if I am not mistaken.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, you might have looked at (c). It mentions that the proceeds from its sale be deposited in the Confiscated Assets Fund, that is what makes that debate relevant and that is under clause 98. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairperson, in the thinking of the minister, I don’t think he is in disagreement with what is being proposed that this money first goes to the Consolidated Fund. We should accept that principle because otherwise, how would it be? I think it would look shabby if it were otherwise. In other words, he is conceding to this arrangement where the proceeds of sale go to the Consolidated Fund and then 100 establishes the confiscated assets fund. Of course, when you establish this fund, then money will be deployed by Government through appropriate normal methods to the confiscated assets fund. So, the proceeds of sale in clause 98 should go to the Consolidated Fund and then 100 establishes the confiscated assets fund which will utilise funds from The Consolidated Fund. That should be the normal accounting method. 

MR TANNA: I thank you, Mr Chairperson. When we look at the drafting of clause 98 and I would like to read verbatim, it says, “Whenever property has been confiscated under this Act, the court may…” Now in legal terminology which many of us know, I would like to suggest that rather than “may”, we use “shall” because it has to be one of the three, and because it is the primary statement that we are making -(Interruption) - let me build the point. 

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  We have a choice between the three that is why we are using the word “May.” 

MR TANNA: It is a suggestion that I am making and maybe the legal minds shall or may advise us. When we go further to (a), I would like to support the suggestion that is on the Floor that the word “retain” be deleted because retention by the agency may be construed by the victim or the population that it was a deliberate move by the state to usurp that said property. 

Therefore, I would like to suggest that the retention element be scrapped but when we come to how that asset shall be liquidated, I would like us to refer to the laws that we already have in existence that have been tested and tried and that is the law that prescribes liquidation of assets because it is prescribed. You appoint a liquidator and it is done in a transparent manner and like hon. Abdu Katuntu was trying to explain, it might be a ship; it might be a bus company; it might be a school. Now when the State seizes that school, does that school cease running immediately? Will the state, under its machinery or under this agency have the manpower to continue running the school? So, under our laws, we have already provided for liquidation where a liquidator is appointed – in most cases, a reputable law firm – and they continue running the status quo while a purchaser is being looked for to buy. 

So, I would like to suggest that we crosslink this part to that aspect of liquidation which is already well explained and embedded in our laws - (Mr SSSEBUNYA rose_) - I am still on the Floor, thank you. 

In part (b), when we say, “The sales of proceeds shall be transferred to any government agency,” would you like us to remove that vagueness of “any government agency”. We are already creating a fund. The hon. Attorney-General has already conceded that the money goes to the Consolidated Fund. So, I would like to propose that the words “any government agency” be deleted and that – because they are saying, “Such proceeds shall be transferred to any government agency that participated directly or indirectly in the freezing, seizure of the confiscated property.” 

I would like to suggest that that part be deleted and we say that whatever proceeds come, they should go to the Consolidated Fund. We shall avoid that doubt because if the Police is involved, we can say they should take that; if the military is involved they take it and if the Ministry of Finance is involved – so it would be the rule of the jungle. If at all we have two or three agencies, then they will all be fighting for the spoils. Rather than that, we should make it very clear that it goes to the Consolidate Fund so that it is brought to Parliament for appropriation. I beg to move.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I would have wished, at this point, that Members appreciate that confiscated property, at this stage, still has many obligations; it can be confiscated property but it is foreign or it is perishable. So why don’t we first read clause 100 to the extent that we get to (4) and say that, “The Authority may authorise the following payments to be made out of the fund …” because this money still has obligations to clear and once – I do not want to disagree with the Attorney-General – but once this money is taken to the Consolidate Fund, appropriation is different and it is more difficult if you are to pay out. 

If you read sub-clause (4): “The Authority may authorise the following payments to be made out of the Fund to meet remunerations and excesses of receiver…” because we have already passed some clauses where we allow receivers to pay valid mortgages and aliens against this property. So it is money which is still being processed. “…and to pay for the necessary expenses that have been incurred or borrowed; to recover costs associated with administration and additional amounts remaining…” So this money still has its obligations. So I want us to debate –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. You see, the committee chairperson is arguing both (a) and (b) – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order.

MR KATUNTU: You are arguing both (a) and (b) but under (a) it is about having this property transferred to a government agency. Thereafter, if for example it is a building on Kampala Road and somehow it was on mortgage, the government agency will manage the building and the mortgage; it has nothing to do with the liquidation. 

Under (b), it is about that particular property liquidated and the proceeds. By the time you go to court and apply, you must satisfy court that this property is free from any encumbrance and Government does not intend to utilise it. And therefore, it should be liquidated or sold. And that is when (b) comes in. So do not mix the two; once you do that you will have a problem. 

So, Mr Chairman, my suggestion is that the decision we have to take is: Where does the property go to? It is a simple decision which we have to make. Secondly, the proceeds can only go to the Consolidate Fund and nowhere else. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. Mr Chairman, I want to clarify – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, just give me a moment. I see children leaving but in the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Namilyango S.S.S, represented by hon. Nambooze of Mukono Municipality. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. 

We also have pupils and teachers of Mabale Primary School, represented by hon. Abraham Byandala and hon. Brenda Nabukenya of Luwero District. They have come to observe the proceedings. I think those are the ones who have just left. Please, join me in welcoming all of them. (Applause)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to refer to the Constitution, Article 153, which talks about the Consolidated Fund. Article 153(2) gives exemptions; it says: “There shall be a Consolidate Fund into which shall be paid all revenues or other moneys received for the purpose of or on behalf of or in trust for the Government.” 

But part (ii) says: “The revenues or other moneys referred to in (i) of this clause shall not include revenues or other moneys that are payable by or under an Act of Parliament in some other fund established for a specific purpose…”

Now, Mr Chairman, when we read clause 100, which talks about this fund, which is going to be created, you find that there are other payments which are going to be involved. It is not a question of selling property and all the money accrued will be for the government; they are other costs going to be involved. I am wondering whether we shall create an exception that the amount which is above what is required to be settled in the process of liquidation should be the only one going to the Consolidate Fund. Should we send all the money that has come of the liquidation to the Consolidated Fund when there are other expenses that have been involved? That is the information I wanted to provide particularly in regard to clause 153.

MR KATUNTU: Well, thank you. I am aware of that clause but the point I am trying to make is that we actually do not need that fund. Do not create institutions every other day; eventually even the costs of administering some of these processes rise. You will need managers who you have to pay. We shall have issues of transparency and in my view it is absolutely not necessary. And I think that we shall have to rethink about clause 100 – whether we really need this fund - (Interjections) - may I just make this point and then I will take the information? 

Our view is that if we get the money after liquidation, it goes to the Consolidated Fund. If it is property which we still need to utilise, it goes to the Secretary to the Treasury. After all these are their obligations under the current legal regime.

MR EKANYA: I just want to remind ourselves that if you read the Auditor-General’s report, we have Uganda Property Holdings Limited; all the rent they have been collecting since its establishment, they say they have spent it for operations and maintenance. During the divestiture and privatisation, properties were sold and because we allowed that provision, they said it was expenses for operations. 

Similarly, for the Custodian Board, things are sold and the money is spent on operations. The list is long and endless. So really, to save this country, the Uganda Revenue Authority, for example, budget and plan for activities and Government gives them that money for operations. Once they need more money, they come back to Government and ask for supplementary budget. We are going to create a contingency fund so that all the resources that are collected go to the Consolidate Fund and if you need money you can come back to Government and you will be given money.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would suggest that (a) reads as follows, “… be transferred to an established agency” because by the time it emerges, there should be an established agency to handle and streamline it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are two levels of debate now. The first level deals with the substance of clause 98 and the second level  deals with where such monies should go; whether to the Consolidated Fund or a fund called the Confiscated Assets Fund to be created for that purpose. Those are the two levels of debate. I want to start with the first, and I want to try and guide and see if this can offer a solution, because if you remove “retain” in (a) and remove that other bit then the whole thing you are dealing with under (a) is “transfer” and nothing else.

In (b), what you are dealing with is sale; that is all. There is nothing else you are dealing with apart from sale. Can I propose then that you could restructure clause 98 to something like this, “Wherever property has been confiscated under this Act, the court may, in accordance with the law, make orders for transfer or re-sale of such confiscated property”.

If that is agreeable, it would deal with that first one because you are only talking of transfer and sale. So the court will order for transfer or for sale. Now, in (2) you will create another part that says, “Proceeds arising from the disposition of the confiscated property” and I am phrasing it this way because you might have a situation where it is cash and you cannot sell cash. So, “Proceeds arising from the disposition of the confiscated property shall be deposited on the…” Now that is the next leg we are going to. So, do we agree to the first part? If you agree to the first part, then let us discuss which account this one should go.

The Attorney-General says it goes to the Consolidated Fund and the Members are also saying the same thing. The minister and the chairperson of the committee are saying it goes to the Confiscated Assets Fund. I will put the question to this and it is resolved. No amount of debate will enrich us as the two positions are irreconcilable except by vote.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, let me just give information. I am agreeable to the first part of the -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Go to the next part, everybody has agreed on the first part.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: On the second part, let me just give information. I do not want us to go to the vote. The information I wanted to give is that we are dealing with money laundering and nobody in Uganda is immune to it. That is why this Bill delayed. Now if you want to stifle this organisation, you starve it of funds. The only way to deny it funds is not appropriating money to this fund. If we want this organisation to be independent, we should allow it to have a Confiscated Assets Fund and that is my submission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the chairperson of the committee has spoken in support of these funds being transferred to the Confiscated Assets Fund.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Instead of strictly saying Consolidated Fund, I want to suggest that we say that the money will be treated as non-tax revenue. This is because when it is treated as such, at a later stage - first of all, by implication it ends up in the Consolidated Fund but the difference is that when it is treated as non-tax revenue, the Executive can come back to us here and we appropriate part of that non-tax revenue, if necessary. This is why I think it is a win-win situation. Thank you, Mr Chairperson.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thank hon. Lwanga but why should we go round instead of making it simple and clear? Mr Chairman, I am a member of the Finance Committee. His worry is that there are some expenses that must be met by the fund but I would like to allay his fears that those expenses will be catered for during appropriation and therefore, that will be a done deal. Mr Chairman, I would request my chairman to concede that the proceeds be transferred to the Consolidated Fund. I thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I wanted to tell hon. Lwanga that non-taxable revenue has a percentage, which goes to the Consolidated Fund and there is another percentage that is used at source. I know because I am coming from a hospital. We get NTR and use part of it. This is what we are seeing in hospitals. I was of the view that this money should go to the Consolidated Fund and Parliament appropriates. Why do you want to keep money?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Hon. Tim Lwanga has been around for some time and we all have memories of the Privatisation Fund that was situated near Equatorial Hotel. Those guys were getting money and eating it and there was nothing left. So there is no need to create another commission. We have the Consolidated Fund. Let the money go there and in any case, this money was stolen from Government and it must go back to the Consolidated Fund to fund Government projects. So, there is no need to find another commission for eating and creating employment for people just to eat the money.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the Attorney-General has not made a statement changing his original position. He has advised that this money goes to the Consolidated Fund under clause 98. I am going to put the question if it is necessary. Bukedea, can I put the question on this?

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to beg the indulgence of Members. When we are deciding to either take this money to the Consolidated Fund or leave it in that fund that we are about to establish; the Confiscated Assets Fund, we noted that the responsibility of this Authority is enormous and it involves making payments outside this country. When you look at clause 104 on how the authority is supposed to use this money – 4 (a) talks about satisfying an obligation of the Republic of Uganda to a foreign State in respect of the equitable share of confiscated or forfeited property –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member for Bukedea, the question here is; can’t that be handled through the budget process?

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, what I am trying to say is that areas or the commitment by the authority on this fund may not necessarily be a matter for appropriation because we are dealing with money laundering where commitments can be of emergence nature. If we are going to say that emergence issues should wait for appropriation to take place, are we really dealing with money laundering satisfactorily?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know that the honourable member from Bukedea is a former Chairperson of the Budget committee of Parliament. But we all know that there is no payment to any foreign country that is done by anybody apart from the Secretary to the Treasury. You cannot pay any money that has not been collected. If we collect for example, Shs 1 million, that is what we will transfer to them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question to the –

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I am not disagreeing, but as the sector minister, Mr Chairman, I want to concede that money should first go to the Consolidated Fund. The Authority will budget every year for all those activities and money will be allocated before getting spent accordingly. That is to minimise lack of control by the Secretary to the Treasury and misuse of money. That money should be allocated by this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, honourable minister. Let me just restate the formulation. It reads: “Whenever property has been confiscated under this Act, the court may, in accordance with the law, make an order for transfer or sale of the confiscated property. (2) The proceeds arising from the disposition of the confiscated property shall be deposited in the Consolidated Fund.” Is that clear?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, allow me to move further amendments. You know when you just mention the word “sale” people can sell anyhow. We need to clearly state that the sale shall be done at Market-Value price. This is important because we have seen so many court orders being issued but with people selling away such items at cheaper prices. We need to insert that to prevent such people from selling such property below the market value price.

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to say that selling such property at a market value price is a problem. What is a market value? Mr Chairman, we are being too pedantic. We just need to say, “They will sell.” Market value is very subjective.

MR TANNA: Mr Chairman, I would like to disagree to the insertion of the words “market value price.” I agree with what you have phrased; that is within the law – in there, we have the liquidation law, the receivership law and the PPDA to guide in case – at least we have a frame work under which such a sale can be conducted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I think I said the sale shall be done within the law. I put the question that –

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Sorry, Mr Chairman. We have voted that court will decide on where this money goes. So, it is an option –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that isn’t what we have voted. We said court will make an order for sale or transfer and that the proceeds from the disposition shall be deposited on the Consolidated Fund.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Okay, but the clarification I am seeking is whether court can decide that some of it goes to where it belongs like to those outside States?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think my colleague has raised something important. Supposing it is contraband; I mean something that is prohibited like drugs. Can we still sell it? That is why we need a provision to cater for destruction because if we just talk of sale; we can’t sell narcotic drugs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But are narcotic drugs a property? Aren’t we really pushing this too far?

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. The idea that the Leader of Opposition is advancing has been addressed by the Narcotics and Psychotropic Control Bill. It shouldn’t be captured here.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I listened to your English about this phrase where you used the words “the court may.” One time I went to court for the first time during elections and got to realise that usage of the word “may” is terrible. Why don’t we instead use the word “shall” so we are able to confiscate and sell?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is because there is already an application. If for example, the application is improperly done. There might be a situation where the application cannot be sustained in court. That is why we give court that discretion. You cannot legislate away the discretionary powers of the court.

I put the question that clause 98, as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 98, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 99, agreed to.

Clause 100

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, much as we have not directed that money from the sale of confiscated property be taken to the Confiscated Assets Fund – that organisation can use money from that Fund whether appropriated or not –(Interjections)– yes because this organisaton is going to be receiving money from different sources –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me give you information. Mr Chairman, when you read clause 38, you notice that we have said that the Authority will have a Fund. What we can do here is just to spell out the composition of the fund account. It can be one of the accounts that the expenses, which will be charged on the fund account – if you want.  
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, clause 38 was different; “The funds of the Authority shall consist of money appropriated annually by Parliament for the purposes of the Authority and Government grants made to it and any other money legally acquired by it. So there is nothing wrong with clause 38. 
 
MR RUHINDI: The concerns of Members, if I understood them well, were to guard against creating a new bureaucracy which may be very expensive to run or to manage. But the way I understand this provision is that there is no new bureaucracy. There is already an Authority which we have already passed – the financial intelligence authority - so my understanding is that this fund is to be established by the Intelligence Authority for purposes of avoiding co-mingling of funds and ring fencing this particular fund within the Authority without creating a new bureaucracy, and for purposes of financial management – you know some of us who are learned, we understand some of these things – (Laughter) – avoid co-mingling of funds. It is more or less ring fenced for particular activities and run by the same Authority. So, I do not see any contradiction whatsoever. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPEROSON: Honourable members, we have passed Acts of Parliament which create funds for agencies. I can give you an example, the Uganda Wild Life Authority has a fund; the Uganda Revenue Authority has a fund – in fact the Uganda Wild Life Authority fund is called the Wild Life Fund. So as the Attorney-General said, there is no contradiction. This fund will only be in consonance with what is in clause 38; it will not be some special thing where money goes; unless you are going to take out some of the parts that made reference that money should go directly there. 
 
MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 100(3)(a), it states, “There shall be paid into the fund: a) Proceeds from the sale of property confiscated under this Act…” That automatically collapses – (Interjections) – that is in clause 100(3)(a) and 100(1) – it provides that; ”There is established a fund to be known as the confiscated assets fund”. It cannot be called the confiscated assets fund.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no problem with that – the issue is - for example, the one you have cited that proceeds from the sale of property confiscated under this Act should go direct to that fund - so can we have a clean-up of clause 100?
 
MR EKANYA: The title needs re-drafting – I wish to propose that we call it the fund of the Authority. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, because we are talking about something you can ring-fence for specific purposes. 
 
MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose that we stand over this particular clause so that we do a thorough job rephrasing it - in view of the fact that we have dropped the issue of the confiscated assets fund and we are not creating a totally new fund. 
 
MR LWANGA: What the Chair is trying to do is, we are going to have a collection account; this Authority or whoever is doing the management is going to collect money and put it in a particular account; I can call it a collection fund or an assets fund. But it will be the fund where all this money will go. Much of this money will be in transit, just like in Uganda Revenue Authority. 
 
MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, my proposal is that given the fact that we have changed the title and the source of the money, we stand over this clause because we cannot do a thorough job here.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We can - under Uganda Wild Life Authority, the fund is called the Wild Life Fund – hon. Minister, we can get an appropriate name –
 
MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I propose that we link this up with clause 38: “The funds of the Authority shall consist of the monies appropriated annually by Parliament for the purposes of the Authority and any Government grants made to it and any other monies legally acquired by it” – (Interjections) - we should not delete it, because it does not only talk about this but even how the fund will be administered. So maybe we should change the title – but how the fund will be administered in my view should be retained under clause 100. 
 
MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I seek to know if we are proceeding well. My understanding is that the decision we made in clause 98 created a consequential deletion on clause 100. We no longer have a provision for a confiscated assets fund. What we should be doing is to accept that we deleted it as a result of the decision we took in clause 98 and maybe we create a new clause with something totally knew like you have guided us on the Wildlife Fund. But we cannot retain this as drafted now having taken the decision as we did in clause 98. So is it okay, if we accept that, first of all, this one is deleted and then maybe a new drafting be made to replace this?
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the problem is only with the title now and the issue that the proceeds will be paid there directly. The necessity of having a specialised fund, except that that fund will not be receiving money directly from sale. 
 
MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I do agree with you, but I think it is also beyond the title. The whole spirit of clause 100 was the aspect of direct confiscation and using it; so the whole spirit of it was defeated in clause 98. So beyond the title, we actually lost all this. Then, we actually have to work with the spirit of clause 38 which we retained; maybe we just need to work out a new formulation that expands clause 38 and provides for funds rather than funds from direct confiscation.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe we all pay taxes and we are all aware that all the taxes that we pay end up in the consolidated fund. My question is, who do we pay that money to? When you make a check you say, Uganda Revenue Authority. It does not mean that this money would not get to the Consolidated Fund. So really, Mr Speaker, here what we need is just a title; we can call it Confiscated Fund or whatever fund, but as long as the money goes there and goes to the Authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, first look at clause 100(4)(c) “… to pay valid mortgages and liens against confiscated property.” That is a valid charge on this fund; so that is just an example. These are specialised expenses referring to things that happened directly from these transactions. So that is why there is need for a specialised ring fenced fund within the Authority for this purpose. That is why we are saying there is no harm in retaining clause 100 except you change what it is called and take out all that says that the proceeds from the sales should go directly there.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I have been doing a research on some of these things. I do agree but the Authority is under the Public Finance Bill. The challenge we have now is that most of these institutions must have work plans, activity plans and resources and also must account to Parliament that in the coming year as a result of our activity, this is the resource we expect. We had a misconception on Confiscated Funds otherwise this Authority will come to Parliament that as a result of our activity, this is the result. In fact, these are normal activities that the Authority will be doing with in their regulation and they apply to resource spent.

The danger is and this is why even the Minister of Finance during the budget said the mining department will be still issuing receipts but money must be going direct. What has been happening, and colleagues you do not know, URA for example, the money goes to Barclays Bank and it takes three days before it goes to Bank of Uganda and therefore Barclays will know that from Monday to Friday they expect Shs 1 billion from Ugandans and that money will be liquid for them to do operations.

Therefore, all these banks have free money, the faster the Government moves away from allowing institutions or Governments to hold public money the better for our economy. All the money should go to consolidated fund. This institution must plan their normal daily operations. In fact, it is an error for us to detail that because there are some activities that they are doing which we may not put here; for ISO and ESO spend a lot of money but we do not put all that in the law about their daily operations. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The whole idea of having this fund is to receive proceeds from confiscated properties. Mr Chairman, whereas other authorities have funds, I do believe that there are clear sources of the monies that go to those funds.

The source of revenue that would go to the confiscated assets fund is the revenue that accrues from confiscated property. So, I would support the idea of having a fund if there was a defined and clear source to finance it; other than that since 1998 when we decided to send all the monies to the Consolidated Fund and then the Authority gets funds through appropriation and then we now go to accounting procedures. The monies go to an account that is managed in the Authority and the Authority makes all the expenses from that account without necessarily having a fund.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I support the idea of having a fund as the committee is recommending. We are looking at other sources of money into this fund.
When you look at clause 100(c) as a source, we are looking at money paid to the Republic of Uganda by a foreigner in respect to any sharing of confiscated property. So we are looking at other sources and I would support what hon. Nambooze said, the other sources which are not included which might be useful in getting money for the Authority. So, I do support that we can stand over this as we think about rephrasing it and also look at other sources in other laws of different countries so that we rectify the problem. But we need the fund under the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a substantive proposal that clause 100 be deleted. I need the minister to speak to it.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman and colleagues, we need to help the Authority to create a fund in which they deposit all they get through their operations not expenditure. Let me use an account then we can find the appropriate word. You need an account in which the Authority should deposit the money they obtained through their activities. You also need an account where money appropriated by Parliament and other grants for their day to day activities goes. I may ask a question; if we say we delete clause 100, where will the Authority deposit the money that they obtain before it is transferred to the consolidated fund?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank the Minister of Finance. He is very much aware that Bank of Uganda which you supervise can create an account. It has an account for URA before the money is officially moved to the public account for expenditure for the purpose of auditing URA. So this Authority can enter a memorandum of understanding under your guidance as Minister of Finance that this money be put there.

What am I saying? Consolidated fund account is not a single account. There are so many accounts and therefore this Authority under your guidance with Bank of Uganda shall create a consolidated fund account for moving this money before it is moved to the expenditure account for usage -(Interjections)- yes, go ahead.

MR LWANGA: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving way.  Yes you are talking about this money but tell me, there is a property that is confiscated, it has tenants in it, it has mortgages to pay and they are collecting rent. Where are they going to put that money? Can you clarify and tell us exactly whether it is possible in accounting to keep money in the Central Bank and that one manages all the funding from the Central Bank? Or it is easier for this Authority to have an autonomous account where it manages all these kinds of funds because it is not only about confiscation. It is also about running the place; it is about mortgages; it is about collecting rent; it is about paying bills; it is about paying for security. Clarify please.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is also clause 101 which is on appointment of receivers, trustees and managers. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chair. I think we should take the consistence of what is in the practice. Take an example, embassies collect money but before they use it, they must come here and then Parliament approves. They do not use it themselves. When you look at sub-clause (4), the purpose of collecting money, you find that if the Authority itself collects money and spends it; it is a conflict of interest in a manner that if other agencies collect money and put it on the Consolidated Fund, and again they make an - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you are taking us back. We have already said that all those monies should be paid to the Consolidated Fund. That one we have finished.

MR KAKOOZA: Yes. This is what I was –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What we are debating now is whether there is a need to create a fund for the Authority. 

MR KAKOOZA: That is what I am trying to say that you do not need it, because if you say that the Investment Authority would plan    on the basis of its activities - and when you look at clause 100 which we are debating, the money which is collected will be in the investment plan of that Authority which is going to be spent with in that year. So you do not need to collect and send it –

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: May I give information –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, Chairman, wait!

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: May I give information to my member of the committee?    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, you first wait! Chairman wait. Let me have the honourable member for Pian and not Kyaka.
  
MR ACHIA REMIGIO: Thank you, Mr Chair. First of all, we have agreed in clause 98 that all the money goes to the Consolidated Fund. Two, we have been struggling asking ourselves what happens then to the Authority? We know Uganda Revenue Authority does not have a fund but a collection account and most of these organisations have collection accounts; even this Financial Intelligence Authority will naturally have an account. So they will come here like the people of the Judiciary do - the Minister of Justice when they have claims against them – against the State of Uganda, whether from human rights or anybody, they will come here and we approve the money. 

Let this Authority do its work of collection and transmitting money through an account that will be created with the advice of the Secretary to the Treasury which is a collection account - they will come here and we shall approve their resources of their operation. Whatever they have, be it mortgages, we shall do that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 

MR ACHIA REMIGIO: There is no need for a fund at all. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Kyaka County.

MR KWEMARA: Thank you so much, Chair. I want to clarify here that we are confusing two things; an account and a fund. There is a very big difference and actually a fund can have several accounts and so to me, the argument doesn’t hold that we should not have a fund simply because we shall not have where to put the money that won’t go to the Consolidated Fund; actually what we need is what we call a Suspense Account which helps you to first put that money there then later it can go to the Consolidated Fund. I thank you.  

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My colleague, hon. Kwemara, has even complicated it the more. Why we have advocated for depositing all the proceeds from the confiscated properties to the Consolidated Fund is actually a control measure because these properties involve huge sums of money and therefore we could not allow these sums of money to be used in form of appropriation in aid - that is at source. You have collected money and then just spend at source - No. So we have achieved that but by achieving that, it does not mean that we should do away with the fund. 

Why am I saying that? Mr Chairman, I want to refer you to clause 104 on page 70. When you look at what is under clause 104, you will see that actually the Authority will have some obligations to meet which are outside the day-to-day running of the Authority and because of that, I would think that we need this fund but in this fund, the funds that will be put there are not funds received by the Authority per se but where we have proceeds from the sale of the property, I would rather we put funds appropriated by Parliament and thereafter we need to agree whether actually under (b) on page 70, the balance of any money recovered under pecuniary penalty order under clause 96 should be received directly into the fund or to the Consolidated Fund as well as (C); because to me, the money talked about in (C) should also directly go to the Consolidated Fund so that the fund that is remaining has the money that has been appropriated by Parliament specifically to handle the issues under clause 104 as they are, because if we just rely on the funds under clause 38 - Funds of the Authority, how will the Authority meet - these ones cannot be met by the Consolidated Fund. They must be met by the Authority.

So, Mr Chairman, I would propose that we retain the fund but the money going to the fund should be appropriated by Parliament. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I be helped because we have the Uganda Road Fund, we have the Energy Fund and recently we had the debate between the Minister for Finance and that of Works on why they have not operationalised the Road Fund in terms of those issues? Could these be a guide to the kind of fund that we are talking about here? The fund from the Uganda Road Fund is actually from the Consolidated Fund; the Energy Fund is from the Consolidated Fund? So is that the kind of line that you want to create for this particular fund, honourable minister, for specific purposes like this?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, as I earlier on said, I would just like to look at the functions. Why do we want this fund or this account if you want me to repeat what I said? What I and the ministry would be interested in - we can use a different word but we would prefer not to use the word “fund”. Mr Chairman, allow me to use this word for lack of good English - we want a bag – (Interjections) – “Ensawo” – (Interjections) – no, no, well, we could call it a collection account. We want a bag. 

I am just clarifying and I am not giving a proposal on what it should be called. The Parliament here should tell us what it should be called. We want an “Ensawo” or a bag where the money that is generated [HON. NAMBOOZE: “You can steal forever.”] no, no, it will not be stolen because there will be controls. The money that is generated by the activities of the Authority would be deposited and subsequently transferred to the Consolidated Fund. You could call it a collection account; I am not proposing that one; I am waiting for Parliament to guide me on this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Minister. You have again taken us back to the issue of that collection account which is already resolved in clause 98. That all that money will go to the Consolidated Fund. That is not the debate. The debate now is you have the Financial Intelligence Authority, what would be the structure in that account into which money would be paid from the Consolidated Fund? So, the Financial Intelligence Authority would have an operational account; would have a development account, and would have an account for purposes which were intended under clause 100. For example, payment obligations; certifying obligations of the public; meeting remuneration of expense of receivers; paying valid mortgages and debts against confiscated property but that money would be coming from the Consolidated Fund. So, what will that special account of the FIA be called? That is the debate. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I said let us look at the functions precisely – (Interjections) - he is asking me to respond – we are not getting our minds together. Let me first ensure that our minds are together.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, the Financial Intelligence Authority will have a special account whose money will come from the Consolidated Fund. That money coming from the Consolidated Fund to this special account of the Financial Intelligence Authority will be for purposes, as initially intended, under clause 100(4) and other related matters.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I thank you for guiding, to allow us have a fund. But once it walks like a duck, looks like a duck and quacks like a duck, then it is a duck. So, if we say FIA fund, then there is no harm in amending it and then describing the functions. It is a fund. I concede to the chairman’s proposal. 

MR EKANYA: The challenge we have colleagues is that when it comes to payment of allowances or whatever the word to the heads of this institution, if you create or use the word “fund” in the law and tomorrow Dr Kiyonga is made the head of that fund, we will have a challenge determining his payment. Let me tell you the challenge we will have. He will want to be paid according to the status and the level of other fund managers because in the law, we have used the word “fund” and therefore, for purposes – (Interjection) - no, we are trying to reduce costs. We are a third world country. Let us use a word that will not create complications in terms of operational costs. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Special account?

MR LOKERIS: Mr Chairman, most of these things are semantics. What I want to propose is, and I am looking at the Authority - the funds which will come to this Authority will be for paying various expenses. This sub-clause (4) here would be itemised under the Authority itself; that is the funds in clause 38 so that it becomes “to meet the remuneration and expenses of trustees…” and so forth and all these would come from the Consolidated Fund so that you just put it under there other than saying that we are getting another fund. This would be just an item. This one comes from this item to pay this item; very simple.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words you propose that we delete clause 100?

MR LOKERIS: We should delete 100 and transfer payments in sub-clause (4) under the Authority. We could say the funds from there will pay this and that is all.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I had agreed with you and we had said special account which shall pay - [HON. MEMBERS: “Justify”]- I said I had agreed with your proposal and you had the narration of a special account. Let that account be there for the so many things we are going to collect and put there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable  members, what we are trying to follow up was the submission from the Attorney-General, that you need this money when it is sent there, to be ring-fenced for these purposes because otherwise if it just goes there, somebody might decide to use it to pay themselves allowances. So, the purpose is to create something difficult to play around with; where money that will be sent from the Consolidated Fund goes and it is ring-fenced for those purposes in the Act. That is why they were looking for something that can be accommodated. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you have accessed the microphone before my authority; I will have the member for Moroto.

MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought we had agreed that the money would go to the Consolidated Fund and secondly, we are also saying that the money that goes to the Consolidated Fund cannot be spent at source. What is this other account that we are creating? I want to illustrate using the Uganda Revenue Authority. How does the Uganda Revenue Authority receive the money that we appropriate? They have an account. That is what we require. Then clauses 101, 102, 103 need to be deleted and we create a name for this account, which will carry the functions of clause 4. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what we said, a special account. FIA special account -

MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII: I agree with a special account, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we together now, hon. Members? So what it would mean is that you take out the rest of clause 100 and leave only sub-clauses 4, 5 and 6 and you call this FIA-special account. Is that okay? Honourable members, can I now have the member from Bujenje?

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. What we are trying to do is to reverse what we had passed in 1998. Because, if you read – you are talking of a special account; the moneys that will be going to the special account will be from confiscated assets – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, no.

MS KABAKUMBA: And, Mr Chairman, if it is not the case, what are we are going to appropriate – because we want all the money to go to the Consolidated Fund; you cannot trace all that money to pay for all these expenses unless you are creating a special account where Parliament will appropriate money to cover all these expenses – (Interjections) - if it is that then we are together.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is actually what has now finally been proposed.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Along those lines, if I am now clear about what we are trying to do, there will be three accounts; one is the collection account from where money will be transferred to the Consolidated Fund – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, no, that one is 1998; please do not take us back there.

MR KABAJO: Okay. Then another one will be this special account and then the other account will be an operational account for the organisation. So in this case, it does not matter what name we give it; we can call it “confiscated assets accounts”. This account shall be administered with authority in accordance with the procedures and so forth. But when you read through, you will see that part (iii) does not apply to this account we are discussing because it says, “They shall be paid into the account - proceeds from sale of property confiscated –”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We agreed to delete that one.

MR KABAJO: Okay, that one has been deleted. But I think generally what we are discussing is about the title of an account. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is okay now, Members.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, I get worried when we start splitting these accounts because that is asking for too much; let us leave that to the technocrats to go and write their books. Let us just get a title; if we want to call it “special operations account” or if you want to call it a fund, it does not matter. Let us just get whatever title it is and we proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So the proposal is to change the headnote of 100, delete sub-clauses (1), (2), (3) – is there need for sub-clause (5)? This would be an account; ordinarily it would be audited in a usual way. So delete sub-clauses (5) and (6).

MR LUGOLOOBI: How then do we monitor the proceeds coming out of all these sales because sub-clause (5) is talking about audit? We need to find a way of formulating it in order to take care of the processes and whatever is coming in.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That now comes in on the general auditing and from the Office of the Auditor-General under the general audit of the institution because it is just an account.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, but even then you need to track how this money is coming in and you need to provide for it somewhere; so you do not leave it open like that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you are proposing that clauses (5) and (6) should be retained? Honourable members, we have had enough debate on this; so let us take a decision. I put the question that sub-clause (1) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that sub-clause (2) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that sub-clause (3) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Sub-clause (3) has an element of money paid to the Republic of Uganda by a foreign state in respect of anything confiscated – now this is coming from outside – or forfeited property whether – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that will go to the Consolidated Fund, under 1998.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If we deleted sub-clauses (1), (2) and (3) and we retain sub-clause (4) – in sub-clause (4) we are simply saying that from this special account, we shall be paying A, B, C, D but we need to have shown the source of funds for this special account. So, I am proposing that when we are deleting the proceeds from the sale of the property – in other words, (a), (b) and (c) are deleted but we need to have (a) which says, “funds appropriated by Parliament”. That means sub-clause (3) should read, “There shall be paid into the special account funds appropriated by Parliament.” It is at that point that we can have the basis of sub-clause (4) where we are making expenses. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Does that make sense, honourable members?

MR MUSAASIZI: If you looked at clause 38, it says, “The funds of the Authority shall consist of money appropriated annually by Parliament for the purposes of the Authority, any Government grants or any other money legally acquired by it.” How is this going to be different from the proposal by hon. Kyooma?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it is specifically made to pave way for the special allocation that comes under this particular section. I think there is no inconsistency. (Interjection) Let me first deal with this amendment; are you going to deal with it? Okay, what the chairperson was talking about was finished. (Laughter) Just hold on. The amendment from the Member for Ibanda – we finished with (d) and (c). So that would be now like the new one.

MR KYOOMA: Yes, actually it will be sub-clause (1): “The money shall be paid into the special account funds appropriated by Parliament” (Interjection) we called it a special account, Mr Chairman. The legal brains can help us but the whole idea is – (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why is it special? It is because the purposes are known. So I put the question to the amendment proposed by the member of Ibanda North – a new sub-clause (1).

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So sub-clause 4 will remain as it is or do we need to make some changes there?

MR EKANYA: Yes, there is need to make some modifications, for example, sub-clause (4)(e); I do not think that (e) is necessary or it can be modified. It says, “To recover costs associated with administration of the fund.” Now that the fund is no longer there, I think this – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you are saying that we now need to take out (e)? But even the opening of sub-clause (4) should be running from (1).

MR EKANYA: Yes, it needs to be re-casted from what he has said.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So somebody was saying, “For purposes of…”

MR EKANYA: “For purposes of the following expenses …”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “The money as appropriated under sub-clause (1) will be for the following purposes:” Is that okay? Are we together? (Hon. Kabakumba rose_) Let us clear this matter first then we take on new issues; are you on this same issue?

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There is a small typographical error in clause 4(a). I think that is for “reinstate” in respect of - There is a “t” missing. It is in the second line of 4(a).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, please note that amendment on the word “state”.

MS KABAKUMBA: Then in (l), I do not know whether (f) is also necessary. Since Parliament is going to appropriate, I do not think the minister and the Board should approve how this account is managed in terms of spending money. I propose that (f) also be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think it falls along the side of the - so (f) should also go. Member for Serere, are you now satisfied? We have now married (4), which will now be (2) to run from the amendment proposed by the hon. Member for Ibanda North and approved. Now the proposal is to delete (e) and (f) under sub-clause 4. I put the question to the deletion of (e) and (f).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, mine is about the deletion of 3 (b) and (c). When you look at what we passed in 1998, we did not cover (b) and (c) so by deleting and not including them under clause 98, we are leaving out this source of income to the Board. I propose that instead of deleting them entirely, we can delete them from here but find a position for them, maybe in clause 98 so that this money can be transmitted to the Consolidated Fund. If we delete (b) and (c), where will this money go?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think there is a point there, hon. Members. So we might need to recommit clause 98 so that we can incorporate those two principles. Are we together? Can we now take a decision? Somebody should take note of (b) and (c) for recommittal of clause 98 so that when we come to that stage, we can bring this back under those ones. Okay?

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, my understanding is that under clause 98, we had already said that money from the sale of confiscated property under this Act would be put into the Consolidated Fund. How that process occurs, from what we were being told here would be advised by the technical staff like the Secretary to Treasury and so forth - about how to set up a special account for that purpose and so forth. I do not think we need to write it into the law. That is the clarification I am seeking. Do we need to specify that because we have already indicated under clause 98 that any money from the court orders will go into the Consolidated Fund. Now the procedures are technical issues.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What you are saying is that when Parliament is going through the budget process, it must look at a particular set of monies that will go to this account for the purposes in the Act. In other words, it should not be lost in the translation. Can we deal with this matter now? We have made those changes in 4(a) and we have also deleted (e) and (f) so we are through with clause 100. We have deleted (5) and (6). I put the question that sub-clause 5 be deleted.
                   (Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that sub-clause 6 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 100, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 101

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Covenant Primary School from Mbale Municipality represented by hon. Wamanga-Wamai and hon. Connie Galiwango. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we intend to amend clause 101 first with a title which states, “Management of restrained and confiscated property”. Also replace -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You still want to use the word “retain”?

MR SSEBUNYA: It is “restrained”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR SSEBUNYA: It is, “Management of restrained and confiscated property”. (1) Property restrained or confiscated under this Act shall be managed in accordance with regulations made under this Act. (2) The court may require any person having possession of the property to give up possession of the property to the person appointed under the regulations made under this Act. We also propose to delete “to stay” in (3) and sub-clauses 4 and 5.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is your justification, Mr Chairman?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: There is need for detailed and more meticulous provisions for the monitoring and management of restrained and/or confiscated property in order to avoid creation of another ground for misuse of these properties and this will be best catered for in the regulations under this Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal from the committee. Can I put the question to that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first of all, we passed clause 98, which talks about transfer of property under sale. Why are we now bringing this and saying Government will again make an application to court so that they can appoint receivers, trustees and managers? We decided in (2) that property will go to Government or they will sell. So it is up to the government to make the sales. That is why I am getting lost with the total from 101.

What will happen here is government to sell and it has its own procedures. One, it has a government liquidator and how it does that -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, they may not have convicted the person yet. The trial may take three or four years but there is confiscated property. What do you do with it? But where the person has already been convicted, the other clause kicks in. So there is a possibility that you have property for a person who has not yet been convicted. How do you manage it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that one is okay. What about (4)?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They have proposed (4) for deletion.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I have deleted (4) and (5).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you have proposed. (Laughter)

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I have proposed to delete -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have two power centres; two chairpersons. So if they restructure it in the form proposed by the committee, they are saying (4) and (5) would not be necessary if we adopt the new (1), (2) and (3) in the Bill.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee. Presently, we have a challenge and in the UK, our property, because of management and maintenance costs, was supposed to be disposed of but Government tried and failed. So, a management contract was entered into with some individual company but the story is very ugly. 

The operational costs of the management are very high, to the extent that the contracted company is always in arrears and needs more time for it to recover that money. So, Government has found itself in a very difficult situation.

This proposal will take care of manipulators who can create higher liabilities. At the end of the day, we will lose out. How do we avoid such situations, like that one in the UK?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The regulations will have to do something – are you taking this to the official receiver?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I do not have information about the property that the honourable member is talking about, much as I welcome him back. Anyway, we are saying there is a property that must be managed through a process. But I do not think this law can stop manipulators. We are just putting controls in place so that if someone manipulates a system, they are charged in courts of law.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, what hon. Geoffrey Ekanya is talking about is right. Under such circumstances, Government might be the loser. When you look at how it is done, you realise that the law talks about court appointing and on commercial terms - so, I would like to propose, under the Public Trustees Act, we have got the official receiver of Government. In this case, in order to avoid manipulation, why don’t we also provide for that official receiver? The manipulators can increase liability to cause loss to Government? I am saying this because if you leave it out to businessmen out there, they will take it as usual business.

I propose that we look at Section 10 or 11 of the Public Trustees Act so that we can provide for a receiver or trustee not appointed by court, but appointed under this law because that will now be a government officer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, court is not involved in (1) and it reads thus: “Court may require any person having possession of property to give possession of the property to the person appointed under the regulations made under this Act.” This means if they find you in possession of the property and there are issues you do not want to leave, then they will go to court. But the particular person to manage will be detailed in the instrument to be issued by the minister.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, when you look at (2), it says: “The court may require any person having possession of the property – and to give possession of the property to the person appointed under this section” and under (3), “The power to manage or otherwise to deal –“ That is where the issue of manipulation comes in. It comes in the management and dealing with the property. If we do not look at this properly, Government will continuously lose in most cases where it deals with ongoing concerns or businesses. Government is likely to lose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But, honourable member, it is not the court appointing this person. It is only ordering the person in possession of the property to hand over to the receiver. This is because by the time you get this property, it is not empty; somebody must be occupying it. 

This clause will deal with situations where Government goes to take over such property but meets resistance. It will be at that point that Government will go to court to secure an order for the other person to vacate the property. Court will only order that the property be transferred to the person who has been appointed.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, in order to avoid that ambiguity, why don’t we ring-fence it such that the court only orders for the hand over to a public trustee under the Public Trustees Act? I am raising this in relation to what hon. Ekanya said. We are going to have manipulators taking over and at the end of the day, Government will even go to the Consolidated Fund to get money to pay this person managing and running such a business. In this case, we should look at a possibility – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Every year here, colleagues, if you do not know, Amber House Uganda Ltd, which is a property of Government of Uganda, we budget for rent for its operations. The property is under private management, but we keep paying rent yet, we get nothing for it. The company managing it collects money from Government, yet, it is a property of Government. This is the situation I am talking about and which is obtaining in the UK and other parts of the world. How do we avoid this?

MR SSIMBWA: So, Mr Chairman, in such a scenario, we need to find a way to make a law that protects Government from continuously losing money in such circumstances.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is your proposal?

MR SSIMBWA: My proposal is that in this case, we say that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The problem is that, you are looking at the Bill yet we are still dealing with what has been proposed by the committee. According to them, what is in the Bill should be deleted and replaced with a new formulation, but I can see you still reading –

MR SSIMBWA: Maybe, Mr Chairman, you can read the new formulation and we see how to deal with it. Otherwise, what I want us to do is to include the Public Trustees Act’s provisions in that formulation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First read what you have to the House.

MR SSIMBWA: My proposal reads thus: “The court may require any person having possession of the property to give up possession of the property to the person appointed under the regulations made under this Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And in (1)?

MR SSIMBWA: And in (1), it should be framed as follows: “Property destroyed or confiscated under this Act shall be managed in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is exactly what they are proposing.

MR SSIMBWA: That is okay, but I still want us to find a way of involving the Public Trustees Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If that is okay – 

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Mr Chairman, South Africa is 10 years ahead of us in having the anti- money laundering law. They also have a Financial Intelligence Authority like what we are trying to propose here. One of the functions for this authority – there are three departments: the one that deals with litigation, administration and fund management. This particular function is directly under the Financial Intelligence Authority. 

The authority has staff who act as receivers and manage the assets that are usually confiscated and those that should be disposed of. I am not sure how we can borrow that idea without expanding and bringing in external receivers. The Financial Intelligence Authority should carry out the function of fund and property management in addition to their daily responsibilities. That would be better than getting external actors.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, we will now give the minister the discretion to import that from what has been proposed by the committee to the extent that it should be handled under the regulations made under this Act.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, in (3) (b), we are talking about a situation where property has little or no value, the power to destroy that property. I notice that we have left out property that can be of very high value, like narcotics but undesirable. How do we deal with that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We said that issues to do with those narcotics are handled under another law. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On the issue of the Member for Makindye, I think the heading should be “Appointment of official receivers”. That means Government receivers. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The committee has proposed, “Management of restrained or confiscated property” instead of “appointment of official receivers.”  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, then, we should also put in a clause to deal with accountability. I think every six months, they should prepare a bi-annual return to court to show how they manage property; the income received, the expenses on it and so on. But if you leave it like this, we will say their job is to maintain and they will do nothing. 

So, I propose that we put sub clause (3) stating that “Every six months, the managers of the confiscated property shall submit a financial report on management of property to court through the minister “-(Interjections) – okay “...to the minister to show how the properties are managed.” If they are collecting rent, it should be shown and the expenses should be shown and to see if they are managing the property well. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: If the Member wishes to put control as far as reporting is concerned, I have no objections. But the reporting method can be put in the regulations as hon. Katuntu is saying because there are going to be detailed ways of doing it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question that sub clause (4) be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that sub clause (5) be deleted. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the amendment as proposed by the chair of the committee to replace the heading of Clause 101 and replace sub clause (1) and (2) in the terms proposed by the committee.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 101, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 102 agreed to.

Clause 103 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new clause after Clause 102 to read: “On the headline of international cooperation agreement, the Attorney-General or the authorised officer may enter into an agreement with any minister, department, public authority or body outside Uganda for the collection, use or disclosure of information for the purpose of exchanging or sharing information outside Uganda or for any purpose under this Act.” 

The justification is to allow the Attorney-General to enter into an agreement with a public agency outside Uganda to exchange or share information for any other purpose under this Act. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I see a gap and I am particularly not content with this. The Attorney-General may, considering his interest, put our country at loss particularly if he enters an agreement on behalf of Uganda. And considering the history of the attorneys-general we have had in Uganda, we need to take second thought on this. 

The purpose of this agreement is good, but I propose that this is done in consultation with Parliament because the attorneys- general we have are not good. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the honourable member on the Floor intends to legislate for persons here. I thought the proposal from the committee was to legislate in respect of an office of the Attorney-General and not for persons or the holder there of – [Mr Nandala-Mafabi:”Information”] - You cannot give information on information. 

Previously, this is why he has carefully deleted the expression, “The authorised officer in Uganda”, because the Attorney-General’s role as far as legal advisory services for this country are concerned is constitutional; that is Article 119. 

Mr Chairman, we had a long debate in this House as to the value of such a clause but we agreed that we can have it. We debated its value because legislating across borders – we saw the challenges. But we said, “After all, there is no harm in having this kind of clause”.

But the information I want to give to my colleague is that a good law should always be blind. If you legislate and make your laws have eyes, to see whom you are legislating for, then you will have a problem. 

MR KATUNTU: Let me seek a clarification from the learned Attorney-General, having Article 119 in mind, the Office of the Attorney-General serves as the principal legal advisor to Government. Ordinarily, in situations like these, there is a minister responsible under the Act and the Act has defined who this minister is. Why don’t we have that minister to enter into agreements and you reserve your role of being his principal legal advisor other than you taking over the functions of the minister under this Act? I do not understand whether I am being a shadow of you.

MR RUHINDI: I appreciate the humility of the shadow attorney general for legislating himself out of office but normally, under international obligations of this nature, where requests are being made and even requests are being received, particularly of a legal nature, even the ICC statute to give as an example the officer that we put as the officer in charge is the Attorney General’s Office. They want to say that is related to justice.

Mr Chairman, there are no hard and soft rules on this matter - you can take that route. This is the proposal from the committee. The shadow attorney general can propose an amendment to it and I do not think I would have any problem with it.

MR KATUNTU: Therefore, I propose an amendment to the committee’s proposal that “the minister may” instead of the Attorney-General then the Attorney-General will certainly advise because there is no agreement that can be entered into binding Government without the approval of the Attorney General. So, he is part and parcel of this agreement.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Let it go without saying that I have accepted his amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment by hon. Katuntu of replacing the “Attorney-General” with “the minister.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the new insertion of a new Clause 103 in the terms proposed and as proposed by the Chair and as amended by the hon. Katuntu.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the new Clause 103 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think Clause 103 is where we had an issue the other time. Here, we have documents outside the state.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me clarify this. There is no amendment from the committee on the existing Clause 103. That same amendment is just approved in the new Clause 103. So, now, we are on Clause 103 in the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, Clause 103 is talking about a request for mutual legal assistance. Foreign governments will ask us but we have not put anything also asking and yet, many of our properties have been externalised. I will seek the indulgence of the Chairman; is it legally wrong to include also –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I think we are making a mistake. Do you have an amendment?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We have an amendment and that is to his effect and also to the effect of the committee. We have an amendment under Clause 103, requesting for mutual legal assistance. It will read:
    1) “The minister in Uganda may make a request to the court or other competent authority of another state for a legal assistance related to a civil criminal or administrative investigation, prosecution, proceedings for enforcement of court orders.”

The justification is that court should not be included since it may be required to adjudicate on the same matter. I think we have removed the current (1). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you propose to delete the existing sub clause (1) and in its place, put what you have just read.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I do not think we need to delete (1). The other people can apply to our court; we are also saying, we should also put a clause for us to apply to the other court also to assist us. This thing you have drafted does not do that because here, it is saying “The minister.” We want to look for a way our orders can be enforced.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what is proposed now in this.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: What I have just proposed is the authority we are giving the minister or the Attorney-General to seek information from other jurisdictions and as you have accepted (1), that is to allow other countries to seek information here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us first finish this. The proposal in the new (1), I do not think that it can replace the existing (1). So, this one is new. The minister may make a request to court or other competent authority of another state for legal assistance related to a civil, criminal or administrative investigations, prosecutions or enforcement of court orders. I think that takes care of hon. Nandala’s concerns. Are we together now?

So, we now have a new proposal for a new (1) from which the other one will be subsequently amended.

MR ACIRE: Mr Chairman, I wanted to seek your clarification. We have decided to use “the minister” but we are also aware that we have bodies like Director of Public Prosecutions. There are bodies that are independent and not under the direction of the minister. So, how do we handle that if they have to make their independent requests to other jurisdictions, do they have to go through the minister? Our Constitution says that the DPP shall be independent and not under the directive of anybody but now we are saying “The minister shall make a request” but if they are doing an independent inquiry – the DPP or IGG - are we saying that they will have to go through the minister to ask such information from another state?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, I agree that there is a new insertion that has been made under Clause 103. But to my understanding, what we want our country to request from a foreign state is not equivalent to what the foreign state is requesting from us. When we look at what is in the Bill as (1), for them they are requesting for identification, tracing, freezing, seizing and confiscating property here. This means a foreign state can ask for confiscation or tracing of property here but when it comes to us now, what we can only ask for is for legal assistance related to civil, criminal and administrative which means we are not on equal terms with the foreign state. So, I would request that what appears in the present Clause 103 (1) should be the same in the insertion in the proposal by the committee.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The learned Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, first, my colleague talked about the independence of the DPP and relating it to international obligations. You see, independence of the DPP is that office to have powers to exercise its powers independently, professionally and without interference. It is independent to make a decision and by the way, independence is not a shield against accountability. 

For as long as you operate within the four corners of the law, you are independent. If you get out of the four corners of the law, you are not. I was surprised one time here when some offices did not even want to appear before Parliament because they were saying they were independent. That is not being independent. 

Therefore, independence is to the powers of the DPP to make independent decisions. But interstate obligations are political functions exercisable by relevant ministerial portfolios or ministers. 

So, honourable colleagues, interstate obligations are matters -   because you see the DPP between states could even be strange. DPP does not sit in Parliament and he does not sit in Cabinet.  When it comes to those functions, it is the sector ministers who speak for those independent bodies in Parliament or in Cabinet. 

Now to my hon. colleague from Makindye, we debated this matter. I do not know whether you were in the House. Really, the best we can stop at is what the committee is proposing and beyond that, is to legislate for another foreign state. You cannot! That you make provisions in your domestic law on how they should be enforced in the other country, that is not applicable, Mr Chairman. Thank you.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, when we refer to the international convention on the confiscation of property, there is no way the Attorney-General is saying that we are going out of the law. Unfortunately, I do not have it here but it allows under mutual agreement between states to assist in the tracing, identification, and even confiscation. So, I do not know why we cannot replicate or domesticate that law and we provide for it in our laws.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, can I have the Member for Kole? He has not contributed on this and then I have the – 

MR EBIL: Mr Chairman, just like in 1960 while opening this Parliamentary Building, the then Secretary for Colonies, Macleod, said that, “There are laws, which will divide us but what is very important at that hour is that we should look at what law helps our people.” 
So, I agree with the Attorney-General that on matters of international law, we have to play by the law. But I wanted us to look at, if possible, we could bend it just a little –(Laughter)- in other words, I am not asking too much. I am asking that people have stolen money from our country; people have looted this money and some of them have been given even five years only. After five years, they start collecting their rent in China, America and our people continue languishing in poverty.  

So, Mr Chairman, I do not know whether it is possible in the circumstances that we are still standing here today while our people are languishing in poverty to do something in memory of these people who die every day because of the plundered money of public funds, and these people go and build huge mansions in America so that we tighten the noose within the country here by putting, as we wanted to put it – if possible, like my colleague of Makindye East, if you could adjust it a bit so that we do not go beyond the borders of international law. I thank you.  

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, you know when legislating, you must have a purpose. That is the first point for take-off. Let us look at the objects of the Bill, that is Clause 2 (c) - it is to enable Uganda to fulfill its international commitment to participate in the fight against trans-national crime particularly, money laundering.

This process that we are going through now, 95 percent of the countries have gone through it. Actually, we are a little bit too late. They are all creating legal regimes in their countries. I can tell you that, for example, if we are not to pass this law, I do not know the cutoff date, we may be denied access to some of these international clearing houses [Mr SSEBUNYA: “30th June.”] 30th June. 

So, the reason we cannot legislate literally outside the international framework is, one, to go to a country, you do not say that, “I am coming with a court order.” You do not. It is what the law in that country provides – [Hon. Member: “India.”] I am not going to talk about India - (Laughter) – for various reasons. So, we cannot sit here and legislate that when we come to you, we shall be coming like this or that. It will certainly not be correct. 
I agree entirely with the opinion of the Attorney-General and we do not have to complicate it. You see, if we go there by letter because of the international or mutual commitments that we have made, it is okay. So, we just look at the law in that country, which we are seeking to have cooperation with, what does it say? Do you come by order or do you go by order? Do you come by letter or do you go by letter? Do they say you should come by the Attorney-General’s whatever it is or do you then go by that? So, you cannot provide it in this law and that is my opinion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, let me help. I know the learned people are giving their views. Even here in Uganda, there is a proviso that we may accept or not. What my brother, hon. Ssimbwa is saying is that under the Confiscation of Assets Convention, which we have domesticated here, we agree to confiscate assets. Now, here, we are saying that we may also request - not under this Act but we are saying “may request.” 

It is up to that country to either accept or refuse and we are not saying that they will be following this Act, Mr Chairman. What we would say here is “A court or competent authority in Uganda may make a request.” Just make a request from a court or other competent authority of another state to identify, trace, freeze, seize or confiscate properties derived from money laundering activities and we stop there. We cannot say “under this Act” because they may not apply, they may have another Act to apply and maybe we can put it under the international convention. 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, in addition to what my honourable colleague is saying, hon. Katuntu, has ably quoted one of the intents of this Bill, “To enable Uganda fulfil its international commitments to participate in the fight against transnational crime” and the UN Convention on fighting transnational crime is very clear. Under Article 13, International Corporation for purposes of confiscation, they are many but in one of the sub clauses, “A state party that has received a request from a state party having jurisdiction may be – (Interjections) – yes, that is what we are saying.
 
We are saying that let us place a request to trace as it is included here because under this convention, the state where you are requesting from, if Uganda is requesting from Kenya, Kenya should take the responsibility of tracing and identifying. So, what is wrong with us including that part in our request instead of being vague? Why do we provide a big hammer to hit ourselves with and we cannot use the same hammer to hit the others because it is provided for? I request hon. Katuntu to read Article 13 of the UN Convention on fighting transnational crime.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, there are two issues. There is a proposal from the committee for an amendment, where it has now been changed to say “The minister”. If you look at Clause 103(1) the court under that is receiving a request from another court from the other side. The court in Uganda is receiving a request from another court in the other country. Why would we then, instead of making courts do this court thing, make a minister to be the one to make this request?  Because if it is a request from the court, that means you have applied to the court that I need the following things and the court has granted you the authority to seek this thing out of jurisdiction and then make the request. 

I do not know how improper that would be because then, in that case, you would only need to rephrase to alter the content of Clause 103(1) to say, “A court in Uganda may request” or something like that. I do not know whether it works that way so that the request is made through the court to conform. I do not know; Attorney-General, because here it is court sending the request to the court in Uganda and here on our part, we are saying “the minister” will request the other court. 

MR KATUNTU: I feel fortified in my thinking that what we are trying to do is not reaping any dividend or adding value and I will give an example. Assuming this money has been hidden in Argentina, and the Argentine law says that the minister responsible for finance in Uganda will make a request to the country, like the one we have just provided for in our law that it is the court or the minister, what will you do when your law is talking about the court? 

So, what is important is that the country you are going to request assistance from has a legal regime and how to reach that legal regime, you have to read the law and say, it could be as ridiculous as say, the President of the country may make a request or Cabinet of that country may make the request. We cannot know how the country wants you to arrive there. So, it is absolutely not necessary. Once you know this property is hidden somewhere in the United Kingdom, then your lawyers or whoever it is must look at the United Kingdom’s law and determine how to get there. And that is the most important. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, do we adopt the position of the committee? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, can the order be enforced? That is what we are trying to say and if it can be enforced, we are saying that we also should be able to make a request for this order. If they enforce it, well and good; if they do not – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: No. Let us look at what sort of order can come out of a court. Can a court order be a court order when it is seeking assistance? You could have what my colleagues are thinking about, what you would have is an ordinary court order, which is being enforced outside jurisdiction. If I am sued by hon. Odonga Otto and I am in the United Kingdom and there is a judgement against me to attach property and he takes that court order; first of all, he has to register it in that court and then, another process takes over from there. This is different; here, you are just requesting assistance and once that request goes there, it may not necessarily go through an enforcement process. You just have to look at what the law of that country provides on anti-money laundering activities. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, first of all, when you have a valid court order for the arrest of hon. Ruhindi, if I may give this as an example – God forbid – (Laughter) - it can be enforced as of now. It can be enforced and if you have properties in the US or the UK, there are procedures which you follow. You register in court, and then those properties can go ahead to be attached without this law. But what this law is saying, and which the committee chairperson has brought to the attention of the House, is that the request - because what kind of request can Uganda, for example, make to Japan? 

It cannot be a request. Does a request come through court or through a minister? We must be very clear on what we want. That is why the chairperson guided that we could probably adopt the same wording in Clause 103(1) - “A court or other competent authority.” We just pick that same drafting so that we do not tie our hands in leaving the request to the ministers only; courts may also find it necessary that they need certain information. So, we just say, “A court or a competent authority in Uganda…” then we continue with the committee suggestion: “…may make a request to a court or other competent authority of another state for legal assistance related to civil or criminal….” This is broader – hon. Ssimbwa, you should not worry. By saying, “attaching property, seizure of property” it is even narrower than “criminal”. We can have a thousand remedies under civil; so we could just – Mr Chairman, I would beg to move that we cut and paste the words in Clause 103(1) and insert before the word “may” and we adopt the committee position.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, in the words of hon. Katuntu, and in your own words – because the last time we debated this matter, you gave us an example – like you said, “Why should one legislate in vain?” You say, “A court or any other competent authority” – Now, when he uses the expression “court” and you go to the other country and they say, “Our laws do not talk about ‘courts’.” Maybe, you could say, “A competent authority –” (Interjections) Wait, please, you cannot say, “which includes” because then you are legislating what may not be desirable the other end. “A competent authority may make a request to another competent authority of another state for legal assistance related to a civil, criminal, administrative investigation, prosecution, proceedings, enforcement of court orders in accordance with the laws of that state.” If you said that or whatever it is – the competent authority will be in accordance with their laws.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, with your permission, I am agreeable to the Attorney-General’s submission. However, that means we have to define a “competent authority” in our definition section because if we leave it like that, tomorrow, you can find the “Black Mambas” issuing orders that, “Hon. Nyombi, we need some particulars about you in Japan” and in Japan, they will not know what “Black Mamba” is. They may think it is a competent authority in Uganda. (Laughter) And with the kind of attorneys-general of these days, they can even write to them that this is a competent authority. So, we need to define that competent authority later but I will support the Attorney-General’s submission.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, just an addition to what the Attorney-General has just said. I am now also in agreement with this addition. Instead of stopping at “in accordance with the laws of that country” we can add on and say “…and any international convention, treaties, agreements or arrangements” because there are others, which are international. We should not only lock ourselves within the national laws of that country. That is why I want us to add those others.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about “applicable law”?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, as long as my idea is captured.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “Applicable law” will take care of all the laws that are applicable in the circumstances.

MR SSIMBWA: The reason I wanted us to expand is that I did not want us to tie ourselves around the laws of that country when there are other laws that can force – (Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Mr Chairman, I would like to get a small clarification from hon. Ssimbwa – because a treaty can only work in a certain country after it is domesticated. So, it might be tricky; but if it is not agreeable to that particular country, you cannot use it. So, if a certain country is a signatory to that treaty, then it becomes an applicable law. But if it is just an international treaty and a certain country does not believe in it, still you cannot use it as an applicable law. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think “applicable law” would take care of international law called “traditional” or even “cultural” – (Laughter) – as long as it is applicable. And for the concerns of hon. Odonga Otto, in the interpretation section, a “competent authority” is defined. A “competent authority” is not courts, hon. Member. So, do we now adopt this formulation? Now, it will be “A competent authority in Uganda…” or do we just leave it as a “competent authority”? - “…in Uganda” is not necessary?  “A competent authority in Uganda may make a request to a competent authority of another state for legal assistance related to a civil, criminal or administrative investigation, prosecution, proceedings or enforcement of court orders in accordance with the law applicable in that state.” If it is international law, which is applicable in that state, that is what will be applied. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are right because like in the UK, you will not get a law on money laundering like this one and they are also fighting money laundering – even in the US. So, it is only us who are trying to have this kind of law. So – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, for them they have a law under the EU arrangement; so, that will be the law applicable there. So, is that formulation acceptable, hon. Members? I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, do we need to take the same phraseology in the existing (1)(a) of “competent authority” and take out “court” so that we do not mention “court”? We just say, “A competent authority in Uganda may receive a request from a competent authority of another state to identify…” Would that be the formulation that we accept? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 103, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 104, agreed to.

Clause 105, agreed to.

Clause 106

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I propose to put a new clause. I will not mention the number, after Clause 105 on “transfer.” The head note shall read, “Transfer of proceeds of crime to a requesting state.
    (1) On request by a foreign state, the Attorney-General shall transfer to it any proceeds or instrumentality recovered in Uganda.
    (2) The Attorney-General shall deduct all expenses incurred in the recovery of the proceeds or instrumentality.”

The justification is to address the transfer of proceeds of crime recovered in Uganda to a requesting state and two, it was noted that part 5 of the Act is restricted to international cooperation in respect of the offence of money laundering and recovery of proceeds under conviction-based recovery. There is, therefore, need to take into account mutual legal assistance in respect of conviction-based recovery.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal - Are you still holding on to “the Attorney-General” here?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: It is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But then you should have taken the consequences in your new amendments.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. “On request by a foreign state, a competent authority shall transfer to it any proceeds or instrumentality –“

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, this is still “the minister”.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Okay. “On request by a foreign state, the minister shall transfer to it any proceeds or instrumentality recovered in Uganda” - and “(2), the minister shall deduct all expenses incurred in the recovery of the proceeds or instrumentality.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a proposal for the insertion of a new clause immediately after Clause 5 in the terms proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would suggest that we use the word “may” as opposed to “shall” because circumstances vary. If we tie our hands, we may reach a very patriotic level in the near future where everyone believes that things should not be returned to that country like the case of this fugitive in one of the airports. He does not know where to go so circumstances - We should not make it mandatory since it is about returning things to another country. The Chinese Government is very good at that; they are very patriotic. No matter how much noise the Americans make, they just resolve as a country that they are not going to do something.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I accept the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The amendment is accepted.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am just seeking clarification from the chairperson of the committee about the word “instrumentality”. I thought it would be “instruments” but if it is not, I would request that “instrumentality” also be put in the definition section.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “Instrumentalities” are very common words. It is like a pencil in other professions.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, for the benefit of my colleague, “instrumentalities” in such crimes refer to those things that are used in the commission of such a crime. So, in this case, if we are talking about money laundering, somebody might use a vehicle for money laundering and that becomes an instrumentality of a crime of money laundering.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, under the circumstances, it may still be a good idea to put in the definition section what we are talking about here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there need to define “instrumentality”?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, you only define a word if you have a special meaning attached to it other than the ordinary English meaning. Then you can put it in the definition section and define it the way you wish. Otherwise, if it is as we know it or as it should be, then you cannot define it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For example, if you want the word “gun” to include a toy gun, then you will define it but if you want the gun to mean a gun, then you do not have to define it. Are we together? Can we now take a decision on the proposal of the committee with those changes? I put the question to the amendment from the committee with the improvements made.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the new Clause 106 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 106

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, Clause 106 is only catering for a foreign Government and not ours. I would propose that here, we also insert sub clause (1) that says, “A competent authority of Uganda may make a request to another state for assistance again related to civil, criminal, administration…” up to involving money laundering or other crimes.

The purpose is to be in line with the one we have just made in Clause 103.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Correct? So, for the purpose of consistency, do we propose it in the same terms as proposed by the committee in – We just re-draft? In other words, we are going to take out “Court” here.

MR KATUNTU: I think as a consequential amendment, we just have to re-draft Clause 106 and say “may receive or request” and then the whole thing flows up to (2) (g).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Because this is talking of another state. Okay. But you are saying “may receive or request”. That means in one clause- I need a draft, hon. Member for Kalungu East.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, I thought that was catered for under Clause 102, which says that a competent authority in Uganda shall cooperate with other competent authorities in another states in taking appropriate measure - matters concerning money laundering and other crimes. I thought that was enough.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 106 is now a specific provision in terms of other mutual assistance. In addition to what you have passed, there might be need for other things. Hon. Katuntu, do you want to make a proposal?

MR KATUNTU: I think we just have to redraft another one. I thought we would save ourselves from being verbose by just inserting a request but that will not make sense. We need to create another clause the way we did in the first one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, would it be in the exact wording?

MR KATUNTU: Yes, it has to be in the exact wording.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, in which case, now it will be a new sub clause (1). 

MR KATUNTU: It will now read as follows: “A competent authority in Uganda may request and take appropriate measures with respect to - ”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it should read, “… may request another state…”

MR KATUNTU: Yes, then it continues thus: “… another state for assistance related to civil, criminal or administrative investigations.” That will be (1) (a).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it will just be (1). So, it will read thus: “A competent authority in Uganda may request another state for assistance related to a civil, criminal or administrative investigation.” I now put a question to that.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And in the existing one, we now have to deal with the issue of taking away the court so that it is consistent with what we have passed. And that one should read thus: “… a competent authority of Uganda may receive and take appropriate measures…” Would that be okay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed.)

Clause 106, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 107, agreed to.

Clause 108, agreed to.

Clause 109, agreed to.

Clause 110, agreed to.

Clause 111

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, in this clause, we propose to amend the title – no, I shall not amend the title because I wanted to include - we were proposing terrorism financing, but we have stood over it. So, in Clause 111, we propose that it instead reads thus: “Any person who engages in money laundering prohibited in Section 4 of this Act-” No, I drop the amendment because it still talks about terrorism financing, which has been stood over.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Chairman, before the committee drops the proposed amendment, I want to seek some clarification. In Clause 4, we talked about prohibition of money laundering but in Clause 111, we are still talking about the same thing. It somehow confuses. Why don’t we pass this one under the offence of money laundering? I do not know which is which?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which clauses are you talking about?

MR KWIZERA: Clauses 4 and 111 have the same titles.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, Clause 4 talks about the same thing as Clause 111; both talk about prohibition of money laundering.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, first of all, I do not know why the chairperson of the committee is dropping the committee’s proposed amendment. I am saying this because, terrorism financing has already been used in some other sections – look at page 17, haven’t we approved that? Did we stand over, for example, Clause 7? I do not think we stood over Clause 7; we only stood over Clause 4 – (Interjections) You mean all those that relate to terrorism financing?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we stand over Clause 111?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Chairman. We have the Anti-Terrorism Act. What I only want the chairman to clarify is: in Clause 4, the Bill talks about prohibition as well as Clause 111. Is it only Clause 4 that talks about prohibition of money laundering or these are acts of money laundering? Actually, when we get back to Clause 4, we might have to change the title. Otherwise, I think in this clause, we should be talking about offences.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the clauses that were stood over before I started chairing are: 2, 4, and 10. Clause 7 was not stood over.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, since Clause 7 was not stood over and there is already a reference to it at page 17, (h) (i) and (ii), which talk about terrorism financing – we can still apply it to this clause in which the committee is moving an amendment.

Two, from the on sight, we are no longer at variance with the opposition, as far as this subject matter of terrorism financing is concerned. Why? It is because when we come to the definition clause, we will be proposing two simple amendments. One will be to indicate that terrorism has a meaning assigned to it under the Anti-Terrorism Act of 2002 and two, that “terrorism financing” means the financing of terrorism as provided for in this Act, the one we are now passing.

So, we are no longer at variance because we are not providing for new things. So, there is no harm in going ahead – (Interjections) – there is no speculation. When we are passing a law, we refer to these as sections within the body of the text and we refer to this Bill as an Act within the text of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Nyaruhanga High School, represented by hon. Banyenzaki. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not know the status of the submissions of the Attorney-General and the committee chairperson because I want to bring something substantial under Clause 111.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, if there are issues with terrorism financing, which you have not resolved, can we stand over this clause and come back to it when we have ironed out all those things? So, let us stand over Clause 111.
Clause 112

I put the question that Clause 112 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 113 agreed to.

Clause 114 agreed to.

Clause 115 agreed to.

Clause 116

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: The committee proposes to redraft Clause 116, “Facilitating money laundering and terrorism financing: Any accountable person or its officers or employees who, knowingly, allows for its services to be used to commit or facilitate money laundering or terrorism financing in contravention of section 17 commits an offence.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it contains the same phrase, “Terrorism financing”. So, I think we stand over Clause 116. 

Clause 117 agreed to.

Clause 118 agreed to.

Clause 119 agreed to.

Clause 120 agreed to.

Clause 121 agreed to.

Clause 122 agreed to.

Clause 123

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, in the marginal note; it ends with the word “act”. Make it capital “A”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 123, as amendment, agreed to.

Clause 124 agreed to.

Clause 125 agreed to.

Clause 126 agreed to.

Clause 127 agreed to.

Clause 128 agreed to.

Clause 129 agreed to.

Clause 130 agreed to.

Clause 131 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to redraft sub clause (1) as follows: “Any person who commits an offence prohibited under part 7 and section 4 of this Act is liable on conviction to:
    a) In the case of a natural person, imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 years or a fine not exceeding 1,000 currency points or both. 
    b) In case of a legal person, not exceeding 150,000 currency points. “

The justification is that inclusion of the prohibition against terrorism financing consequently requires inclusion of punitive sanctions. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But learned Attorney-General, do we have any consistence in the use of “any person” or “A person”? Have the drafters agreed on this?

MR RUHINDI: I think the stylistic expression being used by the office of First Parliamentary Counsel is “A person”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But now, all these other parts say, “Any person” yet there are other parts with “A person.”

MR RUHINDI: I think I will hold them accountable. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Like one judge said, “If it were possible, this sentence should have been awarded to the draftsman directly”.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, the Attorney-General does not help the case. He should really try to harmonise and we have consistence other than holding his people accountable. The problem is still there. He would rather advise his people to use, “a person” other than “any person”. 

These days, they say there is another style of writing. The Attorney-General and the others belong to yester years. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For example, if you look at Clause 110, it is, “A person”. Now, in these other clauses, it is “Any person”. There should be some consistence. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: With all due respect for the learned Attorney-General, I think there is no need for consistence because they mean different things. “Any person” presupposes that no one is caught. The sample space is still at large. But the moment the drafting changes to “A person” it means there is presumption that someone has been trapped. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. They are the same. “A person who is subject to an order” – it is just that whoever uses the language should be consistent. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, when the chairman was reading, in one of the penalties he said, “Not exceeding 100 currency points” and what is written here is “…1,000 currency points.” I want clarification because on the Hansard, we might have something different.
 
MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: “In case of a natural person, imprisonment not exceeding 15 years or a fine not exceeding 100,000 currency points or both.” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is to say that you get Shs 100,000 times that 20,000 and that would mean Shs 2.0 billion and the other one is talking about Shs 3.0 billion.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, in the report you have just read, it is 1,000 currency points. So, which is which - because I am looking at both? I am looking at the committee report and the Bill.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think I was being disturbed by somebody behind here. Let me read: “In case of a natural person, imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 years or a fine not exceeding 1,000 currency points.” This is 1,000 x 20,000.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you remember under Clause 9, we said nobody can open an account or a transaction of more than, say, Shs 20 million or 50 million there about. The moment you make a fine equal to the minimum of the opening, it will be dangerous. That is to begin with.
 
Now, 15 years is good enough but which money should be big enough because there could be money laundering of Shs 1,000, there could be money laundering of Shs 100 billion. I do not think there is a problem when we say “not exceeding 100,000 currency points.”  Then, say “or both.” You can get 15 years, 10 years or two years depending on the gravity of the matter. The Bill is fine. My only problem is that I wanted you, Mr Chairman, to help me.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If you are now moving on, let us first handle your proposal. The substance of your amendment is to reduce the currency points? 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think we did not want to reduce the currency points because I understand that it is Shs 20 million if we say 1,000 and Members are saying that is too little. They are saying we stay the proposal in the Bill, which is 100,000 currency points or both. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what is in the Bill. So, what is the substance of your amendment?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Our amendment had, “In the case of the legal person –“

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In the Bill, it says “not exceeding 100,000” but nothing. So, it should be inserted. Let us just resolve this little thing and then I come to you. Yes, chairperson, you wanted to put currency points in (a) because it is missing.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I think we say “100,000 currency points”. We make a pronouncement on that then we move to the second.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, this is in relation to (a); I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: In case of a legal person, by a fine “not exceeding 150,000 currency points”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: 150,000 for a legal person, is that okay?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I am okay with what he have gone through especially (a) because it is stating the period for imprisonment, which is, “not exceeding 15 years” and you could also have a fine or both.
 
But for (b), I see there is a problem because for a legal person or company or firm to just pay 150,000 currency points and you leave it at that, I think to the big and multilateral legal person, this might be small money that cannot prohibit anybody from money laundering.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, propose.

MR NZOGHU: I propose that we should also put a phrase that “…the operations of such a legal person can also be seized.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The seizure provisions are the other side.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what I wanted to say here also is that first, a company cannot commit a crime. It is individuals in the company who commit a crime. So, the company has been used to commit but the people who used it are not being punished here; that is the directors or the shareholders. So, Mr Chairman, I want to propose that the individuals –

I am raising this because if you have a company called “A limited” it deals in hoes; that is its normal business. Then, one of the directors decides to use the company to launder money. The company is doing it but the true story is that the company’s legal business was selling hoes and not laundering money. So, the people who did it made it launder money. The directors or the management should be held liable as individuals.
So, we are saying here that the individuals in the company who made it launder money should be treated as in (1)(a) above. 

MR KATUNTU: I think what the Leader of the Opposition is saying is about offences and those are all created right from 111, which we stood over, even 112, 113, 114, 115,166, 177 and others. Those are the offences.

But what we are looking at now is the tail end of the process. Some of these directors, if they have committed the offence as you ably put it, are all caught between 111 and may be up to 120. But what we are looking at is just what the punishment is.

My view is, we need just to say, what is appropriate for either a company or a natural person? There could be a company formed specifically for those purposes and then, I form that company, I have been tried, convicted and sentenced to the fine, which I pay but there is a company here, which is in existence actually with assets and with money on the account. What do you do with bigger money on the account? So, the reason the law is providing for punishing a legal person is even this company, which maybe does other business other than anti-money laundering can only be punished by going to its asset base and pays the fine and so on. So, we can debate the appropriate fine -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How much?  The Bill says Shs 150,000.

MR KATUNTU: If we can calculate Shs 150,000 – hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows the arithmetic more than me – [Hon. Members: “Shs 3 billion.”] Shs 3.0 billion? So, I think what we have to do is to leave some discretion on the part of the court or the trial magistrate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not exceeding –

MR KATUNTU: “…not exceeding” and we can put a very maximum sentence and depending on the sort of the value of the transaction itself, monies involved, the nature of the case, then the magistrate or judge is given some latitude.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you suggesting Shs 200,000?  

MR KATUNTU: Shs 200,000 which will come to Shs 4.0 billion. I think that is appropriate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The amendment is to increase from Shs 150,000 to Shs 200,000. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would suggest that we leave it where it is because when you are talking of companies, you do not talk of big companies like MTN or Airtel. There are also small companies – (Interjections) - Yes, I understand “not exceeding.” As to why I am saying that we leave it the way it is, under the Companies Act, and even under common law there are circumstances under which the veil of the company may be lifted and one of the circumstances is when the company engages in illegal activities, activities prohibited by the law of that particular country. 

So, the court still has discretion to lift the veil and then give modest sentences to the directors as long as they have engaged in criminality but to put the threshold at what hon. Katuntu proposed, you will actually help the prosecutors to be bribed because when you see the magnitude of the fine you can pay, you find now it is easier to lubricate the judicial system than to go and get that penalty of Shs 5 billion. So, either way, there is a possibility of losing. 

If I am being arraigned in court for a fine of Shs 5.0 billion, you will see the behaviour of someone from the DPP and all those going to be involved in the cases and so, I do not think we shall be solving any problem. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The private individual or the natural person is not exceeding Shs 100,000 currency points and the legal person, which is like a company is Shs 150,000.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with this proposal in terms of our principles in criminal law. Would it mean that when we talk about the “natural person” - because if we are talking about a company, we are talking about lifting the veil and looking at the directors and officers of the company that committed the crime or crimes because with criminal law, we must look at the mens rea, the intent and the actus reus, the act. Without those two, you cannot get anywhere. When you talk about a company, this presupposes that you have, under (a), gone against the directors as officers of the company in the case of a judicial or a legal person have them punished and in addition to that, then you look at the company because it also has assets. So, let us also proceed against them and we get this amount. I do not know whether that is the intention because let me first put it clearly so that you answer if you want to answer – (Interjections) - you need a break? You do not understand what I am talking about in terms of a jury? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are commenting on things that are not on the record. People reading the Hansard may wonder what you are talking about. 
 
MR RUHINDI: Most obliged, Mr Chairman. I think if we want to do that, we need to be clearer in (b) that in addition to those officers of the legal person either directors or otherwise, who will have been involved in committing the offences in addition to the punishments they receive, the company should also be liable to this extent. If that is the intention, we need to look at it and we have it debated.

MR KATUNTU: I think we are all agreeable that a crime can be committed by both a legal or a natural person. Having said that, the issue the Attorney-General is raising is actually the one we are discussing. Why do I say this? We are saying that here is a company that has been used as a vehicle to facilitate anti-money laundering. So, much as we punish the directors or the shareholders, the officers who have been party to this criminality, there is this person called Ruhindi Investments Limited and this investment even has assets. It has benefited from this process and we have to punish it. My colleague has reminded me of COWE and unfortunately, for COWE, there was no money at all but some of these companies do have assets and we have to punish them. We say you have benefitted from this trade and there are only two ways, Mr Chairman, you can punish a legal person.

One, you can kill it legally, you wind it up then you have punched it. Two, you can go to the assets and attach some of it and that is why we are saying it should also be liable to a fine not exceeding this and I do not see why my learned friend is thinking we are not having our minds meeting on this.  

I think the only point of departure is that of hon. Odonga Otto who is talking about the level of punishment, and he thinks it is being too harsh and it could have other consequences and I hold a different view. You see, whether it is one day, five days or one month in jail. If somebody does not want to go to jail for a day, he will use money for the prosecutors to run away. Whether it is two days; he will use the money and if somebody is corrupt, that does not arise because we have seen it. People have given out money for offences with shorter terms but the reason we wanted a harsher punishment, Mr Chairman, let me give an example of a state called New Mexico. A petroleum company had been committing a lot of environmental breaches but because the legal regime provided for a smaller penalty, they would continue destroying the environment and pay the fine. But if you realise that the fine is big, it might not be possible for you to continue to breach the environmental regulation. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. First of all, I want to distinguish between the legal persons. From the debate that has ensued here, we have made mention of a company, which is established deliberately for money laundering and I wonder; if investigations confirm that our company was established deliberately for money laundering, would you just go ahead to fine it and leave it to continue in business or would you make sure that its operations cease but you proceed on the directors to pay the fine? So, when we talk of a legal person here, I think we should distinguish between that deliberately established for money laundering and that that finds itself in circumstantial activity. 

For example, it may be used when its core business is different and it would be the latter that we would penalise in terms of the currency points but the former, we should emphasise focusing on the directors; those who established it for purposes of money laundering and then the company itself should be liquidated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there can never be a company established specifically for money laundering. They will never be registered. (Laughter) Such a company will not be there because it has to state in its objectives that “The purpose for the establishment of this company is to launder money.” Which authority would register such a company? (Laughter)

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. When we give a fine of 100,000 currency points to a natural person and 150,000 currency points to a legal person, then I do not see any difference. We should really be able to distinguish between the two because a natural person weighs less than a legal person. So, why don’t we give something very substantial? Let us double it for the legal person. That is my submission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: 200,000 currency points has already been proposed but hon. Katuntu and the Member who was objecting have withdrawn their objection. I put the question to the amendment that it should be 200,000 currency points. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think we are tired but before we go to Clause 131, I cannot see under legal person where you have put the individuals who commit a crime. So, I want to include there that the individuals –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. Individuals are covered in (a) if it is done by a natural person, if it is done by a corporation it is (b). So, whether the natural person is in a company or not, they are covered under (a).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, then if we go to sub clause (2) (ii), they are saying natural person when he commits from 112 to 5, he will be given not exceeding five years but then the currency point is 90,000. If you are giving 100,000 currency points for 15 years, then the best way is to divide that by three so that it is about the same. So, that means this should be 33,000 currency points. The justification is that 15 equals to 100,000 and five equal to 33.333 - (Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I just want to seek clarification. Did you say in (2) - because 131(2) has a corresponding crime?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: 112 to 130 is the whole range.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is what I am saying; that if you say “not exceeding five years,” then the currency points must not exceed a third because five years is equal to a third of 15. So, the currency points should be a third of 100,000. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, it is 30,000 currency points. Would you like to propose it properly?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I want to propose “not exceeding five years and not exceeding 33,000 currency points.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that, hon. Members, so that there is consistency. The justification is simple; because you have reduced this by five. So, can I take a decision on that since it is okay?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I do not have any problem.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I put the question to the amendment in (a) from 90,000 currency points to 33,000 currency points? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in the same vein, that applies to the legal person. They are looking at five years and that is a third. If we have passed 200,000 currency points, then we should get a third of it, which is not exceeding 70,000 currency points. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is (2)(b). The proposal is to change from 15,000 currency points to 70,000 currency points. I put the question to the 70,000 currency points. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Some of us are not lawyers and sometimes, some of the decisions taken by the honourable Justices are really very surprising. Here, we are simply emphasising “not exceeding”, suppose in one scenario someone has actually been involved in money laundering and huge sums of monies have been involved. Then the honourable Justice in his wisdom says, “You have saved court’s time, you are a first offender and you have saved us a lot. I actually fine you one currency point.” In this case, it really would not fit the stated currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You would appeal it.

MR KYOOMA: That is where I seek your guidance because in this case, we are emphasising the upper limit. Can’t we also put a lower limit?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You can appeal against it.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: If I may support the Chairman; the remedy you have would be to appeal because you know the whole philosophy of the law is that you are better off having many guilty people free than have one innocent person sentenced because everyone wants freedom. So, in an event that you are even cautioned, the fact that you are undergoing trial in an open court is enough therapy in itself that you have been undergoing trial for doing such and such a thing. It is in itself a punishment. 

So, I would see nothing wrong if you are complaining that one year or Shs 1,000 is less, you go ahead and appeal. But I think if we put a minimum sentence, we may be bordering onto the powers of the court because the day you are before court, you are sure that you will get at least one year, which is not fair. (Laughter) At least, you should have some hope that you may walk away free in case you are –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we still have (c), in which we said – what was the proposal? We also say Shs 70,000. I put the question to the proposal that in (c) it should be Shs 70,000 instead of – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, no. Mr Chairman, (c) is on a daily basis; whenever you continue each day, you are charged 5,000 currency points. You cannot say that every day you will charge that amount. You cannot commit every day. If you get him committing it again, you take him up again to 33. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, we leave (c) as it is? [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] Okay. Any other?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Under this section, we are discussing, we are talking a lot about a “natural person” and a “legal person”. I have tried to look for the meaning of a natural person but I have not understood it well under this Bill. A “natural person” – like me, I am natural person and there are others who are not. So what –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What kind of example can you give us? (Laughter) A natural person who is not natural?

MS KARUNGI: They may be a natural person but are not complete –maybe, you are disabled; they may be dumb and deaf.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They are still natural persons. 

MS KARUNGI: Mr Chairman, I would wish that we clarify it under this law – the difference between a natural person and a legal person. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Member, a natural person is clear in law.

MS KARUNGI: But under this law, it is not defined.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This law is not different because “natural” or “legal persons” are very well known terms which do not need any further definition. So, can we take a decision on this clause now?

MS MUTYABULE: Mr Chairman, maybe, my colleague from Kanungu wanted to mean that in this continuing offence, we should be able to differentiate between the “legal person” and a “natural person.” Does this fine apply to the legal person or both of them?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I think that is a point from Namutumba not from Kanungu. (Laughter)

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, I am requesting the hon. Member of Kanungu to withdraw the statement that a disabled person is not natural; I am very natural. And in insurance, when I am being gauged, they do it in my normal state. So, let us purge that statement from the Hansard. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, hon. Member for Kanungu, just withdraw that remark.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Before I can say I am withdrawing it – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: My order is that you withdraw the reference that “disabled people are not natural people.”

MS KARUNGI: Most obliged, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, withdraw.

MS KARUNGI: Yes, but I would wish to say that it is fair enough if we defined it under the interpretation – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you have not withdrawn the statement. So, you have not had the right to add any other word to your statement.

MS KARUNGI: I withdraw, Mr Chairman. Though I would like to – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek guidance because under Clause 131(2), we have provided for c) which caters for a continuing offence and yet under 131 (1) (a) and (b) we have not mentioned.  I would like to be guided. Isn’t it possible that under 131 (1) there are also continuing offences for which we must make provisions? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If they are continuing offences, then they will fall under 131. If they are not continuing, then they will fall under the sections that you have already mentioned. 

MR OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, when you look at 131 (2), it says “an offence mentioned in section 112 to 130” and when you look at them, it is individuals who are just facilitated or covering up the offence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, these are two different sections. Clause 131 is talking about commissions under section 5, that is one. Two, is referring to those offences from 112 to 130. So, the distinction is made there. If you commit an offence under section 5, which is – I think it is 4, it will have to be re-organised. I think it is not correct. 

If you commit an offence under section 4, that part of 131 (1) would apply. But if you commit an offence that is in sections 112 to 130, these penalties would apply. So, it is just differentiating the two. 

MR OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, would you want to say that whenever I commit an offence under Clause 131 (1) the same penalty applies even if it is specific? I thought if you want to make it preventive, then the penalty goes with continued offence. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But, honourable members, can’t we finish this clause at least – this 131? Yes, Attorney General, taking care of the matter of the Member for Pallisa -

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, his worry may be justified because we have Clause 131 (1) for offences under Section 5. Did we correct that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, it is actually (4) in the Bill. There is a problem with the cross-referencing.

MR RUHINDI: So, it is (4). Therefore, for offences under (4), these are the penalties. Now, you come to (2) and these are the offences under sections 112 to 130. I think his problem is from (c) - take an example of (c). If it is a continuing offence, does it only apply to offences under clauses 112 to Clause 130 or also offences under (4)? I think (c) cuts across if it is a continuing offence either under (1) or (2). So, maybe, we could have a new sub section (3) to say that if it is a continuing offence under (1) or (2) then this applies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, you either put (c) twice under (1) and (2) or you take it out of that flow and make it stand alone as an overriding provision. Okay, which is which so that we sort it?

MR RUHINDI: We can have it stand alone so that it applies to both (1) and (2).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, then, it would be (3). The proposal would be to delete (c) and have it as a stand-alone (3) so that it covers sub clauses (1) and (2). Can I put the question to that amendment?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, that is okay but I wanted to say -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can I put the question to it if it is okay?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Not as yet, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, if it is okay, I can put the question then you bring your issue.

MR SSEMPIJJA: I am only adding by saying that (d) should also be under the new (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Actually (d) should be (4). 

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, when I look at the penalties under (1), I do not see that this issue of continuing offence applies. If you are convicted for an offence of money laundering, the offences are under (a) and (b). If there is another offence, again, it is (a) and (b). If there are two different offences of money laundering and you are a natural person, then you will be liable to 15 years imprisonment or a fine. If you have another offence, the same applies. 

So, this issue of continuing offence does not apply. It only applies to clauses 112 to 130. If you look at what clauses 112 to 130 contain - I will take an example. If you take Clause 129, “unauthorised access to a computer system”, that is what they are talking about. In fact, that is why in the original drafting, even the fines are lower than in part one. So, I do not really see why you need to apply this issue of the continuing offence because each situation of money laundering can be treated as its own case and the judge would simply follow what is written here under part one.

However, I can see from the court cases, for example, the recent one of Kazinda, that if those cases were committed together, the judge can decide to convict you up to 90 years and then treat them concurrently. Otherwise, each one of them is a separate case and I really do not see this issue of continuous offence applying. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clearer now, honourable members?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, given the circumstances, I think we cannot comprehend anymore.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, motion. So, I can say Clause 131 is stood over.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report thereto. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009” from clauses 80 to Clause 130 with amendments and stood over clauses 111, 116 and 131. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I am very happy with our progress today but as I said earlier, by close of business today, all the ministerial statements and other policy statements should be before this House. This would be the proper moment for us to go through this process. Can we start in the order in which they were pending?

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I. MINISTRY OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one was laid. It was Office of the Prime Minister.

    II. OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

7.17
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Prime Minister’s Office for Financial Year 2013/14; Vote 003. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for further action. 

    III. MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

7.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2013/14 for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development under votes 017 and 023. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee. 

    IV. PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSION

7.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the Policy Statement for the Parliamentary Commission, Vote 104, for the Financial Year 2013/14. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It also stands committed to the appropriate committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Can you, please, clap? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have received all the policy statements – can I have a confirmation? Which ones are remaining? The one for Ministry of Justice and Constructional Affairs was received. The one for the Office of the Minister of State for Security was received under Presidency. Ministry of Lands has also submitted. I think we now have all the ministerial policy statements. 

So, the committees should begin their work. Is the one for the Ministry of Education and Sports here? What happened? I directed that by close of business today, the House should have all the policy statements submitted. Yes, Prime Minister, that ministerial policy statement, by order of the Speaker, should be in the House today. I already made that directive four hours ago.

7.20
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, if Parliament was sitting tomorrow, I would say we would submit it tomorrow. (Laughter) But since there is no sitting tomorrow, I would like to beg that we lay it next week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister, please, ensure that we get this policy statement on Tuesday. And that now includes all the statutory bodies and other self-accounting institutions. Beyond that, there might be some penalties. House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.21 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 July 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)


   										`																																					 


