Wednesday, 31 July 2013

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanya, in Chair)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Yesterday, we could not proceed with the normal sessions and sittings of the House because of the tragedy we had and we had to use yesterday for a special session. That means we have lost a whole day and we have to see how to catch up so that we can accommodate all the programmes. I have received communication from the Government Chief Whip making announcements in relation to Rule 148(2) and Rule 17(65) about designation of members to committees.

I wish to announce to the House that by this correspondence, hon. Kyamadidi Vincent goes to the Committee on Natural Resources while hon. Hood Katuramu goes to the committee on Foreign Affairs. The next list of Members is about those who have been moved from one committee to another. 

The hon. Wilberforce Yaguma, from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to the Committee on Natural Resources, hon. Margaret Kiboijana from the Committee on ICT to the Committee on Agriculture, hon. John Baptist Lokii from the Committee on Health to the Committee on Presidential Affairs, hon. Gertrude Nankabirwa from the Committee on Presidential Affairs to Education, hon. Martin Drito from Gender, Labour and Social Development to Natural Resources, hon. Ngabu William Kwemara from Foreign Affairs to Education. Hon. Victoria Busingye Rusoke from Education to Trade, Tourism and Industry, hon. Betty Mbabazi from Education to Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and hon. Monica Amoding from Foreign Affairs to Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Hon. Members, I put the question to the approval of these Members.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, earlier I gave a timeframe which has been overtaken by events and now I would like to propose the next one which I hope we will abide by to guide us in the process of completing the matters that are before us. We should have finished with the State of the Nation Address debate by 26th. I am accordingly moving it to the 1st and that is tomorrow and we should be able to close the general debate on the State of the Nation Address.

Next week, from Tuesday, we want to do a general debate on the budget, something we have not done for the last two years but which is important in informing the Members and informing the debate. When we finally come to debate matters from the sectoral committees, general debate will have ended and we think that should start next week on Tuesday 6 August 2013 starting with the response from the shadow minister of finance on the proposals made by the Minister of Finance on the budget.

We will use the same procedure of allocating Members time. The different whips will do that like they have done with this debate on the state of the nation. I am still waiting for the list that will come from the Opposition because I received a list from the Independent Members on 16th July, from the NRM on 15th July, but I have not received one from the Opposition that should come to facilitate debate today and tomorrow and next week when we do general debate on the budget.

There is another matter that came to the Floor of this House last week on the strike in schools in Bushenyi. We have information that similar strikes have also happened in Mbarara and some 12 schools have been closed and also in Busoga. So, we are seeking some guidance from the minister as to when she is likely to come and update the House on what should be done with this so that House also knows and instead of Members coming one at a time to raise these matters as urgent matters, at least the minister should keep abreast of the developments.

Finally, hon. Members, you will recall that we referred some regulations to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee where I cited the old rules on how to guide where statutory instruments that require parliamentary approval should be sent. It now seems that there has been some miscommunication or improper guidance on my part on how these regulations should be handled.

There was a regulation that was brought here under Section 82(2)(c) on the elections of representatives of professional bodies and under sub-section (3) of the KCCA Act. That instrument should be laid before Parliament not for its approval but just to be laid for information. So, if by mistake I referred this particular instrument to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, it should be corrected. But there was a regulation that was made on the modification of the law. On this particular regulation under section 78(1) of that Act, modification requires prior approval of Parliament and this would require the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee to look at and come and advise the House as to whether we should deal with it at all or not. This would be in the mandate of the legal committee. So when it comes back, we should be able to take a decision as to whether we adopt the minister’s proposed modification of the law to apply it to the modification of the Local Government Act and whether we should adopt it. That will come at that time.

For if there was any miscommunication to this effect please take note that the instrument that was referred, which requires the approval is that made under section 78(1) of the Act and that will be it for now. Thank you.

2.39
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the instrument that should facilitate the election of councillors representing professional bodies was brought here, there were issues raised by colleagues. I remember hon. Nambooze and others – in my understanding, that is the spirit under which you referred it to the committee and you said that they can raise those issues in the committee. The procedural issue that I am raising is – your guidance today now seems to conclude that matter and I do not know what will happen to the issues that they were raising because they never wanted that instrument laid here because of reasons they are about to explain and you said that let it be read but they can go to the committee and sort out whatever matters there are.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see when an instrument is brought to Parliament for information it does not mean that Parliament cannot engage in it. The effect is that it still remains an instrument enacted according to the laws that gave the authority for their enactment. But if there are issues about them, they can still be raised. If there is an issue of any conflicts or this – but on the authority of the law itself, it does not require the approval of Parliament. It does not, if you look at the law itself. 

But that does not stop the committee or anybody else going to the committee to raise those issues that when they are coming back to report on that one which requires approval of Parliament, all those issues can be discussed. There is no prohibition but the law is that those ones do not require the approval of Parliament but discussion of it is not stopped. Okay?

MR SSEMUJJU: The point, Mr Speaker, is that colleagues who raised objections were objecting to the instrument being laid. There are procedural issues and I do not remember what they were but now if it is captured on the record of Parliament as having been laid properly before Parliament – in fact, that is the basis the subsequent processes on that instrument have started happening and I am aware that hon. Sseggona was away but at least the Electoral Commission wrote to him. They copied a letter to him that was written to Parliament telling him that they were seeking clarification of Parliament. 

Your clarification today, Mr Speaker, seems to give the Electoral Commission a go ahead to conduct the elections but there were objections at the laying, not about whether we required to approve it or not but colleagues were objecting to that instrument being laid and they had those issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The objections were not sustainable. You cannot object to the laying of an instrument as it is being laid within the law. But what you can object to is what I said; you can go and raise it with the committee because that particular instrument would not require parliamentary approval. Parliament does not claw back. It did not claw back the responsibility to implement that regulation and so you cannot stop it as Parliament because you have given that power away to the minister. So, you cannot stop the laying of a document or paper but once it is laid, then you raise issues on how to resolve those conflicts.

2.43
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. It was actually myself who raised the objections to the laying of the instrument then. The basis for my argument, I understood then and now that the objective of laying the instrument in haste by the minister then, was an attempt to try and circumvent a pending court judgment.

Two, that there were issues that actually engendered the laying of the instrument and were actually a part of a parliamentary petition by the Lord Mayor to Parliament which Parliament had actually failed to dispose of and here was a minister now trying to respond to the petition by way of trying to lay a document in haste so that that process is circumvented and the question of the day was, was this procedurally right? Are we going to allow people to try and circumvent the due process of the law because the law empowers them to do their job which they had initially failed to do? That was the business of the day. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I can only restate what I have just stated. Parliament gave the minister the authority to make those instruments and the minister did not make them in time and issues arose. The minister has brought the instrument within the provision of the law to lay them before Parliament. Can we stop it? They have brought to lay and the law says that it shall be laid before Parliament.

Section 82 says, “The minister may by statutory instrument make regulations for the better carrying into effect of the provisions of the Act. Notwithstanding the generality of sub-section (i), the minister may make regulations for … (c) the election of representatives of professional bodies and in (iii) the minister shall, as soon as practical after the publication of the statutory instrument made under this section cause the instrument to be laid before Parliament.” This is what the law is.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I agree with you thus far. The problem of the day was that – my thinking and perhaps the view of colleagues then was that the minister’s position was not motivated by the presence of a law but by political motives because the minister was all over the place telling whoever cared to listen that the Lord Mayor must vacate office because of failure to execute his duties as a Lord Mayor and when the Lord Mayor turned it to the minister for failure to do his job - and this was part of the petition in Parliament. Now, the minister realised that actually his arguments were not sustainable and I was actually trying to invite Parliament to be alive to the real issues that the minister should not be allowed to be the same person pontificating about the failure of the Lord Mayor to do his job and here he was coming to Parliament to be used as a conduit to enable him short circuit a petition that was supposed to give clarity as who actually had failed to do their job. That was the argument and not the law itself then.

I still insist that there was a problem with the conduct of the minister and whatever the outcome in whatever procedures you are taking in laying the document and subsequent outcomes, they have very serious consequences and I think that at the end of the day, if we proceed like this, it will be an indictment of Parliament that Parliament can be petitioned in vain and that somebody can fail to get justice in Parliament because they are not part of Parliament – because the honourable minister is part of this House and therefore can use his presence and the law to circumvent another process that is supposed to give justice to a petitioner. That was the argument, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I agree entirely. The situation that we are dealing with is that does that stop the operation of Section 82 of the Act? My response is that it does not.

Secondly, the acts of the minister in rushing to Parliament to lay an instrument - because the law says, “As soon as it is practicable” to bring the instrument to lay it before Parliament. Now the fact that the minister acted on a particular date to bring that document to lay - I think that would be evidence enough for whoever is in a certain forum trying to adduce the inaction of the minister as imputing an operational problem with the minister’s position – that you see that even up to this date, he who is blaming so and so had not acted. It was only after he realised that he was part of the people to blame that he rushed to lay an instrument. That would be part of the evidence in my opinion. Yes?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the prayers that day were that this instrument should not be laid because of these processes and your guidance was that whoever had an issue should go to the committee - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if that is what I said, then it was because I had not read the law. But you cannot stop a minister from laying an instrument – an authority you granted him in the first place. For as long as you granted the minister the authority to lay that instrument, we cannot again say, don’t lay it. We are the ones who gave him the powers to lay it, as Parliament. Is that clear now, hon. Members? 

However, that does not stop the concerned people from picking it up or raising it with the committee. You said this instrument was laid under this law but there were issues with it. Yes, you can still do that. There is no prohibition at all because it is a matter that is before Parliament. Parliament now is abreast of the fact that such an instrument was actually made. 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I am not rising to dispute your advice and I think it is right, only that on record, I think the House should guide the petitioner in lieu of what is going on and especially the fact that we have not moved on your guidance and ruling. How do we proceed, given the fact that the petitioner and the report thereto had hit a snag? We need your final ruling on this matter on how to proceed because the committee never left its docks. So, we cannot proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the committee and actually under the rules, I was waiting for nominations from the Opposition to give the nominees to constitute that thing which was supposed to verify the sub-committee which we agreed upon. We haven’t received a list from the Opposition. I have the one from the government both on maternal health and also on that petition. I haven’t received a list from the Opposition. That committee would already have been constituted and it would be functional by now. That is a fact, please. I have two letters from the Government Chief Whip nominating members for both the maternal health ad hoc committee and for the committee on the report on the Lord Mayor’s petition to this House. You recall the discussions we had here. I haven’t received that list yet. The committee would have already been constituted. 

2.52
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the names were submitted by the Leader of the Opposition and I think your Office raised objection to one name and, therefore, there is one name which is valid. That name had a conflict of interest and that person was supposed to be replaced but otherwise there is one name already of hon. Ibi, supposed to be a member of that committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we should we proceed with only that name? 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: No, the second name will be replaced.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us handle that immediately after we adjourn the House so that that matter is expeditiously concluded. Hon. Minister of Education, address this issue of the strikes.

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Mr Speaker, I want to inform this august House that we are preparing a statement to be presented to this House in respect to strikes which have hit our schools in Sheema, Busoga region, Mbarara and other areas in the country in one week’s time, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you should come to the House on Thursday next week. At least give us the status quo. If a comprehensive report is not ready, you will tell us then but come back on Thursday to the House and update us.

2.53
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek your indulgence that you may also direct the relevant minister to come and make a statement to this House about the manner in which the hon. Member of Parliament for Iganga Municipality was arrested, brutalised and treated at the hands of the Police yet he was demonstrating on a just cause of lack of water in hospitals. I thought it would be prudent that this House gets a formal statement from the minister concerned as to why a Member of Parliament belonging to the ruling party who is justly demonstrating for lack of water in a government hospital in his constituency would be handled in such a brutal manner - the way we saw on national television. Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence over the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a statement on that situation of water in hospitals coming up tomorrow. You may want to update it to accommodate the concerns of the hon. Member. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO US$20 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO SUPPORT THE DRY LAND INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN KARAMOJA

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a proposal to borrow up to $20 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the dry land integrated development project in Karamoja. 

Mr Speaker, this loan will improve the livelihood of the people of Karamoja. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO US$80,620,000 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF OPUYO-MOROTO ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a proposal to borrow up to $80,620,000 million from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) to finance the construction of Opuyo-Moroto electricity transmission line project. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The two requests stand committed to the Committee on National Economy for expeditious handling and reporting to the House. 

REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS AFFAIRS COVERING THE ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION FOR THE PERIOD 2008 TO 2011

2.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS AFFAIRS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Mr Speaker, I rise to move under Rule 174(2) of the Rules of Procedure and stand at this historic moment to lay before this august House a report of the Human Rights Affairs Committee of Parliament covering the annual reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the period 2008 to 2011. The report is dated July 2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. That is a report from the Committee on Human Rights Affairs. We will be scheduling it for debate as soon as the opportunity is available. 

THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS’ FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Ms Angeline Osegge): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Uganda National Bureau of Standards’ financial statements for the year ended 30th June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Ms Angeline Osegge): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Uganda Communications Commission financial statement for the year ended 30th June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE NEC LUWERO INDUSTRIES LIMITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Ms Angeline Osegge): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table the NEC Luwero Industries Limited financial statements for the year ended 30th June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

THE NEC FARM KATONGA FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Ms Angeline Osegge): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the NEC Farm Katonga financial statements for the year ended 30th June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR NEC CONSTRUCTION WORKS AND ENGINEERING LIMITED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

2.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Ms Angeline Osegge): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for NEC Construction Works and Engineering Limited for the year ended 30th June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS AUTHORITY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Ms Angeline Osegge): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority financial statements for the year ended 30th June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Hon. Members, items 3(iv) to (ix) stand committed to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for expeditious handling.

RURAL COMMUNICATION DEVELOPMENT FUND (RCDF) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.00
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Rural Communication Development Fund (RCDF) financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE RURAL ELECTRIFICATION AGENCY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.00
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Rural Electrification Agency financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT JOINT PARTNERSHIP FUND (JPF)
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.00
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Ministry of Water and Environment Joint Partnership Fund financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.01
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the National Youth Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE UGANDA PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS, NEW YORK REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.01
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Permanent Mission to the United Nations, New York for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

THE EDUCATION SERVICE COMMISSION REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.01
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Education Service Commission for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

QUALITY INFRASTRUCTURE AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME (QUISP) SIDA CONTRIBUTION NO. 51180019/1-2, REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.02
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Quality Infrastructure and Standards Programme (QUISP) SIDA contribution No. 51180019/1-2 for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONALS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.02
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Allied Health Professionals financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE, 2012

3.03
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Judicial Service Commission for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

There is 3(xvii) which is on – 

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, it has already been laid but they had given two copies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So does it mean item 3(xvii) is not available?

MR TAYEBWA: It is not available; we have laid only (xviii).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, those reports – 

MR TAYEBWA: I ask for time to bring it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, those papers, ranging from 3(x) to 3(xix) but minus 3(xvii) stand committed to the Public Accounts Committee for expeditious handling. Technical people, please assist the chairperson so that the documents are arranged properly to facilitate them in laying of documents. We have one outstanding particular paper to be laid and that is the report for the UNDP-funded nationality implemented government programmes. Nationality - well, we shall look at it when it comes. 

Hon. Members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students of St Balikuddembe Senior Secondary School, represented by hon. Kiyingi Bbosa and hon. Sarah Nakawunde. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) We also have Muwanga sub-county councillors, Kiboga District, represented by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa and hon. Kabajo Kyewalabye. (Applause) They have come to observe the proceedings. We also have pupils and teachers of Factory Primary School, Jinja District represented by hon. Daudi Migereko and hon. Agnes Nabirye. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. Thank you. (Applause)

DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT ON THURSDAY 6TH JUNE 2013.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 6TH JUNE 2013.

(Debate continues)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I said before, I have not received a list from the Opposition; I do not know how I am going to proceed with that. Maybe since we are closing the debate tomorrow, we will find a way of accommodating the Members of the Opposition. But for others, I have the list here which we have been following to carry out the debate - (Ms Aol rose_) - is that the Leader of the Opposition?

3.09
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We in the Opposition have made our decision that those who are in the House be given the opportunity to give their response to the State of the Nation Address. So whoever is here is the right person to talk. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is a departure from what was agreed upon by the Business Committee and it gives the Speaker some difficulty because we have times allotted and names provided here. So, I do not know how much time I will give for whom and how long the debate will take. That is the challenge I will have. So I am going to allow the Members who will be speaking from the Opposition to take five minutes each. But that is going to be very difficult for me because I was going through the lists very easily. 

Okay, let us start with the Member for - I have the list for the Independents so if you are not here, I am very reluctant to include you at this stage. I will have the hon. Member for Kilak County, eight minutes.

3.11
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, allow me to air out my views on the State of the Nation Address presented by His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda.

In 6(3), His Excellency elaborated very clearly on education in our country. He talked about UPE and USE. The introduction of UPE in Uganda was a very good idea and we have achieved some success. It has increased the rate of enrolment and we have very many pupils who can access education. The challenge we are remaining with is to improve on the quality of UPE.

For UPE to succeed in Uganda, we need to look at the following areas. We need to look at teacher-pupil ratios as recommended by the Ministry of Education. For a teacher to handle a class successfully, there must be one teacher handling 45 pupils. If you look at schools in the villages, for example, in Amuru where I come from, you find one teacher teaching over 200 pupils in a class. This is affecting the success of UPE in our schools.

If you look at other policies within UPE, there is one that talks of automatic promotion. It says that even if a child fails in Primary One, that child should be automatically promoted to Primary Two. If the child fails in Primary Four, he or she should be promoted automatically. We are now asking ourselves, what if a child fails in Primary Seven will that child also go automatically to secondary school?

We have some great challenges there and some policies within UPE need to be changed. For example, this issue of automatic promotion may not work. If a child fails in Primary Two or Three, that child should repeat that class until the teacher finds that, that child is fit to go to the next class. For the automatic promotions to succeed, the pupil-teacher ratio should be 45:1. A teacher needs to keep on giving continuous assessment and must know each and every child by name but when you are handling over 200 pupils in a class, you may not be able to mark all the pupils’ books in a day. So we need to organise and rectify such situations.

Traversing many schools, one may find a school with over 800 pupils and only four teachers employed by the government. You find one teacher running from Primary One to Four. So we really need to improve that in order for us to improve the UPE policy.

Looking at Universal Secondary Education, when it was introduced, Ugandans were very happy but now the implementation of USE has great challenges. As I speak, there are private schools that signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the government to help in the implementation of USE. Since 2011, when we discussed this in this august House, there are other secondary schools that have not received the capitation grant that the government normally gives to secondary schools.

His Excellency stressed through the Minister for Education that USE funds need to be given on a termly basis and not on a quarterly basis. As a result, private schools under USE are failing to pay their teachers and to run the schools because of late releases of funds. The funds for schools are being released on a quarterly basis yet the timetables for secondary schools do not rhyme with the quarterly releases of funds. So the ministers of Education and Finance need to work on this so that we improve the release of funds.

Regarding low capitation grant for schools, I remember that schools under USE, under their umbrella body Private Schools’ Association, petitioned this Parliament last year saying that the money being remitted for each child in is too little. In order for USE to succeed, we need to increase the capitation grant. The government set aside Shs 47,000 for each student in secondary school but one should look at the cost of living and the cost of running a school, more so a private school where the government does not pay the teachers.

When those private schools joined USE, some of them were charging over Shs 100,000 for each child but immediately they joined, the government said they should not charge students any money. That means they will end up getting Shs 47,000 per child, which normally reaches the school very late. This is a great challenge and the schools are getting stuck.

Looking at the health department on page 4, His Excellency elaborated very well concerning health centres. According to the Ministry of Health policy, health centres II need to be put in every parish but if you look at many parishes, for example, in Amuru where I come from, there are so many parishes without health centres. You may find a district with only one health centre III and without a referral hospital. We need to improve this very seriously.

Still on health, a district should be having a minimum of four ambulances. If you move – (Member timed out.)

3.20
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to concentrate on the issue of the economy, which was a centre in the State of the Nation Address. The President said that in the next 50 years, Uganda will certainly be a first world country and that by 2017, Uganda will be a middle income country.

We look at the foundation that will make Uganda a first world country in 50 years and a middle-income country by 2017 - I was going through the budget allocations and policy statements supplied by the various government sectors and going by these allocations, it will take Uganda, maybe about 200 years to become a middle-income country.

I can give you an example. The department of - let us start with the industry and part of the Namanve Industrial Park in the constituency I represent here. Uganda Investment Authority is looking for about Shs 460 billion to prepare that industrial park for industries, which will create jobs for our children. In this financial year, it has been allocated only Shs 2.0 billion. When you look at the items, and these can cut across, under State House – inland travel, there is Shs 36 billion allocated; presidential donations – Shs 80 billion. So, what do we prioritize as a country to begin making declarations that we want to be a first world country?

When you go to agriculture, you realize that the figures supplied by Government, which were the basis for this budget – 28 million Ugandans still live in rural areas and only six percent live in urban places. The retreat of the NRM in Kyankwanzi of October 2011 made a resolution which was even published in newspapers that they wanted to increase the budget allocation for the agriculture sector to at least seven percent of the national budget.  Instead –(Interjections)– 10 percent was the Maputo Declaration, which you were not able to meet, but at least you said seven percent. What has happened in this budget is that the allocation to the agriculture sector has been reduced from 3.4 to 3.1 percent. And in the same figures, you are telling us of 28 million Ugandans who live and survive on agriculture. That notwithstanding, you have allocated them only 3.1 percent, which is a reduction. You have even failed to fulfill your own commitments that you made while at Kyankwanzi. Maybe you were just enjoying bull roasting. 

In the State of the Nation Address, the President declares Uganda to be a first world country in 50 years and a middle-income country by 2017. You can’t construct any industries and you are just providing for your own travels and we have seen – maybe, we need the Leader of Government Business to explain or the Government Chief Whip will help. Otherwise, you people in Cabinet, either you are not giving the President the right advise or if you do, you now need to restrain him.

Uganda will become the only country that can develop by distribution of cash in sacks and boxes. If you looked at the images in the newspapers – I think we are still living 1,000 years behind. The Head of State distributing money that was being picked from boxes by military generals and everywhere he has gone to – if you compare – just look at the budget allocation for agriculture. Agriculture needed Shs 800 billion for seedlings, planting materials, to kick start agriculture, but it is provided with only Shs 36 billion because the country does not have money. But the head of that country is moving from one zone to another appointing colonels and brigadiers –(Member timed out.)

3.26
MS EVELYNE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to thank H.E, the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address. In this State of the Nation Address, the President termed corruption as evil. But to me, corruption is not only evil but also satanic, demonic, a chronic disease, to mention but a few – (Interjections) – call it.

I want to concentrate on corruption. This evil practice is not about stealing the money. It also involves homosexuality, cheating with other people’s spouses, sodomy, walk to work, rioting, divorce – all that to me tantamount to corruption.

For God’s sake, we can never bury our heads in the sand and pretend - corruption is real and the players are very many outside there. The majority of the corrupt are outside. This tendency, if not fought now, will continue eating us up and even the generations to come. We shall give accountability, Mr Speaker, whether dead or alive to those who will come after us if we cannot stand today and condemn corruption.

Parliament as an institution is the overseer of all government programmes in this country. We must organize the public to give them hope for the future. We all know that prevention is better than cure. Corruption should be shameful to whoever practices it. We need a common voice for the future of Uganda to get bright.

We don’t need a lot of technicalities when fighting corruption. When a person is corrupt, they are corrupt. That is final. What else do you need –(Interjections)– yeah! Hand them; kill them or do anything – (Laughter) – but we should see justice and fairness. Corruption fighters in this country are sometimes demoralized and frustrated. When corrupt people are arrested and the next day they are out of jail jubilating and celebrating and shamelessly coming out as victors.

The first thing is that fighting corruption must be the responsibility of everybody. We must fight corruption at all levels. Fighting corruption in the higher offices is not enough. This must also trickle down to our districts, the sub-counties, the NAADS programmes, the NUSAF and other offices, the roads and the works. There is a lot of corruption. We must follow the officers in every district who handle programmes like NAADS and the rest. 

I want to thank the civil society organisations and the religious groups for raising the alarm against corruption especially the Black Monday Movement. They are doing a noble job. We must join hands with them to fight and clean Uganda and display a better image of our country. We should not fight in isolation- (Interjections) - which order? We have to fight corruption. We must join the Black Monday Movement- (Laughter) - but when we are fighting we must be organised. We must not work in isolation when we are fighting. When we are joining the Black Monday Movement, we should respect the authorities; we should respect the Police and we should do it in an organised manner. 

3.31
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand in support of the motion moved by hon. Boona that thanks be given to the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address delivered by His Excellency the President of Uganda.

In the State of the Nation Address of 2013, the President has indicated that developing infrastructure, especially railways, roads, electricity and ICT is important for the socio-economic transformation of this country. In this particular case, I will focus on ICT and especially its infrastructure. 

I need to inform the House that ICT contributes at least six percent to the country’s GDP and it is also a very big source of employment especially for the young people in Uganda. Therefore, it is very important that this sector is accorded the support it deserves.

In the area of ICT infrastructure, I will focus on the issue of analog to digital migration. For those who have not heard about this issue, it is the transformation whereby we shall change from watching analog television to watching digital television. Uganda has committed itself to completing this process by 2015. In fact, as part of the East African Community, we had preferred that we shorten this process to the end of 2013. However, at the moment the analog to digital migration process in Uganda is not moving as well as we would have wanted it to move. 

At the moment, the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, together with the Uganda Communications Commission, is working to see that the analog to digital migration is completed in greater Kampala by the end of December 2103. But even here in Kampala and greater Kampala, you can see that very few people are aware of what analog to digital migration is. Very few people even know what they need to do in order for their television sets to be able to receive digital signals. So, in this respect, the aspect of public education has not been very well handled and I will call upon the Uganda Communications Commission and UBC to make sure that they educate the public about what to expect in this process of the analog to digital migration.

Another issue that I have with this process is that there are some decisions which were taken by the government, one of which was that UBC would be made the sole multiplex operator for digital television signal distribution. I personally think that this was not the correct decision. As a member of the ICT committee, we have advised the government that we should have at least two signal distributors in the country. 

Another issue we have is that UBC which has been made the sole signal distributor - as for now, we have advised them to unbundle into two entities: one that will handle content distribution and another to handle signal distribution. However, up to now, the UBC has refused to unbundle and it is very likely that this state of affairs will mean that the analog to digital migration process will not move at the correct speed we want it to move. That means the process will be full of potholes. It will not be a smooth process. 

We all know that Uganda Broadcasting Corporation unfortunately also has its own managerial, financial and other technical shortcomings and, therefore, I have doubts about the capacity of this entity to properly navigate the waters of analog to digital migration. However, perhaps with the support of Uganda Communications Commission, they will be able to do so. 

Finally, this process of analog to –(Member timed out.)

3.36
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute to the State of the Nation Address. I join my colleagues in thanking the President and the Ugandan Government for embracing the East African Community integration. In 1999, the Republic of Rwanda and that of Uganda signed a treaty. In 2005, the Customs Union came into place. In 2007, the Republic of Rwanda and the Republic of Burundi joined the East African Community. All these countries joined the Community with the objective of the monetary union, the customs union and political federation. 

However, this has not been achieved to their expectation. In Uganda, we have not got the benefits of the integration, reason being that the implementation of the integration process is very slow. I want to appeal to the line ministries together with the ministry which is concerned with coordinating the integration to expedite the process. 

Colleagues who have moved around, you will agree with me that if you go to Rwanda, the integration process has taken off. Here in Uganda, things have not set off because the system is corrupted; we have not set up systems which can easily enable the integration to move on. In Rwanda, there is something called the Rwanda Development Board where all business documents can be got. In Rwanda, if you want to get a work permit, you get it in a day; if you want to register a company, that can be done within a day. Here in Uganda, getting those documents is a nightmare, hence hindering the integration process. I would expect the Uganda Government to pick a leaf from Rwanda so that we can enable our people to benefit from the integration.

The benefits of integration are mainly to reduce on the bureaucracy and on the costs of trade, which I believe is very important to our people. My way forward for the integration system is that as Uganda, we need to increase awareness amongst our people. We also have to increase the budget for the ministry of East Africa Affairs since we chair it now. Awareness also needs finances.  

I want to thank the government where it has scored. We have managed to sing the East African Anthem on all national functions; we have managed to have Swahili on our curriculum; we have managed to print national identity cards much as it is still at pilot level. These national identity cards will enable our nationals to move freely in the East African Community and they will also enable us to access services. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

3.41s
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking His Excellency, the President, for the State of the Nation Address. 

However, I have the following concerns: One, modernising agriculture. The President identified it as one of the bottlenecks in transforming this country. Over 80 percent of our population is engaged in agriculture; therefore, as we face a lot of challenges in modernising agriculture, this has affected the quality of life of our people.

There is a high level of dependency syndrome; people are staying in abject poverty, low incomes and we have food insecurity in the country. As we sit here, the country has been hit by a drought and this has affected our population but if we had better performance, I believe we would be storing food. Even after a drought, we would still have food in our stores. If we do not work on modernising agriculture, we shall have many challenges which will affect the growth of our economy.

I have the following proposals: The President has laboured to expose our farmers through field visits; the research officers and field workers are working to disseminate information and teach people about modernising agriculture but I think reviving the district farm institutes will be cost effective. This is because whenever the President organises for these tours, you find that a few leaders are picked from the district but dissemination of information becomes a problem. So if we can revive the district farm institutes, they will help us.

I believe seeing tractors given by the government to sub-counties, as we talk about modernising agriculture, to increase production is necessary. Many of our farmers are using hoes.

The facility that we have on ground is that through NAADS, our farmers are organised in groups and so I propose that the government should labour to provide tractors to organised farmers’ groups in order to increase our production level.

There is a challenge of having loans financing agriculture. I know that there are loans outside; SACCOs are in existence but the interest rates cannot be managed by our poor farmers. I want to propose that agricultural loans be availed to rural farmers because we know the capacity of the people who engage in this. Many of the loans which are available can only be managed by the rich people but not the poor.

I also wish to talk about the market for our produce. Although Uganda is concentrating on agriculture, how much do we supply our region? We need to look at the issue of marketing our goods and we cannot do this if we do not consider value addition for our goods. I propose that the government looks at the issue of the markets and value addition so that we can have transformation in our country through modernised agriculture.

Most of the farmers are hit by challenges especially in my district. Their produce is always destroyed by animals especially the elephants. As we think of having food in this country, we should also think about protecting what the farmers produce. Through NAADS, the ministry has gone to selection of sites but the main thing is that we are not looking at industrialisation. I was surprised two months ago when I saw on NTV some groups of people in Yumbe trying to help the people to have proper use of their fruits. The government should relate the end-up site selection with establishment of local industries so that our people will make better use of their produce. For example, we have fruits in West Nile but normally we leave them to rot.

On education, I want to appreciate the government efforts but there are challenges that we need to look at. The quality of education in this country has to be looked at. There is a lot in the media about the quality of lecturers and the quality of teachers in institutions. I propose that the relevant ministry takes a deliberate initiative to ensure that the quality of our education is highly perfected. 

We have gaps in technical institutions and vocational schools. I propose that in each of the districts, we should be able to establish a technical and vocational school because there are many who cannot make it to university. It would be relevant to have the technical or vocational schools in our districts. 

We have challenges coding community initiated schools. In our constitution - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will have the Member for Aruu County, the members for Rubaga North and Luwero District. Five minutes each. Can you press the other - 

3.49
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I just have four areas of concern. One is on page 3 where the President noted, with great concern, incidences of accidents, which are contributing to 20 percent of the lives lost in Uganda. I think that this is a little on the higher side. 

I talked to a doctor recently who said that every day in Mulago Hospital, they lose three Ugandans because of boda-bodas and I think that as a Parliament, we need to come out and do something. 

One of the causes of these rampant accidents could be related to alcoholism. So at an appropriate time, when we consult you, we shall be able to deal with some of these causes of reckless driving once and for all.

Secondly, on page 6, the President said that the railway line would be built. This pledge has been coming in every year but I was surprised over the weekend when the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas was returning from Packwach, somewhere in Nwoya, we found construction work of the railways actually taking place. So we hope that it will be completed on schedule.

On page 12, the President stated that our export earnings are Shs4.9 billion. Something should be done about agriculture. We have travelled all around the world; I travelled to Malawi and the government there has built big silos for the rural farmers. People grow maize and store it. Malawi is now the biggest exporter of grain to the Comoros. But in Uganda, you produce maize from 100 acres and the prices will go down to Shs 50 a kilogramme. You will fail to have storage. So, we want to see the government minister coming here to tell us how many silos they have built in Uganda.

We raised this issue two years ago and it is on the record of the Hansard. Minister Tarsis Kabwegyere got up on the Floor of this Parliament and said that Government cannot build for people granaries. We are not talking of granaries but of silos – if only we can have big storage facilities in every parish so that the farmers can store their products. The challenge we have is that we have a Government that talks, talks and talks. The actual implementation is not there on the ground. 

We are even complaining of drought and I would challenge any minister to get up and tell us how many kilometres of irrigation have been done by Government. Israel is one of the driest countries in the world but they are world leading producers of fruits. So can a minister get up and tell us for the last 27 years where they have done irrigation. We do not see anything. It is just talking and politicking. People in the villages cannot even dig because of politicking. 

The year 2016 is still three years ahead and people have already started consultations. You wonder how this country is going to be run on full time politicking! Mr Speaker, because this country is too political, I am of the view that we may need to extend the term for elective offices because you wonder what we are producing as Ugandans other than politics. Before you are sworn in, another person is already consulting - (Laughter)- and politicking. People cannot dig! In all the trading centres, there are mobilisers already well positioned.

So, we may have to think about why Uganda is too political and I suggest that we need two urgent amendments: one of restoring terms limits so that a president can concentrate on work not because he wants votes but because he has to leave a legacy. But this work of where you are looking for votes compels you to even start carrying money in sacks. (Laughter)

Another amendment I would propose is that every elective office from LC I to president may have to be for a term of seven years so that people can concentrate in productive activities. The cost of elections in Uganda according to the Electoral Commission is a budget of close to Shs 1 trillion. How many health centres can be fully furnished and we have drugs and doctors with the Shs 1 trillion we need to just go and elect leaders.

So as this Parliament, at an appropriate time, we may have to decide to extend the term of every elective office to seven, eight or even nine years – (Interjections and Laugher) - that is on assumption that it can help to stop this country being too political because we engage in politics every day –(Member timed out.)

3.55
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The State of the Nation Address is a political accountability given by the President –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR KASIBANTE: It is a political accountability given by the President to the people on whose mandate he works. But I would just like to begin by giving one challenge and the point is on page 6. I just want to supplement on what my honourable colleague has mentioned earlier and want to quote the President. He states, “The railway will be built…” and he goes on to state, “…but besides we have trained the UPDF Engineering Brigade to build the railway.”

I believe the best statement would be, “not to build”. It would be either to rebuild, to extend, to maintain or rehabilitate. The Uganda railway was completed in 1926 and was extended way back in 1969. We cannot up to now, 2013, talk about building. That is an economically intimidating statement because there can no longer be any more building of the Uganda railway but we can only maintain. We can actually only stop destroying what has already been put in place.

A State of the Nation Address must address real issues. The most pressing issues at hand today include the following. One is corruption, army desertions, indebtedness of this country and also poverty. In fact as we talk, the foreign debt that Uganda has is close to $ 6 billion. Rwanda with all the developments it has ahead of us has only $1.1 billion of foreign debt –(Interjections)– protection, Mr Speaker.

Uganda is the most corrupt not only in East Africa, Central and South but also in the whole of Africa. Uganda is one of the 25 least developed countries of the world. Uganda has soldiers at the rank of Generals deserting the Army. As far as I am concerned, these are the most pressing issues at hand.      

The last surviving single buyer of one of the formerly major cash crops in Uganda, which is tobacco, and whose single buyer was BAT has just announced its closure because it has become expensive to buy and produce cigarettes in Uganda and it is only cheaper in Kenya. So BAT is going to be buying tobacco and producing cigarettes in Kenya and then selling to Uganda because it is expensive in Uganda just because of one major problem; we have the poorest road network in the whole of this region. The Government of Uganda –(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: I thank hon. Kasibante for being kind to give way. I want to inform hon. Kasibante – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you rose on a point of order. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry. I am standing on a point of order because I have data. I am involved in the sector and the available data shows that Uganda doesn’t have the worst road network. So, is it in order for hon. Kasibante to come and give wrong information to this august House, telling us his opinion and not facts? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a saying in Luo and I am sure in many languages that if you only eat in your own house, you may think your mother is the best cook - (Laughter)- please conclude. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I just wish to also inform the hon. Minister that it is only in Kampala, the Capital City of Uganda, that 80 percent of the roads are dusty. 

Single buyers of our major cash corps including coffee, cotton, etcetera are now history. The coffee marketing – (Member timed out.)

4.01
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few issues and the first one is on page 6, concerning agriculture. You will recall that before the NRM Government came into power, we had cooperatives and we had cash crops. Lango was known for cotton, Buganda for coffee and also other areas had specificities in agriculture but today, when you ask a child in primary school what our cash crop is, they can never tell you because we are lagging behind; we are not producing like we used to. We are in a situation where a lot of money in the budget is allotted to security, defence and other areas but the backbone of the economy which is agriculture - because we still have 75 percent of Ugandans still producing locally using primitive tools when other countries have even been subsidising their farmers and creating market. We lack this and that is why even if this Government came out with a very ambitious vision, it can never realise it if we do not go back to the drawing board and reinstate what existed because these farmers were being paid like formal employees. They would access markets, they would get tools, there were tractors, there were bulldozers, there was everything to ferry produce and roads were maintained fully. If we do not go back to that level, the NRM vision will not be realised.

When the President says that we need to mechanise and industrialise and you leave it at national level; you do not go back to sub-county level because I represent a rural area and I know what it means if you bring machinery at districts. That means the last person can never really access it. So, mechanisation should be looked at, at sub-county level. If this government cannot see that, then you will never be able to realise this vision and our poor farmers are going to lose it because you cannot continue farming when you have no markets, when you are not ware about the climate and when you do not know when you are supposed to sow because the seasons have all changed. 
We do not even have a meteorological system that is very effective that will tell farmers to plant or harvest at such a time. That means agriculture is still doing badly and Uganda is not going to develop because you still have 75 percent in that area and I pray that in this coming budget debate, we focus on improving agriculture in this country and then those other many visions will maybe come to be realised. 

Education; I realise the President mentioned several new things like the loan scheme. I hope this grant won’t face the same fate like the State House Fund but if it is realistic – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please, let me interrupt you a bit. I see some children leaving. In the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of St Mbaga Tuzinde Primary School, Kampala District, represented by hon. Fred Ruhindi and hon. Nabilah Naggayi Ssempala. They have come to observe the proceedings. I had to indulge myself because they were leaving. 

MS NABUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was on the issue of education. The President said that the loan scheme will only benefit the science students. I represent a rural constituency and actually, we have very few schools that have standard laboratories. That means that when you put such a large sum to one area, majority of these students will not benefit. If it were realistic, I think it would have been open to all those who could access it but limiting a national grant to one area is going to be detrimental to those poor students studying Arts because they would have preferred doing sciences but because we do not have the facilities, they are not going to. While we look at this loan, because of course if it is a loan it is for Ugandans, everyone should be able to access it – (Member timed out.)

4.08
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in this debate to thank the President for his address. I also want to thank the President for consolidating peace and stability in fulfillment of his constitutional mandate. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the UPDF for maintaining peace and security of all Ugandans and their properties. 

However, I want to agree with hon. Odonga Otto that there is too much politicking; that if Uganda spent more time on productive, beneficial and constructive debate, maybe Uganda would be far ahead than where it is today. 

I also disagree with hon. Kasibante that really he has diverted us on some matters. I did not understand because you know very well that Rwanda, which you have quoted as one of the countries you admire most, has Generals who rushed to South Africa and even if you watched the news today, you would see many officers and men in various places being tried for betraying their country. So it is not Uganda alone that is facing these problems.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are too close to the microphone.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to guide my sister from Luweero that Uganda has moved from the traditional cash crops of coffee and maize; we are now having all crops for food security and commercial purposes. For example, maize and bananas are cash crops – (hon. Sewungu rose_) Mr Speaker, let me - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you first rose on clarification; you cannot therefore change it to order. Do not disrupt the debate; please sit down.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I want to address myself to page 11 – I see the President lamenting – (Interruption)

MR SEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament from an area which grows a lot of coffee. And recently, even during the dry season, under the NAADS programme, people from Kalungu District were supplied with coffee seedlings as the main cash crop - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR SEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to insinuate that this country has moved from traditional cash crops – which we are even still teaching in schools. Is he in order to mislead this House that we abandoned our traditional cash crops which are coffee, tea and others and yet we are still supplying them to our areas?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you will have your clarification. (Laughter)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, hon. Sewungu. But the fact remains that we now have more cash crops beyond coffee. 

Mr Speaker, I want to address myself to a point on page 11 – of course I thank the President for paying attention to all the details in this country – be it small or big. But in this case, he is talking about drug-resistant ticks. I come from a district where everybody depends on cattle. We petitioned this House, as the people of Kiruhura in September last year, that our cattle were dying because they were no longer responding to drugs due to these resistant ticks.

Now, I thank the President for addressing himself to this problem. But he laments on the laxity of the veterinary department. This is a big problem; why should this department abandon its duty? I want the Minister of Agriculture to come and explain why our cows continue to die – and even the President says so but nothing is being done about it.

Still on the same page, the President says that he recently went to Northern Ireland, UK specifically on this issue and the drug manufacturers there have a solution to this. I want to know from the Minister of Agriculture whether they have followed up on this matter - (Member timed out.)

4.14
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address. In his speech, the President focused on the bottlenecks to the socio-economic transformation. And I will focus on numbers three and six. 

The first one is on development of human resource and I will focus on education. I know that most of my colleagues have talked about it but I also want to add on something, being a teacher by profession. The President talked about development in the education sector and he mentioned UPE, USE and vocational education. This has been very good for our country because it has enabled many of our children to access education. There has been improved enrolment but there are challenges that need to be addressed. And I will summarise them.

One of them is accessibility; much as we know that this has improved enrolment, it is not accessible to all the Ugandans. When you move across the country, there are very many sub-counties that do not have secondary schools. A’Level education is a nightmare in some sub-counties because some districts do not have the schools. For example, in my district, we have only two secondary schools that offer A’Level education and yet I have 12 sub-counties. I know the trend is similar across the country. I would request the Ministry of Education to have some schools grant-aided, like my colleague was saying. The communities have tried to put up some schools but the government is not taking them up. 

When you look at the budget – I sit on the education committee but there is nothing for grant-aiding. There are no seed-schools that are going to be constructed this financial year. I beg the House that we join hands to push the Ministry of Education to ensure that we have some of these schools grant-aided so that our people access this education. 

The other challenge under education is quality – as my colleague has said. Colleagues have mentioned very many remedies but I would also add that we should motivate these teachers. This will ensure that as much as we have UPE and USE, learners access quality education. We have to look at motivation – not only in terms of money but also the pupil to teacher ratio. If a teacher handles few learners, he will cater for them in a better way and we shall see improvement in the quality of our education. 

We should look at accommodation for teachers. Last year, we talked about having teachers’ houses but in my district, we do not have even a single teacher’s house. If our teachers had good accommodation, they would be motivated to teach better.

I also want to comment on what the honourable member for Luweero was talking about – the issue of the loan scheme. In fact, I would want to support my colleagues who call for the loan scheme to help the products of UPE and USE but cannot afford to pay for their further studies. So I would encourage us to open it up for the needy students if that time comes.

My other concern is on agriculture; the President talked about the 68 percent who live under subsistence farming. He went ahead to talk about some actors who are not serious after noting those other districts which are implementing the cluster enterprises that we talked about. I would also want to support him and say that the cluster enterprises decision was by the leaders – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from Masaka District; five minutes. 

4.20
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to comment on the State of the Nation Address. I would like to comment on agriculture, energy and infrastructure.

I thank the President very much for his advocacy of a cluster of crops and fruits that should be grown by each household. On page 9, the President mentions 13 fruits as well as cash crops that should be grown by each household in order to bring in money that will enable them to fight poverty.

The President even went into the details of stating the size of land on which the crops should be grown. He says that we should grow an acre of coffee, an acre of fruit, an acre of bananas, an acre of elephant grass etcetera. The President has thought in detail what rural households should be involved in, in order to improve their incomes.

The President continued to say that he has advocated for and made these recommendations for quite some time and he adds that those areas, which have taken up this recommendation and implemented this package, have experienced dramatic results. Examples include in the Bundibugyo area, Kanungu, Kiruhura, Kapchorwa and Soroti. So he has evidence that this works.

My problem is that the people of Masaka District have not benefitted from this implementation. I am assuming that the people of these areas that benefitted from this recommendation were given inputs by NAADS because NAADS is the flagship programme of the government that is supposed to implement these measures to bring people out of poverty.

I am wondering why NAADS has not implemented this programme in Masaka District when my people have expressed eagerness and are ready to work and plant these crops. They even have the size of land as recommended. Moreover, when we get coffee that is distributed by UCDA, all the farmers can get is maybe 50 coffee seedlings and sometimes less.

I would like to urge UCDA and NAADS that when they are distributing these seedlings and crops, they should be cognisant of the President’s recommendation and see that the people of Masaka District also benefit from the NAADS programme and get the recommended crops from which they can also derive sufficient income.

On energy, the President recommended nuclear energy. I would like to say that nuclear energy is very dangerous –(Member timed out.)

4.25
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, People with Disabilities Representative): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. His Excellency the President did fulfill his constitutional obligation by addressing the nation on crucial and salient issues affecting the country. I will confine myself to one or two issues because of time constraints.

On page 5 of the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency, the President pointed out various bottlenecks that are inimical to achieving our national development goals and I will quote infrastructure including electricity, roads, railways and water among others.

It is high time that as a country we adopted a cost-effective mode of transport to promote our trade goals. There is no doubt that Uganda is a landlocked country but we cannot continue to lament about our landlocked position because I believe that our position, being in the centre of the East African region, can be used as a strength to interlink with other member countries in the region to promote trade.

All countries in the East African region; Rwanda, Burundi, DRC, Kenya and Tanzania have to promote their trade while passing through Uganda. If we reflect on how Tanzania agreed with Zambia to initiate and establish the Transzam railway, which was later named Tazara railway in collaboration with the Government of China, they did it in a collaborative way. This is what Uganda can emulate and ensure that we make a railway link between Uganda, Rwanda, Tanzania, Kenya and Southern Sudan that has just joined us.

If we consider the costs that we are incurring by taking our merchandise to Mombasa using railways, this makes our trade; the country’s exports and imports very expensive. Therefore, it is high time we borrowed a leaf from the policy, which His Excellency the President introduced, of the National Road Fund. 

Today, we have constructed some roads using internally generated revenue. I think we can also do the same with the railway; we can form a railway fund so that we can start the reconstruction of the railway lines beginning with our locally generated revenue.

Mr Speaker, His Excellency the President talked about ideological disorientation. As a country, we have to appreciate our natural endowment. On page 7 of the State of the Nation Address, the President, while talking about constructing a pipeline up to the coast, said that the countries where thepipeline passes would charge a fee. I feel Uganda can also charge a fee in respect of our railway line, which will be used to transport merchandise to our neighbouring countries, for example from Mombasa to the Democratic Republic of Congo.(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Masaka Municipality, you have 10 minutes.

4.30
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your most kind consideration on the time. I will make good use of it.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I took off time to try to appreciate the President after his 28 years at the helm of the state. I thought I would make various bits of responses to the salient issues that he failed to address the nation on, albeit being the same issues reoccurring year after year. In particular, I will address myself to the 10 issues that he described as bottlenecks to the transformation of the Ugandan state into a modern state. 

He mentioned, critically, the issue of ideological disorientation, and I cannot agree with him anymore on that issue. I was only a small boy in primary 3 when the President came, all guns blazing,with the ten-point programme. It is not that Ugandans are that gullible but they are very hopeful. Before that list was exhausted, we had a 15-point programme. Before the ink dried on that one, we now had visions – the visions started. So, when the President talks about ideological disorientation, he is only right. He is a dispirited man. I think by moving back and forth, to no consequence, he is right to talk about disorientation. 

This is where I would like to invite the House to help the President and the country so that we can end this disorientation. We cannot be moving from one end to another to no avail. I will not describe properly what the English say of a man who does the same thing using the same process but expecting different results. 

I think the President, for the very first time, made a public confession that he is dispirited.He only fell short of asking for help, maybe because he is the President, but I think he did invite the House to offer help. So, while debating this year’s budget, I would like to invite the House to try to refocus the dreams of this country.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the President is right in talking about building state pillars to ensure that the state is capable of governing people. He has had close to 30 years at the helm of the state. The basic foundation of building an enduring state is building and enacting a durable Constitution. As we speak, the Constitution is akin to a document of convenience. It is only taken seriously when the powers that be believe that it is a convenient vehicle for moving forward whatever they want to act upon. For me, this is very disappointing.

For us to talkabout building state pillars to make the country governable when a single man has reshuffled the frontbench variously at his convenience, and he is the only person who has not been reshuffled, he must be the problem. I run short of recollecting how many people have occupied this frontbench. Is it that all these souls have been incapable of helping a single man build state pillars? Is it that all the occupants of the frontbench are such an incompetent lot that they must be reshuffled and a single individual stays and he is still building?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, we all know very well that to reshuffle the frontbench is a prerogative of the President as per the Constitution of Uganda. We also know very well that to reshuffle the Presidency in Uganda is the prerogative of the People of Uganda through democratic elections. The people of Uganda have said “no”; they have been voting. The President has subjected himself to the people of Uganda four times and they have re-elected him.Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to confuse everybody and the House that the President can be reshuffled by Parliament or anybody? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the constitutional provisions are clear on how ministers are appointed. For the benefit of the members, when you look at Article 113 (1) of the Constitution, you will find the prerogative of the President. When you look at Article 105 (1) of the Constitution, you will see how the President’s term is determined and how he or she is elected through a process. So, to suggest that the ministers should be reshuffled at the same time as the President would be an unconstitutional suggestion, to say the very least. The member is not in order. (Applause)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, we have shared this matter with hon. John Byabagambi variously. He wanted to make a point on record that we have disagreed on how to do it. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. We are in 2013 and yesterday we were at the Central Police Station, Kampala, but already there are posters of President Museveni for 2016 to 2021. They are already at a police station, an institution which is supposed to be apolitical. Is that not really being too much on the people of Uganda, and we pretend that we are following the Constitution? Thank you. 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, because of the way we have approached our politics, it will continue enlisting those kinds of emotions especially when we fail to draw a boundary between productive politics and career politics.

The President is also concerned about the human resource development in this country.He addresses himself to the fact that we need to develop a human resource for this country. In the National Development Plan (NDP), which is supposed to be a document to buttress our planning and budgeting, clearly the need for vocationalising education is well articulated. Go into our budget for 2013/2014, where is the money for building vocational schools? Isn’t this a pipe dream? Aren’t we preaching water and drinking wine? 

Why are we enacting documents to occupy our shelves and we cannot act on them? We need to refocus. If we are going to help our young people and not turn them into people that are educated without any skills to work with, we need to act on our proclamations. The NDP is very clear on what we need to do with education, but our budget speaks a different language.

The President is also very keen in overcoming the problems that bedevil agriculture by modernisation. However, at the same time he is making pronouncements to the effect that he is about to ban NAADS. Who is telling the country the truth? So, was this the state of the nation? These are the questions we need to answer in this closed room to help this country get a strategic bearing and refocus our resources. 

While we were discussing the ministerial policy statement for the presidency, we realised that indeed 40 percent of the budget for the presidency is for donations. The minister for Luwero Rwenzori had barely Shs7 billion for servicing this sector. The President had more than Shs100 billion for donations, which are haphazard as we know them. It is a pathetic sight to see your leader carrying a sack of money. When the world is going to the moon, a President in a banana republic is moving with sacks of money –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member for Masaka Municipality, in the course of his debate, made reference to the phrase, “in this closed room”. Future readers of the Hansard might think that this House was proceeding in a closed session. This House is not in a closed session. The doors of the House, by rules and the Constitution, are supposed to be open except in those circumstances that are also prescribed. This debate is, therefore, in open Parliament – open to public viewing. So, any reference to “closed room” shall be interpreted in that context. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have James and Christina Newville from Dallas Texas, USA. They are visiting with West Budama South, Tororo District, represented by hon. Jacob Oboth and also hon. Sarah Opendi. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

4.44
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the State of the Nation Address, the President identified 10 bottlenecks to development and emphasised socio-economic transformation of our society. The President talked about economic and political transformation of the East African region and the African continent as part of removing the strategic bottlenecks. The President points to the creating of a big stable market as justification, and the urge to integrate the African continent and the East African region.

Mr Speaker, the East African Co-operation broke down in 1977, as the President rightly states. If you look at what is happening in Uganda today, I see inconsistencies that might lead to what happened in 1977. The inconsistency and the incompatibility the President mentioned was the dictatorship of Idi Amin and the political order of Mwalimu Nyerere.

If we look at East Africa as it is today, the Constitutions of the rest of the East African countries are not compatible with what is happening in Uganda. Our Parliament today has the military in Parliament. The rest of the East African countries have civilian parliaments. Also, in terms of term limits, how compatible are we as a country with the rest of the East African countries? That is a question for Government to answer.

Another issue about compatibility is on the African Union. Uganda is a member of the African Union and the African Union adopted the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. Most of the 54 member countries have ratified the Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance, but Uganda has failed to ratify the charter. The question is: if Uganda, a country capable of bringing peace to other countries, can shy away from ratifying the charter, how are we going to be judged as a country? 

Secondly, because this charter is so important to African integration, how is Government explaining herself to the rest of the countries? Why should a country that is strong enough to bring peace to other countries chicken out when it comes to making commitments to standards by which it can be judged? Could Government explain why it is shy to ratify this important document yet we are formidable members of the African Union and the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM)?(Member timed out)

4.50
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman representative Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In his address to the nation, the President started by identifying 10 bottlenecks to socio-economic transformation in this country. The first one was ending ideological disorientation. I find this difficult to understand. I have been in this world long enough and when I was young and the UPC was in Government, the ideology that we had was concerned about teachers. The teachers were rated very highly, so much so that their payment was very good.

Why am I bringing this up? The President talked about human resource development, which is No. 3 among the bottlenecks he mentioned. Human resource development is very important in the socio-economic development of the country, and teachers are at the gateway of human resource development. How are we going to make sure that the human resource that we have will develop if we abandon the teachers and we rate them lowly.
Secondly, when we talk about human resource development, we should also look at the issue of health and education. Teachers always keep reading on a daily basis and they are informed, not like other professionals like us.

Mr Speaker, one of the issues that came out among the bottlenecks was on agriculture. On page 9, the President ably talked said that 68 percent of our farmers are still practising subsistence agriculture. I agree with him. He went ahead to say that clustering of enterprises would have helped to transform this nation. This is true, but the problem is that the clustering was done without any framework, without any plan or any budget. This is why you find that on page 9, he went on to give examples of areas which are doing well in clustering, for example, Bundibugyo, Kanungu, Kiruhura, Kapchorwa and Soroti, but there was no example of any area in the North. Why was this so? This is because it is very difficult to find any area which is reaping from the zoning of agriculture.

For this zoning to work out very well, we need a framework, we need actual plans and a budget, and we need agricultural institutions. We also need capital to invest in agricultural institutions. We also need storage facilities. On top of that, I see that there is no Government effort towards regulating the prices of farmers’ products. This, therefore, leaves the farmers at the mercy of the middlemen who are always very quick to exploit them. This is because the Government is not regulating the prices of the farmers’ produce.

I would like to suggest that if we know that 68 percent of our farmers are still at the subsistence level, we need to make sure, as a Government, that we have the market, the infrastructure such as storage and good roads. When you look at the budget, which is yet to come, the district roads which are important to our farmers have been given very little. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this debate was supposed to take one hour today. I had communicated earlier that we would close this debate tomorrow to pave way for a general debate on the budget. I am going to urge especially the Leader of the Opposition to this time present a list to me for the balance of the debate.

I have the hon. Ochola, hon. Wafula-Oguttu, hon. Odoo Tayebwa, hon. Wamanga and hon. Kiyingi Deogratius on my list from the Opposition. If you could by tomorrow give me the full list with time allocation, so that we can see how to balance these presentations. This also applies for next week’s general debate on the budget. Members, we will have a general debate on the budget next week. So if you do not speak on the State of the Nation Address, let your whips assign you time on the budget debate next week. It is going to be managed the same way. 

We have used up two hours on this debate; I am going to allow one more member for five minutes so that at 5.00p.m.we can go to the next time.

4.57 
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand in support of the motion moved by hon. Boona.

I want to appreciate the President for the State of the Nation Address simply because he was serving his constitutional obligation. He was accounting to the population and he was giving us a back to future analysis. In other words, the President was showing us where we are coming from and where we are going. 

I know some of our honourable colleagues have tried to vindicate the President when he said that by 2017 Uganda should be a middle income country and within 50 years it should be a first world country. There is nothing wrong with visioning. A good plan should have a vision because in visioning, you want to see where you want to go, where you are and the constraints that lie between, which are preventing you from realising your vision. Working on these tensions should be a collective effort. Therefore, we should appreciate the vision irrespective of whether you are in the Opposition or in the ruling party. It is good for any country.

Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate the achievements, some of which were enumerated by the President, both short-term and strategic. At this time last year, you remember we were not doing well. The economic growth rate was about three percent and inflation was at two-digit figures. Now our economic growth rate has improved significantly; we have reduced inflation to a single-digit figure. There is infrastructural development. There is some relative stability. Despite having demonstrations here and there - walk to work and others – on the whole we can say we have been relatively stable. 

Obviously, there are challenges. You cannot avoid challenges; even if it was your own household, you would have some challenges. I know there are a number of challenges but I want to focus on those in agriculture. I know agriculture is the backbone of our economy and 68 percent of the population is still practising subsistence agriculture, but it is the President’s earnest desire to transform this country’s agriculture. 

Here, I will only make a few prayers, if we are to realise this vision. You all know that some 10 to 20 years back, we had a neo-liberal wave of thinking that swept across the globe, where we came up with decentralisation, privatisation and all that. We came up with an extension system that emphasised demand-driven private sector-led growth, decentralisation, farmer empowerment, giving our farmers a choice under the framework of NAADS. 

Today, however, we are talking about going back to the single spine extension system. This is a departure from the demand-driven approach to the supply-driven approach, and we are moving to centralisation again. My only prayer is that we move a bit cautiously here. I feel that we can still have some good aspects of the demand-driven approach and some good aspects of the supply-driven approach. Can we come up with a hybrid? You know that after spending almost two decades, we need to learn from this experience –(Interruption)

MS ABIA: Thank you very much, my brother, for giving way. The information that I want to give you is that actually, Government has rescinded its earlier position that it was going to move away from NAADS. This is because it is under undue pressure from the World Bank.

World Bank is funding ATAAS, which is the research component of NAADS. Therefore, if Government was to completely withdraw, that would mean that that component of research would also have to be withdrawn. Now that Government did not want to do that, it was prudent that Government finds a way of manipulating issues around in order to retain NAADS.

Secondly, the withdrawal of the previous extension providers under - 

MR KWEMARA: I thank you, honourable colleague, for the information. I was actually urging us to come up with a hybrid. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to emphasise farmer empowerment. It is true that Government has done a lot in infrastructure development, which can lead to development of agriculture. However, I would like to urge Government further to think through farmer empowerment. How do we achieve farmer empowerment?(Member timed out).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. There is an item that I had left the balance of the time for. If we can finish in time, we can maybe come back and do another 30 minutes. What was left was very small and we could deal with it and then we come back to the debate and we see how far we can go. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the last time we were here, we went through the provisions of this Bill and we were at the second schedule. The issue was on the application of clause 7, which we had passed, in relation to information on whether the person obtained the consent of the member or the owner of the premises. I think that this is where we stopped.

Honourable members, there was a debate that caused the standing over of the second schedule. Has it been resolved? Can I put the question to the second schedule to stand part of the Bill now? I put the question that Schedule 2 stands as schedule to the Bill – Yes, learned Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, in the second schedule, the sector ministry proposed insertion of a new item No. 8 and if sustained, then the current No. 8 would be No. 9. The new No. 8 reads as follows: “Did the organiser obtain consent of the owner of the venue?” You remember that is where we deferred debate or rather consideration of these schedules.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal was that the answer would be “yes” or “no” and then there was an amendment proposed that there should be “not applicable”.

MR RUHINDI: To the Government side, I do not think there would be any problem in adding, “Not applicable”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. “Did the organiser obtain consent of the owner of the venue?” The options then would be three - “yes”, “no” or “not applicable”. That was the proposal. Can I put the question to that amendment? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the second schedule, as amended, stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Third Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House so that the Committee of the whole House reports. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.09
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Order Management Bill, 2011” and has considered the second schedule, with amendments, and the third schedule. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Was it passed? 

MS LUMUMBA: The House considered the second schedule, with amendments, and the third schedule and they were passed. I beg to report. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba):Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

5.10
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I move for a recommittal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a proposal for recommittal. Would you like to speak to that proposal.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I would like to recommit clauses 8, 9, 7 and 10. Mr Speaker, I will start with clause 8 in particular. Fundamentally, clause 8 runs against a ruling of a Constitutional Court judgement. 

This Parliament is an affront to the rule of law and constitutionalism in Uganda because essentially, it has restored the powers of the Police to prohibit. The actual reading of the amendment, according to my understanding, is that clause 8 in particular has given powers to the Police again to prohibit. That is contrary to Article 92 of our Constitution, which stops this Parliament from enacting any law that can subvert a judgement of any court. So, it is not only unconstitutional but even this Parliament cannot go ahead and do it. 

Therefore, to avoid an inevitable court petition and inevitable embarrassment and shame to this House and to the members who participated in this, I seek to recommit to forestall what, ordinarily, any court in Uganda will find unconstitutional and this Parliament will be put to shame.(Mr Kakooza rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you seeking guidance on a motion for recommittal? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, if I succeed in recommitting clause 8, it will essentially have an effect on clauses 7, 9 and 10.

I would like to urge Members of Parliament that our primary obligation as legislators is to promote and protect the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and to promote the rule of law. That is our primary obligation. I want to endear you that this is not a partisan issue; it cuts across the board. It transcends our colours of blue, green, white, red; it touches every one of us. Today, it may be about me but tomorrow, this law will catch up with one of you. It was Panadol the other day. I do not know where Gen. Sejjusa is right now; he was at the forefront of beating some of us. Therefore, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, in this Parliament we all come to deliberate on behalf of Ugandans and in the interest of Ugandans. Is the honourable member in order to tell us that we are making laws meant for other people when we, Members of Parliament, are not above the law? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, laws are made for everybody in this country, citizens or non-citizens.For as long as we are within the territorial jurisdiction of Uganda, the laws made by this House will affect you. Also by international arrangement, the laws of this country can affect you even from wherever you are, even if you are outside Uganda. 

The authority to make those laws is given to this Parliament.Laws are preserved or operate by the presumption of the Gazette, and the presumption of the Gazetteis that once a law is published it is presumed that everybody knows the law, and that is why ignorance of the law is no defence. A law is blind; that is the principle of law. It does not target anybody in particular except when you come across it in violation; that is when you activate it in your disfavour. If the Member suggested that this particular law is being made for particular individuals, that would not be in order.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, my humble submission today is that let us do our constitutional duty. Let us not pass a law in the spirit that I see we want to operate, based on our colours and our theoretical divisions because tomorrow, you never know where I will stand or where you will stand. 

A good law, ostensibly, is blind as the Speaker has guided. If you pass a bad one, it will catch up with you but most notably, I do not think it is within the powers of this Parliament to make any law that is intended to side-track a judgement of the whole Constitutional Court which this Government –(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the head note of Article 92 of the Constitution says, “Restriction on retrospective legislation” This means legislating with an intention to change the decision which was made. 

Article 92 says, “Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgement of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgement.” My understanding of this is that we are estopped from making laws whose effect is to change the decision as between parties, not that we cannot make a law for an onward application. That is what I understand it to be. For instance, a law cannot be made that will change the consequence of the judgement as between hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and another that was held the other time. 

Mr Speaker, is it right to say that we are estopped from making any law even with future effect, which is not affecting decisions of the two parties which was made some time back? Thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Well, my humble understanding of that section is that the Attorney-General was party to that judgement. It was MuwangaKivumbi v. the Attorney-General and the Attorney-General represents the Government of Uganda at any time. So, it was between parties. We cannot make that law. This Parliament is estopped to pass any provision that essentially gives the Police powers to prohibit. 

The Constitutional Court ruled that it was unconstitutional, and the Attorney-General then had a right to appeal to the Supreme Court but he did not. Therefore, I beg to move that clause 8 and in effect 7, 9 and 10 be recommitted in the spirit of promoting democracy and constitutionalism in the Republic of Uganda. I beg to move.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I do not know how many times we have debated this matter. I do not know how many times we have spoken to this matter. I do not even know how many times I have spoken on the issue still being raised by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. 

First of all, let me thank our colleague, hon. Lubogo, for clarifying on the implication and application of Article 92 because it essentially means that. If, for instance, there is a decision that hon. Lubogo owes me Shs10 million and the court has decreed that I should pay back, there should be no legislation to alter that decision. However, the power of Parliament to legislate is inherent within this Constitution, under Article 79. 

Let me actually recap on a few matters pertaining to the case that my friend was party to, and that was the case of hon. Muwanga Kivumbi vs. the Attorney-General, Constitutional Petition No. 9 of 06. On 27 May 2008, the Constitutional Court issued a ruling on that particular petition, annulling Section 32(2) of the Police Act. 

Section 32(2) previously empowered the Inspector-General of Police to prohibit public assemblies or demonstrations where they posed a likelihood of breaching the peace. The Inspector-General of Police had absolute and unfettered discretion to prohibit. As a result of the annulment of that section, the Police no longer have the power - unless we pass this Bill – to prohibit a procession or assembly on a public road or street or at any place of public resort, even where the Inspector-General of Police has reasonable grounds to believe that the assembly or procession is likely to cause the breach of the peace. 

The ruling thus created a gap in the management of assemblies and public gatherings, making it difficult for the Police to maintain law and order and to preserve peace at public gatherings and events. (Interjections)-Let me first finish my submission; you can make your own because if we go into that we shall not finish.

I want colleagues to now capture the essence of the provision of section 32 which was saved. Section 32(1)(b) was saved. It was not declared unconstitutional by the court. That section gives the Police the power to issue orders for the purpose of directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads or streets or at places of public resort, and the route by which and times at which any procession may pass. However, this provision, which was saved, does not require, for instance, an organiser of an assembly or procession to notify the Police of the intention to hold the assembly or procession. 

Mind you, the idea is that you exercise your right, under Article 29 of the Constitution, in peace. Where the Police come in is to regulate, so that you exercise your freedom. This presents a challenge in maintaining law and order because without the information about an intended assembly or procession or its location, the Police will not have the opportunity to exercise the power given under section 32(1)(b), thereby making it hard to enforce the provision. 

While it is the constitutional duty of the Police to maintain law and order, with the annulment of section 32(2) the hands of the Police are tied. This is because the Police no longer have the power to regulate the conduct of assemblies or processions in public places, especially in cases where two meetings are scheduled by the organisers to take place on the same date, at the same time and in the same venue, which is likely to cause disorder or a breach of peace; or where the venue is considered unsuitable for the purposes of crowd and traffic control or interferes with other lawful business of non-participants.

Government obliged and agreed to delete paragraph (c) of 8(1), giving further powers in the opinion and discretion of the IGP. We agreed that that one be deleted because it was re-introducing the discretionary powers to the Police. Therefore, with these benchmarks being given, which limit the application of the power of the Police, this ceases to be an absolute power; it instead becomes a regulatory power to the Police. That is my submission.

Let me tell you –(Interjection)– Before you come in, let me finalise. This Bill apportions responsibility to organisers of assemblies, to participants and the Police before, during and after assembly. So, there is accountability for every commission and omission by all persons envisaged in the Bill. This will promote unfettered enjoyment of the participants’ fundamental rights without compromising the public interest or interfering with the rights of third parties unconnected with the event. I beg to submit.

5.26
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Over the weekend, I had a meeting with my constituents and the RPC, DPC and OC of the area were present because we were sorting out something within the community. The RPC did not have the power to stop me from conducting the meeting but they were all there to regulate the activities. However, if anything turned unlawful, they would have used their power to stop the meeting from going on. 

The argument I am trying to grapple with here is that in whatever we do, we should not intend to make the Police prohibit. In light of the court judgment, whatever we can do should be to enhance Police regulation. What we are doing now, honourable colleagues, is actually to empower the Police to prohibit. 

I will give an example, Mr Speaker, of our colleague, hon. Mugema, Panadol. He had a pertinent issue – there was no water in Iganga Hospital. He notified the Police and when he went there, he was actually being prohibited even to assemble in his constituency; he was whisked away and then water was reinstated. 

What we are saying is that we are agreeable to enhancing the powers of the Police as far as regulation is concerned. However, when it comes to prohibition, we can sit here, pass this – I heard some colleagues saying, “Let us vote”; I heard hon. Rebecca Otengo whispering, but we are in this House as leaders to build the nation. The outcome of suppressing people’s views is –(Interruption)

MS OTENGO: Mr Speaker, I have been in this House politely and attentively listening to the debate. Is it in order for hon. Mubiru –(Laughter)– hon. Mwiru Paul from Jinja Municipality East, to say I whispered to him? How possible is it for me to whisper across to him? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One of the major challenges of chairing this House is ruling on facts. Now I am even being called upon to rule on a whisper –(Laughter)– that was, whether made or not made, about 10 metres away from my earshot. I am unable to rule on that subject.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I conclude, I would like to say that hon. Ruhindi knows that you cannot read Article 79 out of this Constitution and interpret it. Article 79 should be read together with Article 92 so that we know the restriction, which we are trying to run away from.

The point I am making is that for us to get consensus on this matter, we should ask ourselves what we aredoing. Our honourable colleague is saying that by passing the Bill the way it is, we are actually empowering the Police to prohibit. In my opinion, I have no problem with anything that enhances the powers of the Police to regulate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member for Jinja Municipality East, can you point out where that prohibition is being re-enacted so that we deal with it? Where is the prohibition being re-enacted in this law?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What we are saying is that if the Police think that the meeting should not go on, it should not be the organiser to go to court to get an order. We are saying it should be the Police to go to court and get an order to stop any activity. If I have to go to court and get an order saying my organised meeting is going to be stopped, that will, in a way, bar members from conducting activities. 

We looked at the time element; for example, if you are to go to a place, you must run very fast to conduct an activity. It is from that perspective that we are saying that this clause should be recommitted. We have a lot of time - Uganda is not going to end this afternoon - we can recommit that clause and look at it so that we all support the law and the repercussions can be owned by everybody.

Mr Speaker, you recall we had a law here, the regulations which were given to the Minister in charge of Transport; people disowned it here, saying that one was for hon. Alaso and hon. Mwiru. We want to legislate as responsible citizens in this country so that Uganda does not end today but proceeds even after we have passed this Bill. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman, or the person standing in the place of the chairman of the committee, could you guide us on what was adopted in clause 8? This is because the honourable member was not in the House when we reshaped clause 8. Maybe we could help so that we see whether that prohibition is still there and then we can take a decision.

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Rt Hon. Speaker, the committee proposed radical changes to this House on clause 8 and the House adopted several amendments to clause 8. What now remains of clause 8 basically is the following: clause 8 sub-clause (1) (a) and (b) as a start, and if you may permit I will read it:“(1) Upon receipt of a notice under section 7, where it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting, for the reason that-
(a) 	notice of another public meeting, on the date, at the time and at the venue proposed has already been received by the authorised officer; or 
(b) 	the venue is considered unsuitable for the purposes of crowd and traffic control or will interfere with other lawful business, 

the authorised officer shall in writing within 48 hours after receipt of the notice notify the organiser or his or her agent that it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting and the notice shall be delivered to the organiser’s address as stated in the notice of intention to hold the public meeting.”

Rt Hon. Speaker, I cannot find any more reasonable provision than this. I do not foresee the possibility of two meetings being held at the same place. The only thing left is that we are saying if the Police already have notice that there is another meeting, they will communicate to you and state that there is already another meeting on the same date and at the same time.

In (b) we are saying if the venue is considered unsuitable for purposes of crowd or traffic control- If you are going to hold a public meeting or a demonstration in the middle of a road and they cannot control traffic, they will state that this place is not suitable for crowd control. This is reasonable- (Mr Wafula-Oguttu rose_)– I will give you time; I am here for the whole evening to answer any question that you raise. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, we can impose restrictions on the enjoyment of individual human rights and the restrictions we can impose are governed by law. They must be demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic country. The demonstration here is that you have two competing rights, the rights of road users and the rights of a demonstrator. Therefore, there must be the Police to determine that they have the capacity to manage both the traffic and a demonstration. This falls within- (Mr Mwiru rose) – Can I just complete this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish and then you raise those points.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Let me finish and I will answer all the questions you will raise. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, the committee had time to consider all these concerns and we took into consideration every concern that was raised. I can comfortably say that what remains of clause 8 - (1) (a) and (b) - conforms to the standards set in our Constitution. 

We deleted sub-clauses (3), (4) and (5) and replaced them with only one clause, which reads as follows:“A person aggrieved by the decision of the authorised officer under this section may within 14 days after receipt of the notice under subsection (1) appeal to a magistrate’s court in whose jurisdiction the meeting was scheduled to take place.”

If the Police, following the reasons given in (1) and (2) decline and notify you that you cannot hold a demonstration, you have recourse that we have provided for as a replacement for sub-clauses (3), (4) and (5). So, sub-clauses (3), (4) and (5) as in the original Bill no longer stand part of this law. I really do not know what the problem is. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us deal with the substance and leave out procedural issues for now. The issue is that there is a motion for recommittal of clauses; you cannot seek guidance from the Speaker on it. If you want to speak on the subject, just do so.

5.38
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Some of us were here when this Bill started and, Mr Speaker, you were in the Chair. Honestly speaking, clause 8 took us three weeks and this is in the Hansard. We recommitted this clause and even constituted a committee. I remember it included hon. Katuntu, hon. Sseggona and hon. Tashobya. They brought these amendments and we debated them thoroughly and then got a general consensus, which the chairperson of the committee is reading. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek guidance from you, and this is my submission. We are going to debate the same issues we debated and we shall come back with the same conclusion. This is because the amendments that were brought were arrived at through general consensus from both the right and left sides of the House.

Honestly speaking, there is a hidden agenda to derail us so that this Parliament cannot perform, but we cannot accept that. We have points that were submitted and the members agreed on them but I see a hidden agenda to debate in reverse gear and delay the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member for Kabula, you know the rules – Thou shall not impute improper motive on any member of this House. You have just done that and you are completely out of order.

5.42
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. All of us want order and all of us, hopefully, do love peace. Some of us have had experiences for the last 10 years outside Parliament where the Police were used politically to prohibit legitimate meetings of political parties. 

I remember in 2006 while we were launching our party cards in Kampala, we asked for a venue and got authorisation from the owners but the Police stopped us. We asked for a second venue, the police stopped us. When we asked for a third one, they told us to go and ask for permission to launch them at Kololo Independence Grounds. These grounds are owned or controlled by State House but when we asked State House, we were denied entry. So, the Police should not have powers to prohibit any party or anybody who wants to hold a meeting at any venue unless it is about walking on the streets, which is to do with traffic. But nobody is mad enough to go and organise a rally that is clearly going to obstruct people’s business.

Let the prohibition be by the owner of the venue. Once I get permission from the venue owner, thePolice have no business stopping my meeting. Definitely, the owner of the venue is not going to permit two people to organise a rally on the same day at the same time. So, what the chairperson of the committee is reading is redundant. Unless you are saying that once you give the Police powers, they are going to use them to just prohibit those they do not like because we have made the Police very partisan – (Interruptions)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, hon. Wafula-Oguttu. The information I want to give to the House is that actually, when we were dealing with that particular clause we did propose that instead of sending the people trying to participate in the governance of this country to get an order, it should be the Police to seek a court order. 

The last time hon. Baba had several amendments; I had the opportunity of interfacing with him and that is one of the amendments he had, but today we now have another one. That is the information I wanted to pass on to the House. The intended amendment was that if the Police feel that my proceeding to have a meeting at a particular place contravenes the law, instead of prohibiting me, let them go to court, come with an order and I will have to move away, other than sending the political parties to court to secure such an order. That is adding an extra cost to them. Thank you.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, hon. Paul Mwiru, for that information. Hon. James Kakooza is saying we have debated this matter over and over, but the question should be why. Why are we debating this matter over and over? We are not mad. We have made amendments but the point we are making is that there is something wrong. Of course, you have the numbers and so you can force it on us and the country. You have the numbers and we shall give you the room to do that – (Interjections) – Yes, because the amendment –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just hold on, hon. Wafula-Oguttu. The spirit with which I have guided this debate from day one is that we have never used any numbers and we do not intend to use numbers. That is how we have been proceeding. So, do not incite sentiments that are not applicable now. Please proceed.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I withdraw that. I want to say that we are appealing to our colleagues; let us make a law that is acceptable to all of us. 

The proposal by hon. Paul Mwiru, and which we had also earlier on mentioned, is that if the Police feel we are going to organise a rally in a wrong place, let them go to the magistrate and stop us. When they wanted to close the Daily Monitor premises, which is my business, what did they do? So, we are begging and appealing to our colleagues; we should recommit this and we should make a law that is acceptable to all of us, a law that is going to bring and maintain peace and not a law that is going to be abused and violated a day after it is passed. Thank you very much.

5.47
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you look at clause 8, I think we really do not need to recommit it. 

The argument being forwarded is that the Police should go to court if any public meeting is to be stopped. I wonder how the Police, who are mandated with the responsibility to maintain law and order, and they do it not because they are aggrieved but to fulfil their normal duties, will be the first ones to go to court as if they are the ones who are aggrieved. That does not come out well. It is only the aggrieved persons who would go to court and the court would then decide. I think that does not stand.

Secondly, if we say here that when a notice for a meeting has been sought by one group and then you also want to have a meeting in that same place – I happen to have been part of the team of Members who  went to observe elections in Kenya recently. On the last day, all the parties wanted to hold their final rally at Uhuru Park. It was the most central point and everybody wanted to pull their crowds there. Now, the team from the side of the current President Uhuru Kenyatta booked that venue first, so all the other candidates had to be told to go to other venues. 

The Police had to control the routes. Supporters of President Uhuru Kenyatta and those of Mr Raila Odinga were not allowed to meet on the way. I walked for over eight kilometres to get back to town because I had gone to another venue and vehicles were not even allowed, but at the end of the day there was peace. So, I think for that matter, we cannot say that if the venue has been blocked you will want to force yourself. This is how we have been handling this conflict. I think we should now make our politics mature to understand some of these issues, Mr Speaker. 

Mr Speaker, you may intend to hold your rally along Kampala Road, around Kikuubo and Owino or in any market even in the village and you think it is your right. Yes, it may be your right, but don’t you think by doing that you also need to have the courtesy to say, “Yes, we need order in this country”? You want to capture power but remember when you get to power tomorrow and other people do unto you the things you are doing today,-refusing to respect all the laws- I think it will be bad. So, for that matter, the purpose is to maintain law and order.

Finally, one of our colleagues here was talking about the incident of Panadol, hon. Mugema of Iganga. I think there was a way he would have organised his demonstration and made it be felt or made the meaning more serious and all of us would do it. We are not making a law that we are not going to break. Even I can act out of emotion and start a demonstration. You know that the law is there but you do it. Sometimes we can also handle it legally. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: The little information I want to give my brother is that there is no law that will stop a human being from biting a dog or a dog from biting a human being. However, after making all the laws we make, then we know that there are some remedies to those who are aggrieved. 

We are not saying that the Police are going to be angels after this law; they are not going to be, not to me and not to the Opposition. However, once they err, then there is recourse; somebody can go to court, somebody has a right to respond as to why and ask questions because there will be a law.

So, the information I am giving is that there is no law we are going to make here that will even stop thieves from invading us. However, when we are robbed, we have a remedy- we go to the Police and we go to court. That is the comfort I am giving my neighbours.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my honourable colleague for the information. We are not making a law that will be an end in itself. We are making a law that will regulate, and people are going to break it, including myself. I will one time break the same law. So, it is not that you make a law and nothing will happen. Thank you.

5.53
THE MINISTER IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened very carefully and intently to the arguments presented for recommittal. I see dangers here that one, there is a dominance of what has recently happened that can influence the thinking that the institution of the Police is perpetually a danger to demonstrators. That is one point.

Secondly, I read in the thinking of hon. Wafula-Oguttu that the Police will always be on the side of the Government. It is as if the Opposition has no hope that one day they will be in Government. (Laughter)

Thirdly, I see a danger of weakening an institution of state by simply fearing that when you demonstrate, you must be right. You give the impression that when you demonstrate you must be right and, therefore, whoever challenges you, including the Police, are the ones to submit.

Mr Speaker, I wonder whether what we are looking for is establishing order or actually creating disorder by weakening the very institution that can be impersonal and now seemingly making it personal. This insinuation that the Police today are an instrument of the current Government is to mistake the institution that we call the state. This state is here, this Parliament is going to make laws and those laws will capture whoever it is that goes against them. 

Your ruling, Mr Speaker, was correct, that when you confront the law – whoever it is – you get hurt. We have seen in the recent past where even heads of state have been affected by the very instruments of the state they run. So, I want to be assured that the argument that the Police should go to court before controlling a crowd is in the interest of order or actually in the interest of disorder.  

5.56
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I seem to be getting here is that we are speaking from a number of perspectives to support or to oppose the proposal for recommittal. If we go by experience, probably this side of the House where I am standing is so rich in experience and has encountered that aspect- the aspect of prohibition- more than the other side. Actually, we have experienced more prohibition under hon. Kasaija who was then Minister of Internal Affairs. (Laughter)   

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, when you have been given the mandate to run a state, you must make sure that you use all the instruments within your power to ensure the state is ran smoothly. When I was in internal affairs, I had to ensure the state was stable, there was law and order and everybody enjoyed his or her human rights. 

Is the honourable Member of Parliament, who I did not, when I recollect, prevent from doing anything lawful, to stand on her feet in this Parliament and say that I, Kasaija, when I was in charge of internal affairs, tortured her? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do recall that the honourable member who raised the point of order was at one time Minister of State for Internal Affairs. I also do recall that there were many activities around that time. The honourable Member for Serere is confirming that during that time there were a lot of activities –(Laughter)– and those activities were from both the other side and the other side. 

MS ALASO: Rt Hon. Speaker, thank you for your ruling. I come from a perspective that has encountered the side of prohibition. My colleagues have not probably encountered this and it is very difficult for them to understand the argument that we are making. I can only pray to them to recall that years back in this very House, we discussed the constitutional amendments and the Political Parties and Organisations Act, then a Bill. 

That side was formally the NRM then and informally the opposition was this side. From the NRM side, it was very difficult to imagine there would be independents. Actually, a lot of opposition to that thing called “independent” came from them. I recall the hon. Ben Wacha stood on that side and pleaded with the House and said, “Please”. Later on, as you know, the greatest number of independents comes from the movement side. I just hope that will be informative enough. If you think prohibition will only apply to those of us who are always prohibited, let me appeal to your hearts; it is possible that on a bad morning, it could apply to you. 


What should we do in such circumstances? I think the issue in contention should not be even whether we on this side understand or do not. The issue should be: is it right, is it proper, to handover the mandate to prohibit freedoms that are imbedded in the Constitution to the Police who have always and persistently, as confirmed by the hon. Matia Kasaija, abused these powers? Is it prudent that we pass it back to them? I will take the information.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, my sister, for giving way. I have information. While you were away, my niece, we deliberated on these issues and the chairperson of the committee came here and gave us the amended version of this section. There was no mention of prohibition. The word, which is stuck in some peoples’ heads now, is the original one.  That has now disappeared because we all agreed in our consensus meetings that the word “prohibition” should not be there. 

If you can, you could ask the chairperson of the committee to read the amended version again and when he reads, you will not hear the word “prohibition”. It is no longer in that version. Prohibition should be left out –(Interjections)– That is when you were outside. The version that has been given is only to bring harmony, to regulate, when two meetings are colliding in one place.

I want to demonstrate a scenario where this could happen. Supposing you came here together and there is nobody to say “go here” or “go there” and you start quarrelling because you both think you have the right of way - this one says, “I want to be here” and the other one wants the same place – what would the scenario be after that? You would even fight, and then who would be held responsible – you, the fighters, or somebody else?

MS ALASO: I would like to respond to the honourable minister’s information by saying that it does not have to carry the word “prohibit”, but it has to bear the spirit of having the power to stop. You can frame it in whichever way but as long as you hand over that power -Let us not go into defining “prohibit” and “regulator” and you know that we took weeks on that. 

Of course, considering that hon. Lokeris is my very good uncle, and knowing that I was out of the House that day, he should have moved and said “wait until my good niece comes back; she is a stakeholder in this matter” but he did not demonstrate that amount of care. I am unhappy about that conduct from my relative but what can I do for now.

Mr Speaker, I would like to pray to this House and my colleagues to first think about doing unto others what you want them to do to you. Secondly, especially those of you who are in charge of the country, because you have the power and the state apparatus for coercion, let me inform you that if you do not allow peaceful dissent, you will end up with bottled anger.

You cannot run a country of millions of people with people whose anger is bottled. You would rather hear it. You would rather allow them to carry placards and walk around. By so doing, you would know what is going on with them. But if you cause them to have bottle up their anger, that is when you begin looking around –(Interruption)

PROF KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, this is what you ruled on earlier, imputing wrong motive. Is it in order for the honourable member to impute wrong motive that the Government creates conditions for bottling up peoples’ anger especially the Opposition, to the point of bursting out and this will be a curse to the Government? Is she in order to be so angry, acidic and talk as if the world is about to come to an end?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in terms of acidity, I have no litmus paper to test the conditions in the House here. However, let us appreciate one thing; instead of saying this side or the other side, I think the first strong opposition to the original text of this Bill actually came from the NRM caucus, to my knowledge. I had a brief from hon. Bahati on the discussions they had in the caucus. I was briefed about the dissent they had about some of the contents in the Bill.

These same sentiments are carried from this other side of the House. I think the spirit is that both sides of the House have agreed that there are certain principles that should not be adopted in this law. The minute we begin debating as if there is a side, you offend other peoples’ sense of owning up to what we are going to pass in this law. 

Realising these two situations, honourable members, we should move forward. The Attorney-General has outlined that the absence of Section 32(2) of the Police Act, having been annulled by the Constitutional Court, creates a vacuum for the Police. The question you want to answer is: is the solution being prescribed to fill that gap to enhance the Police regulatory power exceeding and becoming what was in the original text, which amounted to prohibition? That is what we are interrogating in this particular debate. 

So, let us not say this side of the House or the other side because we have all moved very far and we should acknowledge that. We have all moved very far indeed. So please respect both sides of the House because you have all moved very far in terms of looking at the original text of the Bill and how far we have come with this Bill. If you remember the debate that we have had, both sides of the House were here but the numbers were not that many but the debates took hours and hours. That is the spirit, and we do not want that spirit killed at the last moment when we are about to conclude.

Please, honourable members, I urge you to respect these principles and respect each other when we have this debate. What we want is the best position for this Parliament to adopt for this country. I think that is where we are now. So, please let us avoid these acidic tendencies if they are about to rise, –(Laughter)–  if there are any. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, of course I understand Prof Kabwegyere and I know he walks around with a litmus paper –(Laughter)– I do not know how, but he is known to walk around with a litmus paper.

Mr Speaker, my worry is that when you have a Police officer determining whether I can use a venue or not, I am worried precisely whether it cannot be a subject of abuse. We have seen this happening in many places and practical examples abound. We have seen Police officers refuse for reasons a, b, c, d when they are actually just abusing the power that they have. I, therefore, think that we need to safeguard people who convene these rallies against political persecution as provided in Article 43 of our Constitution. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.12
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much. I need to say, “thank you” to the Attorney-General for his very wise guidance in the House on the matter of the legalityof Section 32 (2) and now what we are talking about under clause 8.

As you wisely stated, the issue now is that there is a gap in the management of public order. That gap, according to the Attorney-General, can only be filled by giving back powers similar to those in 32 (2) – that is, powers that tend to prohibition. However, we are saying that in the spirit of the ruling of the Constitutional Court, that gap must be filled by pure regulatory power. Now, where is the purity of the regulatory power coming from? The purity should come under clause 8 (3) and should not just be the mandate. 

Mr Speaker and the Members, I am begging that you understand me. The right to gather and assemble is a fundamental right; it is not purely constitutional but it is fundamental. It is fundamental in the sense that it is God given. That is why you see that the birds gather and fly together, and we have a saying that birds of the same feather flock together. In that spirit, therefore, I would think that sub-clause (3) should be constructed otherwise. 

I have very high respect for the Member for Kwania. He said the aggrieved party in this case should run to court, and he actually exonerates the aggrieved party and says that the Police do not fall within the definition of aggrieved party. However, we are saying that in the enjoyment of the right of assembly, the Police should carry this law. If we legislate that the Police is injured or aggrieved by seeing that we are breaking this law, then the Police should go to court just like going to seek for a search warrant. That is what we are looking at. 

However, if you put the burden on me to run to court –the organiser of an assembly that has probably attracted the hiring of tents, of chairs, and people have moved from so far, you have spent money assuming that there is also feeding involved – I am actually more aggrieved immediately than the Police officer. In that spirit, if in (3) we say that the Police officer should seek the order to prohibit my fundamental rights, I think that I would be very happy.

Two, I would think that clause 8 (1) (a) should be a standalone clause. We are saying that notice of another public meeting on the date, at the time and at the venue proposed has already been received by the authorised officer. I would think that what you need to add here is that a copy of such notice should be given to me, the person who is going to be probably advised – let me use the word “advised” not to sound so harsh –that there is another meeting. I am actually going to be stopped because when you say that I am not going have a meeting here because there is already another meeting organised, then there should be a copy given to me. Therefore, it will now leave clause 8 (1)(a) and (b) to be attached to where “the authorised officer” starts. 

What I am proposing here is that the venue – Okay, let us start reading from (1) –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are not yet there. We are still debating whether we should recommit it.

MR ANYWARACH: Okay. Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. For this very legal reason, other than the emotional reason, I would think, and I am very sorry for pre-empting where we are heading, that there is reason to recommit this very clause for the general good of all of us. I thank you very much.

6.17
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to use a minute; hon. Anywarach has spoken ably on the legal issue that I wanted to raise on this matter, without going into dispute of the law and all the issues raised by the honourable professor. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, you remember that at the beginning of this debate, clause 8 was in particular described as a “satanic clause”. The Attorney-General is aware, and he has actually made a confession here, that indeed they have a problem, and the problem was the ruling of the Constitutional Court which they lazily failed to appeal against. The argument of the hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is that by not actually appealing to that ruling, you cannot go ahead to try and circumvent that ruling. You have made a confession here that actually, you are grappling with how to deal with that ruling – 

MR RUHINDI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I do not know whether hon. Mpuuga was in the Attorney-General’s Chambers to assess how the Attorney-General’s Chambers took a decision on whether to appeal on this matter or not. I really do not think so. He was not there. For him to boldly stand on this podium and insinuate ill motive without any basis, unless he substantiates is he in order to use such un-parliamentary language against an institution of Government where we have got the finest brains in the world?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is that un-parliamentary language, honourable member? What were the words which you are referring to?

MR RUHINDI: The expression “lazily” –(Laughter)- is certainly un-parliamentary. If it is not un-parliamentary, Mr Speaker, can he substantiate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mpuuga, what did you mean?

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, the ruling of the Constitutional Court was such a monumental ruling and it actually shook the foundations of the Attorney-General’s Chambers. The honourable Attorney-General has just made a confession that actually, since the ruling was made, they have been grappling with a way out. 

By making a confession on a matter that they did not act upon, if it is not laziness and incompetence, for failure to find the right English word I beg that the honourable Attorney-General advises on a better word to use. I actually meant that he failed in his duty to do what the law allows him to do and he is now trying to invite Parliament to engage with him in an illegality, to breach the law by enacting a law in breach of Article 92 of the Constitution. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, is hon. Mpuuga in order to display his incompetence on the Floor of this House in his assessment of the Attorney-General’s work? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, an appeal is a creature of statute. For you to appeal, the law must say you have the right to appeal. If the law does not say so, you have to seek leave of the court which made the decision for you to be given leave to appeal. 

To appeal is also a judicial decision on the party who is under obligation to appeal. The Attorney-General’s Chambers did not appeal. Was there a basis for an appeal if the Constitutional Court said Section 32(2) of the Police Act was excessive in terms of being prohibitive, granting express powers to prohibit? Would it be sensible for any legal house to appeal against that decision? 

The Constitutional Court has stated the very obvious, that “Yes, if you say ‘prohibit’, that goes against the principle of the Constitution”. Do you appeal for appeal’s sake or do you appeal because decisions have violated the four corners of the law under which they were made? 

If that is so, the advice from the Attorney-General came that it creates a gap, an implementation and regulatory gap, which has to be cured. I said earlier that what we are interrogating is whether the prescription proposed now does not go back to prohibition and whether it stays within regulation. 

I think let us be reasonable in the way we debate this matter. When you make statements like those, you appeal to the wrong sentiment of the individuals and everybody has a right to respond to some of these things. Nobody, by the way, has the monopoly of being insensitive to how other individuals should feel and bear this in mind when you utter the words that come from your mouths. 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance. It is because we discussed these matters informally with the Attorney-General earlier on at the beginning of the debate, and he is well aware of my sentiments on how the Constitution is interpreted. 

Mr Speaker, on the way forward, I had suggestions like those that my colleagues earlier on shared but which the Attorney-General was not willing to accommodate in the spirit that you have variously advised us about.

I think the immediate aggrieved party is the organiser of a rally. Just like when the Police seek to search my house because they suspect something is amiss, they proceed to court to get an order. In the same breath, the right to organise a rally is protected by the law. For you to tell me that I should go and get a court order, you are actually saying you have prohibited me. However, I am saying you have no right to prohibit me and if you so wish, you must go through a judicious process by going to court and getting an order to stop me. If you do it without the same, you would be trying to use powers you do not have under the law. You would be trying to use powers that were estopped by virtue of the ruling in Muwanga Kivumbi vs. the Attorney General.

The way forward is, the chairperson and the Attorney-General, just like we had actually done earlier on with hon. Baba - in fact his absence or his boss’ absence today is suspicious because we had actually agreed in principle that – 

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Mpuuga is well aware that we lost a prominent citizen of Uganda who is being buried this afternoon in Koboko where hon. Baba comes from. Is he, therefore, in order to begin doubting and suspecting the whereabouts of the minister of internal affairs?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the cornerstone of parliamentary debate is decency and mutual respect. It does seem to be lacking many times when some colleagues speak in this House. The hon. Baba spoke here yesterday and was passionate about the death of a person who comes from his village, the former Vice-President. He has gone for the burial. For a member to say his absence in the House is suspicious is to be very insensitive. Really, honourable member, you owe this House an apology.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I take your advice to apologise, but in the same spirit say –(Interjections) - Mr Speaker, I said I am sorry about that. This is Parliament, and this is why I am apologising. Parliament does not make a list of those who have gone for burials. The General died and I apologised about it, but there was no reason for the honourable member to turn it into a sentimental matter, instead of giving me information which I would have obliged to and then we proceed. 

Let me go back to my point. We need to understand and appreciate that in any one district, the RDC is the head of security and in the law we are trying to enact, we are referring to the Police. We know the number of times the RDCs have taken it upon themselves, as heads of security, to purport to give instructions to the Police. Now, here we are trying to imagine that by simply imagining how Police will act, you are actually taking care of the whole spectrum of security at any one spot in the country.

Mr Speaker, this is the very reason we need to recommit, reconsider and re-evaluate all these issues as they are coming. These issues are shrouded in the decision of giving discretionary powers to the Police to allow or disallow, in any manner they might seek to do it, by throwing this law into our faces without recourse to all other considerations – partisan and non-partisan – especially given the history of their conduct in relation to those they believe that the powers that be do not agree with. 

Some of us have tasted what the Police can do even without the backing of the law. Now here we are giving the Police an open licence to act extraneously, using a law the House wants to pass without recourse to what has happened. I think the way forward, like I have said, is recommitting and also, more consensus should be built on the ramifications of this entire clause and the attendant further amendments that will be caused by its re-committal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. It is 6.30 p.m. We had agreed to be closing at 6.00p.m. exactly because of Ramadan, to allow our colleagues to be with their families, but we have exceeded that time now. Our number, as it is now, will not allow us to take any substantial decisions. This House is, therefore, adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock and this will be the first item we shall deal with. 

(The House rose at 6.32 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 August 2013 at 10.00 a.m.) 

