Thursday, 14 July 2011

Parliament met at 2.21 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are all welcome. Today, we are again going to engage in the longer discussion on the State of the Nation Address given by the President. We will be doing that until we end the House today. But before we go into that, we have received lots of petitions from the public on general matters and specific issues that need the attention of this House. The Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, has repeatedly said we need to make this Parliament more accessible to the public. We must deal with the issues they bring quickly so that the response can give confidence to the population that Parliament is actually working for them; and that is what we should be doing. So, we have received petitions from the Taxi Drivers and Transporters Association, the former employees of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, the district council of Kamuli, on the closure of the Primary Teachers Colleges, the Uganda Railways Pensioners and others. 

As you know, procedurally, when these petitions come, they should come to the Floor of Parliament by way of a Member bringing them so that they are sent to the appropriate committees. After that, the committee will invite members of the public to interact with them and finally bring the matter back to the Floor and the appropriate decision is taken. So, we should be doing this to enable the public gain more confidence in our institution, because we told them we would exactly do that during our campaigns.

Secondly, hon. Members, I take this opportunity to congratulate members of the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas, who concluded their elections today. You know how important this particular committee is, given Uganda’s status now, having joined the oil producing countries. There should be a direct linkage between this Parliament, the Executive, civil society organisations and all stakeholders in these issues of oil and gas. Therefore, I congratulate the people who have taken the initiative to bring this to the forefront and enable Parliament to have a set of voluntarily subscribed people. 

I take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, who has been elected chairperson and hon. Michael Mawanda, the vice chairperson. (Applause)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry for having interjected at this point. I am a member in that aforementioned forum and we had agreed to review some things. Is it procedurally right to announce what we have not yet concluded as far as the leadership of that forum is concerned? I beg your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, I was approached by the people who conducted the elections and this document is from them. They came to my office and I am communicating what was decided on today. I do not know the internal matters of the forum and it is not for me to know. So, it will be for you to sort it out later. According to this document, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba is the secretary general, hon. Lilly Adong is the deputy secretary and hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi is the treasurer. The committee members include: hon. Beatrice Anywar, hon. Sarah Mwebaza and hon. Patrick Amuriat. So, congratulations. (Laughter) I think your interest has been taken care of. 

Hon. Members that is all I needed to inform you about in my communication.

2.27
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and am compelled to raise this issue on the Floor of Parliament. I wish to present a substantive petition on the closure of Primary Teachers Colleges. In the Daily Monitor of Thursday, June 16 2011, there was an article entitled “Primary Teachers Colleges closed over cash crisis.”

I am a teacher by profession and when I see such issues, I am touched. We all know that Universal Primary Education is one of the most important issues that this government is pushing for to ensure that Uganda’s children get educated. When we get to learn about the closure of Primary Teachers’ Colleges due to lack of finances, yet we know that we cannot have quality education without teachers in UPE schools -

Mr Speaker and colleagues, you will agree with me that UPE is flooded with children yet we do not have teachers. In 1998, a number of PTCs were phased out and of recent, one of them was demolished and taken to some other place and yet that new location has a lot of controversies. I am very concerned because in the newspaper article, students from about 45 Government-aided PTCs were sent home on Monday, June 13 because Government failed to remit operational funds and consequently, the need to avert the threat of possible strikes.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Seninde was my chairperson of the social services committee during the Eighth Parliament. I want to be sure that I am following my former chairperson clearly; she said there was a Core PTC here, but she did not tell us the name. I am sure this House will benefit if she mentions the name of the Core PTC and what happened to it in exact terms. Otherwise, as her former member, I begin to guess that maybe it is St Aloysius PTC, Ngora - which Core PTC is this? As a former chairperson, she should know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, give some details there. 

MRS SSENINDE: Mr Speaker, I think I have made it categorically clear that one of the PTCs is Shimoni – we know very well what happened to Shimoni and my sister who was a very active member on the social services committee when I was the chairperson knows very well the struggles that we put forward in as far as this PTC was concerned. All Members of that committee then were very instrumental in that fight. I would also like to remind this House that although we are in a new Parliament, during that time -(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Member to continue denying us information under the pretext that we were all here and knew what happened then; in fact, some of us have just come to this House? Is it procedurally right? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, did I hear you talk of a petition? Do you have a petition or something of that sort? 

MRS SSENINDE:  Mr Speaker, I must say that I would have loved to present this petition fully, unfortunately, because it was not on the Order Paper, I raised it as a matter of national concern. If I am given the opportunity, I will gladly come forward and present in detail.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Why don’t you do that then? Lay a copy on the Table and then we proceed on the basis of that, although the procedure will now be different.  It will have to be referred to an appropriate committee for handling. (Applause)

MRS SSENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am really grateful for giving me this opportunity to present this petition in its wholesomeness. 

Mr Speaker, I present a substantive petition on the closure of Primary Teachers’ Training Colleges. In the exercise of our fundamental constitutional right as citizens of this country, and most important as a legislator, I would like to present this petition on behalf of the members of the Strategic Leadership Forum.

Like I had earlier on said, on 16th June, 2011 there was an article in The Monitor, which featured in other papers about the Primary Teachers’ Colleges’ closure over a cash crisis. So, according to this article, students from 14 Government-Aided PTCs were sent home on Monday 13 June, 2011.  This was because of Government’s failure to remit operational funds to these PTCs and consequently, the need to avert the possible threat of strikes because it was clear that most of these institutions were going on strike.  

In that article, I vividly recall there was a principal of one of the colleges who was quoted as saying, “We have accumulated too may debts and the suppliers can no longer give us things on credit.” Indeed, no responsible and serious Government should do that to its people and it must not be allowed to continue. I have raised this with all the pain because, like I have said, our children will not benefit from this education if we do not have teachers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, since it is a substantial petition and you have made quite a passionate introduction to it,  why don’t you lay it on the Table and then we send it to the appropriate committee for detailed handling?  Is that okay? 

MRS SSENINDE:  Most obliged, Mr Speaker.  Before, I lay this document on Table, I beg to present the petitioners’ prayers.
One, there is need to direct that the arrears unremitted to the PTCs be paid in full as soon as possible and PTCs be reopened immediately. 

Secondly, I would like to propose that effective from 2011/12 financial year, the regular remittances to PTCs not only be made, but also be made in time. 

There is need to direct an investigation into the general financial management of PTCs with a view of ensuring that they are being run according to the laid down public financial management regulations. 

Fourthly, being a new Parliament, there is need to direct a comprehensive review on UPE and USE programmes with a view of ascertaining proper coordination, continuity and compatibility between programmes so that one intervention like USE does not undermine another equally important programme like UPE and any other recommendation that Parliament may in its good judgement consider appropriate. Mr Speaker and colleagues, allow me to lay this document on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, hon. Member. 

2.37
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  We need to remind ourselves of Rule 27 about petitions such that next time a Member has a petition, they exactly follow the rules.  I could see that if my hon. Colleague had read the rule properly, it could have even been easier. Next time, colleagues should be able to remind themselves of the contents of Rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure when presenting petitions. 

Having said that, this morning the legal and parliamentary affairs committee leadership met the Speaker, who is not the Speaker presiding, and there was a matter, which we discussed and we had agreed that we would raise. So, we are in that kind of confusion because we never brought it to your attention and yet the chairperson, the vice chairperson and I, as one of the senior members of the committee, had a crucial matter which we brought to the attention of the Speaker and we agreed that we would raise it. My chairperson is here and the committee had mandated me to raise this particular matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, can I conclude with the issue of the petition, refer it to the committee and then you come in because I had thought that you were still on the same issue.  Is it a separate issue? 

MR KATUNTU: It is a separate issue, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The petition has been received by this House and we, therefore, send it to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. 

MRS SSENINDE:  Mr Speaker, I humbly request that as much as you have requested the committee to look at this issue expeditiously, bearing in mind the process the petition takes, I would also request that as the committee takes its time to look at this petition, the minister in charge should come to this House and give an explanation. 

I would also like to request that if possible, we require a timeframe because if we do not do that - I have been a chairperson and I know what I am talking about. So much work may pile on the table of the committee and at the end of the day, this may not be given the due attention it requires. It is my humble request, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I am sure the Leader of Government Business has heard and will make the appropriate communication to the minister responsible.  But as per the procedure, it has now gone to the committee and it will be handled appropriately. But that does not stop the minister from coming over tomorrow or later this afternoon to make a comment on the issue raised. So, hon. Katuntu what was the issue? 

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you could be aware, all sessional committees are now handling the policy statements and Budget process. This morning the legal and parliamentary affairs committee was meeting officials from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. However, in the course of our deliberations, some very important matter arose, which we thought the Leader of Government Business should come and explain.

The leader of the delegation to our committee was the Deputy Attorney General. However, in our interaction we found out that actually he and all ministers have not yet received their instruments of appointment. This raises very fundamental questions as to how they assumed offices in the first place and how they are seated on the front bench.

In fact, we went and talked to the Speaker who was very concerned about it and from the consultation, it was actually confirmed that they do not have instruments of appointment. So, for this House to proceed with people claiming to be ministers without - an instrument is actually the appointment letter. So, if you have no - I do not know how the permanent secretaries actually received them in the ministry because some of them are actually new. How did the permanent secretaries give them offices and vehicles, and they are paying them without these instruments?

This is a very important point and Government should come up with an explanation. The truth is that none of the ministers has an instrument of appointment. We beg your guidance, Mr Speaker. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue being raised by hon. Katuntu is very serious. I had pretended as if I had not heard properly but when the Member repeated that Members on the front bench are holding out as Cabinet ministers whereas they are not; and to my dismay, they are still continuing to sit as if there is nothing, as if the rug has not been pulled from under their own feet - 

If what the Member is saying is true, the Leader of Government Business should volunteer the information and if not, can we politely request them to vacate the front bench until their appointment is regularised? (Laughter)

2.45
THE VICE PRESIDENT (MR EDWARD SSEKANDI): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, a serious issue has been raised by hon. Katuntu, my learned friend. Unfortunately, we may not proceed much because he has not substantiated the basis of his raising that point.

We are sitting here by virtue of the Constitution, Members of both that side and this side. The issue of ministers is dealt with in this Constitution. The only requirement is that when the President nominates or appoints ministers, the ministers must be approved by Parliament. There is no indication that Parliament did not participate in that process. 

The other requirement is that before a minister assumes duty, he or she must take oath. As far as I am concerned, I have looked at the Constitution and not seen the issue of instrument or the format of the instrument, which my learned friend is resorting to. I would be obliged if my friend can assist me and show me the constitutional requirement for the instrument he is talking about and then I will respond.

MR KATUNTU: It is trite law that for you to assume any public office you must have an instrument that allows you to assume that office. The process takes place but the instrument is the one that gives you, first of all, even your schedule of duties. You do not just say, “Well, I have sworn in and you walk to a ministry.” What are your schedules of duties? It is all provided for within the instrument of appointment. It is like you being appointed in any office - forget about a public office without an appointment letter. How? In any case the instrument is the one that informs you and the whole world that you are holding that office. What has been happening and has been practiced -(Interruption)

MR SSEKANDI: Mr Speaker, the clarification I sought from my learned friend, hon. Katuntu, was to show the constitutional requirement of the instrument he is talking about. Is it an instrument by handing me a spear or shield? This could be an internal matter not a constitutional requirement. I am only asking him for the constitutional requirement of an instrument because when it comes to the point of oath, the oath is also exhibited in the Constitution; so, I was only seeking assistance. 

What is the basis of the instrument he is asking for and in which form must that instrument be because I imagine he is talking about things that are internal or domestic. I am saying, What is your basis for demanding? Should it be exhibited? Should a minister come here and exhibit and say, “I am coming here and sitting on the front bench; this is the instrument of my appointment?” Isn’t it that what we need now is to bring a book where people sign when they swear in to show that the ministers took an oath? That is the requirement. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am ready to take on as many clarifications as there may be. That is one, but at the same time, I want to clarify one by one. So, any person who has got any clarification he is seeking, I am ready to take them on, but can I finish with the one of His Excellency the Vice-President.

It is my own considered view that legal requirements are not necessarily in the Constitution. We even have Public Service Regulations which clearly show that there should be an instrument of appointment. When you hold a public office, then it is no longer internal. People who come to that office want to know whether the person they are dealing with is say, hon. Mallinga, Minister for Disaster Preparedness, Office of the Prime Minister. We discussed this matter in detail with the Attorney General. We found it difficult to keep discussing with somebody who has no instrument of appointment. How do we know that you are the one? 

The appointing authority could even change his mind without the instrument. The point I am making is that these people will be challenged in their actions. If you have not been appointed with a clear instrument then you are relying on the trust instrument. I am ready to take on any clarification, Mr Speaker. 

GEN. TUMWINE: While we would not like to engage in legal gymnastics; and whereas we are governed by clear laws, and there is a separation between public servants and those in the Public Service who fall under the Public Service Regulations and those who are political appointments, we know that the appointing authority has a constitutional duty that has been explained by the Vice-President in reference to the Constitution. 

We know that all Members of Parliament are legislating legally and are doing that without the evidence of how we come to Parliament and how we are sworn in. I know that the Member on the Floor has not brought a written requirement to show that before any person starts his work, he/she must publish a letter on the notice board confirming their appointment. Should he continue to insist without providing the ground on which he is basing his argument? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this Parliament operates under a structure of laws. By the time we were assuming office, we were made to subscribe to an oath of allegiance and we swore to defend the Constitution by law established.

This Parliament is set to enforce the Constitution as it is. Apart from the Constitution, there are Acts of Parliament or laws passed by Parliament that guide the implementation of the Constitution. Apart from the laws passed by this Parliament, some functions are delegated to certain institutions and authorities to pass subsidiary legislation or statutory instruments that govern the details of the implementation of what has been agreed upon by this House.

The Member who raised the objection has not cited the provision of the Constitution, or of any Act of Parliament, or of any regulations or statutory instrument that would bring force to bear on the statement he has made and, therefore, bring implications on the statement that he has requested the honourable Ministers to abide by. In the circumstances, therefore, I find that there is no basis for continuing with this debate as there is no legal requirement for instruments of this nature as I understand it. Therefore, I rule accordingly.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there was an issue that was brought to the attention of the Speaker yesterday, but we did not have time to deal with it. It is about some students that have a problem in Tanzania. 

2.58
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman representative Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some of us have been receiving calls from our students under the Government scholarship programme abroad. We have received complaints from Tanzania and Egypt; they are being manhandled. I have two letters written by these students and I beg that you allow me to read a one-paged letter from Tanzania and another from the students in Egypt. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you can summarise the contents of the letters because you have read them. 

MS AKELLO: They are complaining that the money they are supposed to receive for their welfare has not been sent from the Ministry of Education. Those under the East African universities exchange programme have not received their USD 270 per student and they are set for holidays in two weeks time. They are urgently requesting the ministry to act very fast.

They have written a letter to all Members of Parliament and I will lay it before this House. I would like the Minister of Education to come before this House on Tuesday with a comprehensive statement. 

MS ANYWAR: I thank the colleague for giving way. The issue which is being discussed is serious in nature. The students Government is sponsoring are starving and they have written that they no longer stay in the hostels where they are supposed to be. They are now staying with friends. As a mother of this nation, I cannot imagine what will happen to our girls as they have to go and stay with friends in Egypt and Tanzania.

The prayer of the students is that they urgently need the already accumulated US$ 600 and yet we have about 64 in Tanzania and 33 in Egypt, who are starving and unable to meet the necessary requirements. 

Therefore, the earlier we save the face of these children, the better. Besides that, I would like to seek for more clarification from the Minister of Education. We should get a statement not later than Tuesday to save these children. I thank you.

MS JUDITH AKELLO: I thank you hon. Anywar for that information. There is a phrase in the letter which I want the Members to appreciate; on the third paragraph of their letter, they say, “On at least one occasion, one student was insulted by the civil servant from the Ministry of Education from whom he was seeking assistance.” He warned him that as the IUCEA Exchange Programme had been scrapped, they were no longer a priority. In other words, the ministry is trying to tell the students who are still undergoing their education under a running programme to find their means because they are no longer a priority. It is important for the ministry to come out clearly and state whether they are ready to carry on with the programmes or if they are not. Let them tell the students to come back. Mr Speaker, the students are 67 from Dar-es-Salaam and 33 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, why don’t you then lay the documents on the Table? I will ask the Leader of Government Business to make a comment because I do not think this matter is for debate, but a matter of concern that needs action.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you. We are in the period of debating the State of the Nation Address delivered on 7 June this year. Procedurally, the frontbench and in particular the core ministers, are expected to be in the House because such questions need a quick and robust response. Sixty seven students who are our children is a big number, to just refer the matter to a time when the minister is able to come to explain.

We have a full Cabinet minister and not less than two state ministers who are seated down the road which is just a walk away. Can we allow about 15 minutes so that contact is made to the respective ministry across the road so as to get a response without necessarily referring this matter? As you may have heard, it is very urgent in nature that it does not have to be referred to another date. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, are we procedurally right to continue without the Leader of Government Business contacting the responsible ministries, and even the ministers failing to attend when we are debating such an important matter like the State of the Nation Address; where they know these matters are likely to come up and they absent themselves without any clear explanation? Are we procedurally right?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the honourable member to lay the documents on Table and then I ask the Leader of Government Business to make a statement? If the statement is satisfactory, we will go by it and if not, then we will make additional requests to the frontbench.

MS KAYAGI: I thank you. Before hon. Judith Akello, the Shadow Minister of Education lays the letter on Table, won’t it be procedurally right for her to mention and tell the House to whom the letter has been addressed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what they do when they are laying them on the Table.

MS KAYAGI: Okay. I thank you.

MS JUDITH AKELLO: Mr Speaker that is why I had requested that I be given time to peruse through the letter addressed to us, the honourable Members of Parliament. So, if the Members of Parliament read their emails -(Interjections)- you will go to your email addresses and see these letters in your emails. I thought it was a matter of urgent importance whenever our students –(Interruption)  

MS NTABAZI: Is it in order for a whole Shadow Minister for Education to lay a document in the august House, which she has not perused, for us to become acquainted with the information in the letter? Is it in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please proceed. State for us the person to whom the letter is addressed to, the person who raised the letter and then you can lay it on Table.

MS JUDITH AKELLO: I thank you. I lay before this august House a letter written by Peter Kamya and Samuel Ndawula to all Members of Parliament dated 7 July 2011. I beg to lay.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: While it is important for some questions in the course of discussion of the State of the Nation Address to be postponed or extended to the appropriate ministers, it is important that under the existence of an operational and living Government, they should be able to answer some of these questions we put across, right away without postponement. On a number of occasions, the questions and issues of urgency we present are postponed -   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you interrupted the Leader of Government Business from making exactly that. (Laughter) That is what he was standing up to do.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I hope so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let him make his statement and if it is not satisfactory, then we move on from there.

3.09
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I must associate myself with the concerns raised on the Floor as it is a very serious matter. I would like to advise that those colleagues who are concerned should not have waited for the House to sit in order to raise it here. They should have gone to the ministry concerned and raised the matter there so that when they were coming here, they should have reported that they had been to the ministry concerned and this is what they said. 

It is not too late for the colleague to go back tomorrow – (Interjections)- hold on please. The colleague should go back and ask the minister – as she has laid the paper and waiting for the minister to come and answer. (Laughter) Go and discuss with the minister and then we will see. This is how –(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, the matter has been addressed here in your presence. So, what are you going to do as the Leader of Government Business?

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I am saying that I support the move and I will ask the Minister to see what is happening. However, I am also asking colleagues not to distance themselves because their responsibility is not only to raise matters here, but also includes going to the ministries concerned and see how you can solve it before you come here. I think this is part of their responsibility –(Interjections)- but it does not matter -[Hon. Nebanda: “Information.”]- Information for what? (Laughter) 
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, notify the ministers concerned that they should come and make responses to the issues raised tomorrow at 10 O’clock.

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. That will be complied with. Otherwise, we should wait until that comes before we can come with more information. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the same issue? No, that matter is concluded. Let us wait for the statement on this issue.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I am not disputing what has already been agreed on. However, I would like to seek permission to add on what the minister can come with tomorrow. I am saying this because if he comes without some other information, it will be double work. 

In that regard, I would like to request the minister to also give us the background information relating to the selection of these students, bearing in mind regional and gender balances to enable us, as Parliament, be at rest on who benefits from the scholarships from Government. I am saying this bearing in mind that my constituency of Kitgum has been in the war for a long time. That is the additional information that I wish the minister to bring as well, Mr Speaker.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I have no objection to that effect. However, the honourable member is further complicating this matter because what she is asking for now is a completely new issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is something completely different.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: When the honourable member asks for information on how Members are being elected and so on, that is completely different information. We have no time to rescue these children.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the matter before this House is the situation of the students in Egypt and Tanzania. Can we restrict ourselves to that and that the response we expect tomorrow will specifically deal with only that?

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery today, we have pupils of Kisa Primary School represented by hon. Dr Muyingo of Bamunanika County, Luweero District. Please, join me in welcoming them to Parliament. They have come to observe the proceedings. (Applause)

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC (Planning)(Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, this being the first time I present a paper while you are in the Chair, may I take this opportunity to congratulate you upon being elected to that high office. I also thank you and urge you to continue conducting business as ably as you have demonstrated this afternoon. 

I have a series of documents to lay on Table. One of them is the Partnership Initiative for the Implementation of SAICM financial statement for the year ended 30 December 2008.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is that CSAICM?

MR KASAIJA: I am sorry, Mr Speaker and colleagues – (Interjections)- these are – I am presenting the Auditor-General’s Report –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. What I want to say is that the problem you have is, if you are given a docket and you do not have the instrument of appointment, it means you do not know your schedule. We are just witnessing that now. The honourable minister is here presenting a document, about which he has no knowledge. So, is it procedurally correct for us to listen to a minister presenting a document on which he has no knowledge?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please proceed in order to show that you know what you are presenting and that is my ruling.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I am very conversant about what I am trying to present. (Laughter) I have the pleasure to lay before this august House the following Auditor-General’s reports as follows: 

1.	Partnership Initiative for the Implementation of SAICM, UNDP funded project No.0057870/0047941 for financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2008 – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, there is really no time for games. What we want is the minister to tell the House what SAICM is all about. They have written for him the notes, but he cannot even read them. The Order Paper is clear; please, tell us what that project is all about.

MR ISABIRYE: Motion!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Motion? Okay, go on and move it.

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the august House and the whole nation is looking at us. I move a motion that since the minister seems not to be prepared, he should go back and prepare such that he submits these very important documents when he is prepared. I beg to move. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, we must be cautious of time as a House. If -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, a Member has moved a motion and it has been seconded by over 20 people. Is it in order for the Prime Minister to intervene before you give a ruling; before we pronounce ourselves; and before the motion is disposed of on the Floor of the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we will defer item 3 to tomorrow 10.00 O’clock such that the minister comes when he is ready. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 7 JUNE 2011

(Debate continues.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the debate continues on the State of the Nation Address and as you are aware, we have a list that has been submitted and people who are pending to speak, but we will try as much as possible to balance it. There are those who subscribed their names by the end of last evening and I want to start with those and then we move on. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I think if a Member wants to contribute on any motion, he stands up and catches the eye of the Speaker, instead of writing notes. I think it is procedurally wrong for you to keep receiving notes and choosing people according to notes. Members should stand and catch your eye instead of sending you notes. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have already ruled on the matter and I do not think you have the authority. (Laughter) This has been the practice that was adopted in situations where all Members want to participate so that there is order in the way they make their contributions, because if you have 375 Members willing to contribute on a matter, it is different from a motion where maybe eight to 10 people want to contribute. It has to be in order so that it is properly processed. I am saying that these people rose yesterday and we asked them to subscribe their names so that we can start with them today and then I will come over to you as usual. They caught my eye yesterday, but I ran out of time. I remember them because I noted them down. So, can we proceed?

3.26
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank you for giving me an opportunity today to respond to the State of the Nation Address. The address was very elaborate because it covered many areas and I would like to thank Government for the achievements that it has brought in place. However, there are some small issues that I would like to bring to the attention of this House, in respect to my district. 

I will begin with education. Aware that the government is doing very much, - they introduced UPE and USE - we know that our people are getting proper education. I know that with primary education, like most of our colleagues mentioned yesterday, even if we continue implementing free education, there is still an important issue to consider, and this is remuneration for the teachers. I was a teacher and I know that even if we put much effort without motivation, we shall not realise results. So, I urge this House together with the ministry concerned to look at remuneration of these teachers. 

In the State of the Nation Address, the President talked about construction of houses for some teachers. I want to bring to it your notice, Mr Speaker, that in my district, we do not have houses for teachers and I imagine that if houses for the teachers are put in place, then we shall ensure good work. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your time is limited. 

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Still on the issue of remuneration of teachers, when the President came to our district, he promised us hardship allowance. Kween is a new district. The terrain there is difficult and when you look at the roads – so, he promised us hardship allowance. I ask the ministry concerned to include us in this plan so that we also realise better results. 

Secondly, I want to comment on health. Aware that this government is committed to service delivery, I would like to report that we only have one health centre IV and no district health centre; maybe this is because my district is new. So, I remind the Minister of Health to uplift that health centre IV to district status and then facilitate it so that we also improve. We have only three health centre IIIs. So, you can imagine the level at which we are. So, since the policy is that every sub-county should have a health centre III, this should also be implemented and the health centre IIs at parish level should be facilitated. I know it is cross-cutting in all the districts.

Thirdly, I want to react to the issue of roads. Yesterday, my colleague from Bukwo mentioned the Kapchorwa-Bukwo Road; this road was in the 2008 budget and up to now, we have not seen anything. We know that for easy communication and accessibility, and aware that our district is one of the food baskets for this country, I urge that this road be worked on. When the President came around, he assured my people that work on the road would start, but up to now, there is nothing. They told us that the paper work is complete; we want to see the work continue. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your time has expired. 

MS CHEKWEL: Let me wind up, Mr Speaker. Concerning feeder roads, in my district, we have an upper zone and two sub-counties that are on the lower side. Connecting to those sub-counties is difficult. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I had been briefed that the shadow ministers and the ministers on the government front bench would speak towards the end, unless that is changing now. If it is changing, I would be obliged because we thought they would make the responses when we are closing the debate. If that has changed, then I will allow all of you to make contributions. In that case, you will not have a right to come and make statements later. Is that okay?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think what you are stating is correct. I urge my colleagues this other side who are shadow ministers to wait and listen to the views of all Members and make appropriate responses. We should be able to speak; but what we need is for you to tell us when this debate is ending such that we know how to programme ourselves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will be able to know that properly by the end of tomorrow’s business. Is that okay? It cannot end tomorrow. That is for sure. We will go into next week. By the end of tomorrow’s business, we will know exactly how we will phrase the ending.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What we do not want is to be taken unawares.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you will not.

MR KATUNTU: Because senior colleagues this side are taking notes. They should be able to prepare for the responses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will not be taken unawares. If that is agreed, then the frontbench on the Opposition side should hold their fire until the moment comes. Is that okay?

3.35
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I say anything on the State of the Nation Address, I have two issues of national importance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not permitted under the rules –

MR OMOLO: No, it –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Make your comment on the State of the Nation Address, please.

MR OMOLO: Mr Speaker, if I may refer to the State of the Nation Address and quote what the President said. “I congratulate all Ugandans upon the peaceful and active participation in the electoral process. I also congratulate the Electoral Commission upon a job well done.”

I am sure all the Members who are in this House know what happened during the elections. The Electoral Commission is supposed to hold a free and fair election. They are supposed to ensure that every person votes; every person expresses his right to vote for a leader and a government of his or her choice. Unfortunately, in the course of the elections, first of all people did not have voters’ cards. Two, most people had their names in the register, but their photographs were not there. Three, most people found their names swapped to other polling stations, hence they did not vote. They did not exercise their right to vote for leaders of their choice. (Interjections) That is true. 

Right now, there are many petitions in court. In most of them, the Electoral Commission is being accused. There are one hundred and ten petitions in court. Most of them are focusing on the Electoral Commission. 

My question is, what was the job well done if we have such problems?  (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought we had excluded maiden speeches –

MR MUJUNI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I agree hon. Omolo could have issues, but is he in order to discuss matters that are in court? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please, proceed. 
 
MR OMOLO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your ruling. In other words, what I am saying is that our Electoral Commission has a lot of weaknesses. Time and again, people have complained and gone to court. I would like to assure you, Mr Speaker, that people have lost trust in our Electoral Commission. People have lost hope in voting, they have lost hope in elections.

I will pose a question. What next will people do in case they do not want to go and vote because they are not sure of the Electoral Commission? In case of any problems that may arise in this country; the Electoral Commission will be to blame.

The President talked about peace and security. Most of us watched what happened during the Walk-to-Work campaign. You watched events live from your TVs. I fail to understand where peace ends and where insecurity starts. What was happening exactly was like what Kony used to do to people in the bush. My brother-in-law was killed by Kony’s people. They beat him like the Police were beating people. I fail to understand where security can be found. If that can happen in broad daylight on the streets of Kampala, what might have happened in the bushes of Luweero? What might have happened in the bushes of Acholi? What might have happened in the bushes of Teso? If that can happen before cameras on the streets of Kampala; what will happen in the dark?

I do not believe we have peace as yet. Let us not equate lack of gunshots to peace. Peace is beyond that. Peace is based on one’s smile. It is psychological. Even when you are broke, you are not peaceful. 

Maybe for you MPs; but how many of your constituents are rich? There is no peace yet in this country. Not until we empower our people economically, can we begin talking about peace. Not until we stop beating people, and begin respecting people’s rights, can we talk about peace. It is a long way for us to achieve peace.

Another issue is about health. There is a disease which has been discovered in the North, in Pader, parts of Kitgum and parts of Kiryandongo. Government has kept the information to her chest and not told Ugandans about the cause of that disease. This is a disease which attacks people between the age of three and 15. It impairs your nervous system and before you get to 18, you die. My uncle’s brother - hon. Mallinga was a Minister of Health and he never told us this. - [Mr Mallinga: “There is no such disease.”]-  (Interjections) It is there. Unfortunately, even doctors have failed to understand what the disease is. It is called nodding disease because of the way it treats a person - (Member timed out_) 

3.40
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I also wish to thank the President for his flamboyant presentation during the State of the Nation Address.

I am very concerned about the issue of land. I appreciate the President’s initiative to enhance land usage by maximising sustainable land use. I also wish to appreciate the Land Amendment Act, Article 237 where land tenure security is being enhanced. 

In the area I represent, Buwekula, my beloved people seem to be living in fear. You remember last year that land wrangles had become a very big problem. Much as Government has come up with a policy to protect the occupants, my people are still suffering. They are still evicted inhumanely. 

Yesterday I received several reports; some landlords are still using soldiers to evict tenants. The situation is alarming. Some of these people in Buwekula were born there. Should they now go and start living on the streets? Should they go and start living in the air? Why can’t the government come up with instruments to effectively enforce the policy? What is happening in Buwekula now seems to be the common man’s sickness. Mr Speaker, I am calling upon your intervention to at least have a special team investigate what is happening in Buwekula.

Secondly, I appreciate the government’s initiative to enhance health standards through the health sector investment plan. What I have noticed, however, is that some of these health centres, especially health centres I to IV, do not match drug dissemination with disease patterns. You find that in some of these rural areas, which are highly populated, they lack anti-malarials; including some of these drugs that prevent bleeding among pregnant women. The issue here is not about implementing the policy, but is the National Medical Stores following the demand in the various areas? 

Another issue concerns, Butologo sub-county; it is an area which is highly mountainous and rocky. The problem there is accessibility to services like education, health and water. Mr Speaker, I wish you could send there a team to go and find out exactly – I remember there is a colleague who referred to a certain constituency in the North, but Butologo is a special area because if somebody is to travel, say, for two miles, it will cost that person about Shs 40,000. Most Members don’t know the area, but Butologo needs to be under an equalisation fund. There are some access and commuter routes in the district, but Butologo is very inaccessible. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

3.45
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much. I would like to take this opportunity to respond to the State of the Nation Address, which was read to us by the President. I also take this opportunity to extend our sincere thanks to the President of Uganda for having considered Bundibugyo District and given us electricity, which now makes the district shine in a special way. -[Mr Lukyamuzi: “Information.”]- Since hon. Lukyamuzi is not from my district, I will not accept the information.

Works have started on the road which we had been crying about for years; the government released money and the contractor is now working seriously. I appreciate that the government has really fulfilled its promise. 

Though there are still some problems with regard to routine maintenance of some roads, which are still under Uganda National Roads Authority, due to our terrain, the grader which we have is not enough. We need an excavator and a compactor – because of the distance to Mbarara, our regional area; we need at least some equipment so that we can do these things ourselves at district level. 

Mr Speaker, we have started fighting poverty in Bundibugyo District. In fact, when the President went there, before even the road was made, we had started equipping ourselves with mattresses and other items to fight poverty at the local level. Even now, because of cocoa, our major produce –(Interjection)- in fact, we are the only district in Uganda, apart from Mukono, that produces cocoa to supply to other areas and even export.

As I talk now, Bundibugyo District earns almost Shs 6 billion. We have presented our matter to the President that we want to at least process the cocoa ourselves. We had requested the President to lobby for us an investor who would put up a factory so that this chocolate and cocoa that we import from outside is produced in Bundibugyo District; that way we would get income in the district and also export. 

We are crying over the dollar; our incomes are low; the shilling is losing value – we want to start producing for export. Now that the Minister of Trade is here, I think this is the time for us to tap our own resources and raw materials so that we also become an exporting country and not just rely on imports. 

Mr Speaker, we have tried our level best to fight diseases, but the only challenge that has remained with us is HIV/AIDS. The other day, women were in a workshop at Serena – the only challenge we have as women is HIV/AIDS. Women comprise 85 percent of HIV infected people in Uganda. When we looked at the map, it showed that the districts that circumcise have low infections while those that don’t circumcise have high rates of HIV infection. This is on record with the Ministry of Health. 

Kabarole was cited as one of the most HIV infected districts because they don’t circumcise. It is my request that the Parliament of Uganda takes it as a policy to circumcise men so that we reduce the rate of HIV infections - (Laughter) - - (Member timed out_)

3.50
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am speaking for the first time in the presence of the honourable – (Interjection)- we shall save time if you let me speak. Thank you.

Uganda was a British colony - I am talking about education - and it is the reason why we speak English in this Parliament. Why is it that our children go to school and study in their native languages in their early years of learning? 

I will not go without congratulating the South Sudanese for attaining Independence. As we know, Uganda is very good at helping other people get on their feet; look at Rwanda. It is Uganda that helped them get there, but if you go to Rwanda now, Rwanda is developing faster than Uganda. I do not think there is a road in Rwanda that is like those ones going to the park in Kampala City. So, please, may the Government of Uganda learn from the people they help that even Uganda needs development. And if I am not going astray, South Sudan is going to be ahead of us in terms of development in two years. Thank you very much.

3.52
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Mr Speaker, I thank you so much. I want to join the rest of the colleagues who have spoken before me to commend the President for the precise exposition in the State of the Nation Address. However, there are areas which I feel I need to comment on in terms of interventions.

The very first one is that whereas the President proposes very good interventions in the area of health to deal with promotion, the reduction of maternal and child mortality rate and also prevention and control of communicable diseases, I feel the President did not echo the issue of staffing levels. 

As we speak, most of our constituencies have health centre IVs and by policy they are all supposed to have at least a doctor. The problem we have in the country is that we have a shortage of manpower in the health sector. The ratio of doctor to patient today stands at 1:25,000 and that of the nurse to patient is at 1:1,630. Therefore, without talking about increasing the staffing in the health sector, we cannot achieve whatever is proposed. I, therefore, urge Government to quickly think of increasing the staffing levels.

Relatedly, this goes to two priority areas of Government, namely, education and health, and that is the issue of remuneration. Mr Speaker, you realise that most of the local governments are doing without doctors. We have so many facilities constructed and code named hospitals, but they do not have staff, especially doctors. Why? It is the issue of remuneration. 

As we speak, the health sector and the teaching sector are doing very poorly in terms of remuneration to the staff. I want to give a comparison. Whereas a doctor who has 25,000 patients before him or her is only paid Shs 600,000 to 700,000/=, the Auditor-General who has 1,019 votes is paid almost 6 million despite having a number of staff. Government should very quickly deal with this unjustifiable disparity in the pay, especially for professionals. 

The same applies to teachers. Sooner or later, like the tradition now is in the country, you will hear the teachers also going on strike because of poor pay. Today, Government is spending more funds on UPE, but we are realising quite little in terms of quality of education. Why? It is because of poor remuneration to the teachers. A teacher who wakes up very early in the morning at 7 O’clock, goes to school and comes back very late in the evening, takes home what is not even equivalent to daily pocket change of some of the staff who are highly paid in Government. It is a mere Shs 200,000. 

When I was doing my research, I found that the Commissioner-General of URA has a monthly imprest of 10 million implying that it is about Shs 330,000 on a daily basis - you can imagine - when a teacher on the other hand is only going with Shs 200,000. The same applies to doctors. Unless something is done to increase the pay in these two sectors, we are not going to realise the theme of this Government, which is to improve service delivery. 

As you recall, it is the staff in the local governments who are going to champion the cause of improved service delivery at the local government level. Therefore, I call upon Government to come up with a comprehensive pay reform strategy to address the issue of remuneration. 

Lastly, I want to contribute on the issue of rural electrification. In order to achieve enhancement of marketing and agro-processing, Government needs to add on the 19 schemes that we have for rural electrification. In my constituency, Samia-Bugwe North, only less than two percent of the geographical area is covered by lines of electricity. (Member timed out_)

3.58
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Let me thank His Excellency the President of Uganda, for this elaborate State of the Nation Address and a variety of areas which he touched on, more so, electricity. At least I am very comfortable that we have some electricity in Mbarara Municipality although at some points it had never reached, for example Katete. 

I want to thank him for giving us a wonderful road that passes through my municipality. I want to give credit where it is due. As a former lecturer at the Mbarara University of Science and Technology, and as a physician who has worked in a government hospital for 12 years, I will speak with real evidence. 

I want to go directly to the Ministry of Health. If we want to give proper healthcare to our people, we must agree that a healthy nation is a wealthy nation. Mr Speaker, when Ugandans are very sick, you will not produce anything. All of us here are potential patients from any disease you can think about. However rich you are, you are likely to get Cancer; you can get HIV; you can get anything; you can even get Malaria. The funding to the Ministry of Health is very inadequate. I am glad the Minister of Health is available. 

Doctors are escaping to Rwanda and I do not think that Rwanda is richer than Uganda because we are the ones who contributed to their state formation. A doctor’s salary in Rwanda is four times much more than a doctor’s salary in my country. I wish to inform you that if you want service delivery, if we want doctors in hospitals, kindly motivate the nurses, the doctors and health workers other than facilitating Police to look for thieves. It is wrong! A hungry doctor is a dangerous doctor. (Laughter) A hungry nurse is a dangerous person, and this one also goes to health. I can tell you there is no transport for nurses. Salaries are very low. I can tell you that mothers and children are dying. Recently, Mbarara Hospital spent four days without gloves. I was surprised when I went there and I found there was no operation being carried out.

Mr Speaker, referral hospitals are very full because the health centre IVs is not functioning as a result of theatres being built like lodges. A theatre should be airtight, ladies and gentlemen! Let there be a mechanism to rejuvenate health centre IVs so that they can start carrying out operations so that patients stop flooding referral hospitals.

The money for teachers in Mbarara Municipality is too small and yet the load is too big. If chalk was expensive, teachers would be selling it. We know there is inflation, but all Members of Parliament should be commissioned to go and tell Ugandans to produce fewer children that they can manage. But if you preach the gospel of producing 10 or 20 children, you are killing this country; we need to have population control.

I also have an issue of slums; they are coming up in Mbarara and people need money. The NAADS we need in Mbarara Municipality is money from microfinance institutions; for people to do business because there is no more land and people are fighting for it.

Mr Speaker, taxation of local government councillors is becoming a problem because these are people supposed to be monitoring Government programmes, but they are taxed. Even the smallest amount a councillor gets is taxed. How can you have starving councillors monitor anything?

Lastly, I am reliably told that Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital lacks about 20 staff - I have the documents here – they have a deficit of 19 specialist doctors and yet Rwanda is – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as soon as you hear the bell; summarise because you have strictly one minute after the bell. Moreover it is not manned by human beings, but a computer. So you will automatically go off unceremoniously.

4.03
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the government for its struggle to give people equal opportunities. My concern today is about the programme in place intended to assist our grandmothers and grandfathers down in the villages. I have heard about a programme where money is going to be distributed to elderly people. But my worry is, if these people have been suffering, are neglected by their relatives and society, this money may land in the hands of those very people. I have come up with an idea whereby Government should introduce homes and begin assisting these people collectively. From there, they can be treated and fed properly. Right now, there are some houses whose condition is not good. As much as Government is considering that assistance to these people, let it put into consideration that in each sub-county there is a home for the elderly.

My concern also goes to the education sector. I appeal to Government to put emphasis on inspection. These days you will find a small private school without qualified teachers, but performing much better than a school with all the facilities. I think the weakness lies in lack of inspection. We should come up with a mechanism of introducing more inspectors so that we can come out with something good from Government-Aided schools. Moreover, when we consider the performance in rural areas compared to that in urban areas, there is still a big gap. I do not know what you are going to do to provide qualified teachers to rural areas; either you will improve on their status or introduce a programme of adding them money to keep them in rural areas. If we do not do it, all teachers will leave rural areas en masse to urban areas. Thank you.

4.08
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank His Excellency the President, for the State of the Nation Address.  My first reaction is on page 12 regarding our involvement in the NAADS programme as young people. We all know that the youth constitute 68 percent of Uganda’s population, but when you look at their involvement in NAADS - for instance, on this page it is indicated, 100 households per parish. We propose to Government that we be given a specific quota because we have the energy and we know we can do better. The biggest challenge facing NAADS is that whenever meetings are called, the youth are never invited. I am, therefore, proposing that as young people of this country we be given our specific quota in NAADS.

Another issue is on fisheries. The President proposed that the new Minister of State for Fisheries will have to stop the catching young fish. I know that most of the fishing is done by the young people and I suggest that instead of us thinking of stopping them from going to the lake, Government should provide appropriate fishing gear, using NAADS. I have been to some landing sites, but there is no Government programme engaging these young people. For example, when I went to Mulondo Landing Site in Serere, NAADS does not target these specific communities.

Concerning education, on page 27, it reads, “Support students from Acholi and Lango sub-regions”. But in my region, there are some districts like Amudat and Nakapiripirit – if we are talking about giving scholarships, consider Bukwo and Kween districts in Sebei sub-region and also Teso. 

I request Government to consider these other areas as well when giving scholarships rather than only Acholi and Lango. The people of Teso and Sebei have suffered as a result of cattle raids and so they are still poor. Northern Uganda was affected by war and the same happened to us; we suffered with the same war by the LRA. So, I am proposing that the scholarships should not only be tagged to the Acholi and Lango sub-regions.  I propose that Karamoja as a region also needs to get special scholarships because I have been there. 
 
When you go to Namalu Estate - you are talking about teachers - there is a secondary school in that estate, but it doesn’t have qualified teachers. Go to Pokot SSS, it doesn’t have qualified teachers. How are we going to motivate these people to remain there and teach the communities how to desist from raiding animals if we don’t give them special interventions? 

On education, I am proposing to Government that let them not only tag it on Acholi and Lango, but could we have Teso, Karamoja and Sebei to be part and parcel of the scheme? 

Another issue which I would like to hint on, Mr Speaker is what was mentioned by the President on page 32, “Ministry of Gender and Social Development provided non-formal education and entrepreneurial skills training to the 334 youths and received a capital grant for 167 youth groups in the 119 districts.” As a youth leader, I would be much more obliged to know which of these districts has a tendency of bringing data here which is not correct. I have been in the youth politics for quite some time and I have been following the events.

Last but not least, I would like to talk about the issue of security. The community of Katakwi District, where I come from, is still struggling with our brothers who raid the animals. I am proposing here that since we were able to defeat the LRA using our local militia, we should stop the raids within the same sub-region. We are proposing that guns be given – (Interjection)- one colleague was saying that we are misusing those guns, but we used them and after that noble cause, we handed them over to Government. 

4.14
MS SARAH MATEKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking His Excellency the President of Uganda for his State of the Nation Address. I have a few areas to comment on, which I would request that we should improve upon. 

First, tourism; this is one of the sectors which bring income into this country. I come from one of the districts where we have the most precious animal, the gorilla. I know most of you might not know it, but it is one of the most precious animals, which brings in a lot of income in this country. I would request Government to invest some funds to cater for the tourism centres in these districts where we normally receive tourists.
 
Secondly, if you go to Mgahinga Gorilla National Game Park, as I speak now, the gorillas are not there. Every year these gorillas go to visit in Rwanda and they stay there for a long time. I was there two weeks ago and they had a booking of about 170 tourists, but it is very unfortunate that the gorillas went the other side and have not yet come back.  So, the tourists have ordered to go to Rwanda. So, there must be something unique that those people do which I am requesting our technical team to go there and find out. Maybe there is something special that they feed these gorillas on. Why do they go the other side and do not return to Uganda? (Laughter) 

To add onto that, I would request the infrastructure to these areas to be worked on because by the time you reach Mghahinga National Park, your tyres may be deflated. I would request that they improve on the infrastructure to Mghahinga, Bwindi and Nkuringo where we also have the gorillas. 

On the issue of education, I would request Government to inject more money to support secondary schools that come up in this community. You find that a community school has been put up in a distance of about 20 miles away. But bearing in mind that the terrain of our places is very bad, the girl-child suffers so much. For instance, I went to a village where I found that there was no one who had studied as far as P.7, which is very sad in the Uganda of today. 

Lastly, on the issue of health, I have heard everybody talking about doctors. In Kisoro we have only one doctor, and putting into consideration that we are neighbouring two countries, that is, the Republic of Rwanda and the Republic of Congo, you find this doctor overwhelmed and that might be the reason they run away. I would encourage Government to increase on the salaries of these doctors if they do not want them to leave for greener pastures. 

I would also request the government to increase on the funding of drugs to these border districts. While sending the money for drugs, they only consider the population in these districts without considering the people from the neighbouring countries who flock to these hospitals for treatment. So, at the end of the day, you hear that the drugs are exhausted.  I would request that Government puts that into consideration. Thank you very much.

4.17
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you so much, Rt hon. Speaker. I would like to react to the President’s State of the Nation Address, and I would like to raise some of the issues that could be pertinent to the nation and particularly to my district. One issue is on the education sector; in the education sector, our policy is very clear, we have the National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) and we are talking about unemployment in Uganda, when we have so many people graduating from university seeking for white collar jobs. 

I am requesting Government that we revisit our curriculum and look at the job market and train our people in those areas. I happen to have been to China and seen a child of 15 years dismantling a computer and assembling it with all its programmes. I was perturbed because I studied right from nursery up to the time when the university dictated which course I would take. I think that is very unfortunate.
 
Look at a situation where I am not good at physics but I am forced to do sciences at O’level, and by the time I reach university I am doing law. How has physics helped me? How does the history of Kintu and his sons and daughters in Primary three help today? So, I think our curriculum should be key and we should focus on it as Government.  

I would also like to lobby Government - actually we are here in this Parliament as lawyers, environmentalists, teachers et cetera; but in all, we are here as legislators. And to assure you, the people who got us here are those primary teachers at the grassroots. The teachers that taught me during my primary school days are the same teachers that are still there. Hon. Members of this august House, Shs 200,000 has totally lost value in the Ugandan context. Let us look at teachers’ salary increment. (Applause) I actually think that they are next to God because they cater for our children. We come to Parliament and leave our children at school with these teachers, but at the end of it all they get only Shs 200,000.
 
The other aspect on education is our policy, which talks about having at least one secondary school per sub-county now that we have USE. It is very amazing that in Ngora District we have only the original secondary schools, Ngora High School and Ngora Girls, which are schools that accommodate students of the middle class from different districts. Actually, I am so perturbed; pupils finish Primary Seven and they cannot enrol because most of the schools are private. So, I call upon Government to tackle this issue.

Concerning sanitary pads, hon. Members, we are talking about enrolment and retention at school. I carried out research in Ngora District, the district I represent, and found out that most girls drop out of school when they are in primary six and seven. When I met with the senior women teachers, they were saying the girls cannot go to school when they are in their periods. If Kenya has fully adopted the sanitary pads situation, why can’t we in Uganda do that?

Hon. Members, about the money given to boost farmers (NAADS); the government provides 12 percent to boost our farmers at the local level. But how many farmers know that they can access this money from the banks at 12 percent interest? In my district it is a dream unless we do something.

Ngora District is one that is prone to disaster right from drought, floods and the recent lightning that struck five schools. As I speak, I would love to cry because in my own village where I come from, people are going without food. Famine is hitting people at an alarming rate and they are taking just a cup of porridge a day. As I was growing up as a young girl in Teso, we used to have granaries -(Member timed out_)

4.22
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Mr Speaker and Members, I would like to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. I would like to respond on the issue of agriculture because 80 percent of my population in Kole are peasants. So, I feel there was a gap in his State of the Nation Address as he didn’t give details on what his Government would do to the agricultural sector. 

Just like the Leader of the Opposition presented to Parliament, we need to invest more in agriculture instead of reducing it from 4.9 percent to four percent. When I was consulting with my people this weekend, they felt betrayed because they voted generously for the President. They expected an increase from 4.9 percent to 10 percent at least; this is because my people are poor. 75 percent of the people of Kole are poor and as I told you, 80 percent of them depend on agriculture. In the words, of one of the widows called Juspine Obwoleben who resides in Adelogo parish. She said her last hope was in her vote, which she cast on 18th February, and which seems to be a distant -

I am still appealing to Government. We still have a chance in Parliament here through the Minister of Agriculture and as Members of Parliament, to agree that Government should increase the investment it is putting in the agricultural sector. If we could rise from four percent to 10 percent, it would go a long way in addressing the suffering of our people who are born in the chain of poverty.

I am urging this House to stand and be counted. History is still on our side; that the five years can be different from the other five years of 2006-2011. I am begging the House to think deeply. Let us have a moment of soul searching that our people out there expect a lot from this Ninth Parliament. I want to bring to you the recent refusal of the budget that the ministers were bringing and some of the hidden funds like Shs 200 billion. I was back home and they have a lot of expectations from this Ninth Parliament. They are saying, this Parliament looks different from the past parliaments. So, it is my hope that we will consider the increment in the budget of the agricultural sector.

Secondly, on the issue of education, I feel that the Seventh Parliament, in 2001, made a fundamental mistake to scrap the issue of grading primary schools. This is because, by not grading schools, the inspectorate of schools is left with little work to do to check on the quality of education, especially in the primary section. 

I am also urging this House, that just like it was in my manifesto - that I would beg this House when I come to it, of which I am now in this House - that we should re-think of grading primary schools. Those are the same primary schools that all of us studied in this House. The system that we studied under made me go up to university and shaped my future, and today, I am proudly a Member of Parliament. I feel we should not cheat the young generation – (Member timed out_)

4.28
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is my maiden speech.

THE SPEAKER: So, you are duly warned.

MS NALUBEGA: Mr Speaker, I want to join the rest and thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. But I also want to add my voice to the cries of all Members on both sides, because everybody seems to be talking about the poor service delivery in the country.

I want to address myself to the MDGs 2 and 3. Yes, we have improved so much because of UPE and USE, but the quality does not match with the quantity. In my sub-county, for the last three years, we have not received even a first grade in the primary schools. It is saddening that we have been the engine of education in Uganda, but the sub-county where I come from and where the history of education is based, has not received a first grade. I keep wondering because this is the same situation in Government and private schools. That means that our performance targets are not realised and we don’t prepare for those targets.

This complicates the issues of MDG 5. Everybody has said that maternal health rates are very high and you know that the big contributor is teenage pregnancy. Most of these young girls drop out due to unwanted pregnancies and abortions. Actually, 25 percent of maternal health is contributed to by adolescents. 

Here, I want to challenge the Minister of Health that they need to address the issues of girl-child education in relation to health. We had the adolescent sexual reproductive health policy; I don’t know where it died. I want to challenge the minister that there is need to review that policy and implement it to make sure that we succeed in UPE and in the health sector service delivery.

I want to talk about employment vis-a-vis unemployment. In Uganda every year, 400,000 enter the job market but unfortunately, not even a quarter is absorbed in the job market. We have talked about education that prepares people to seek for jobs, but not to create their own jobs. I heard the President telling the Ministry of Education to get a career guidance policy, but we do not have it up to now. 

The multi-skilling education is not there in Uganda. Somebody graduates and he wants to get a job in a law firm because he cannot be employed elsewhere, as that is the only field that he understands well. It is very dangerous and we cannot achieve much in creating jobs when we have a market that does not address the products of education. 

I want to propose to the President that he should refocus much of the national resources to implementing the cottage industry strategies and business process outsourcing. We have seen these create so many jobs in other countries.

Everybody has sung about corruption and we have the framework to fight it, but it continues to increase every day. There is this silent corruption where people do not deliver services. Our people die in health centres because the doctors are not there and yet they are paid. Our people go to health centres and they cannot find medicine yet we have procured so much. Every time we get a corruption case, a committee of inquiry is constituted, but the recommendations are just buried either in the dustbin or wherever and the corrupt people are rewarded. 

I want the words of the President to be put in action. We had a CHOGM report, but up to now they are only dilly-dallying with it. They are pin-pointing at one person yet there are so many culprits. We must walk the talk if we are to fight corruption. With due respect to everybody (Member timed out_)

4.34
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): In debating this motion, I would like to restrict myself to about three or four areas. The first one is about labour and employment and it is raised by the President on page 31. It reminds me about our protracted struggle in the last Parliament as youth representatives. I remember we critically highlighted areas where young people in this country can get employment.
We met the President and highlighted jobs in the mainstream Civil Service, service industry, externalisation of labour and commercial agriculture. 

On the mainstream Civil Service, I recall that the President “allegedly” directed the Ministry of Public Service to consider a proposal of reducing the mandatory retirement age from 60 to 55 years.

In 1986, when the NRM Government took power, the mandatory retirement age stood at 55. It was raised to 60 years and the fundamental reason given then was that the country lacked adequate human resource. I do not think this justification can still stand the test of time 20 years down the road. 

I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Public Service to what extent this Presidential directive has been implemented.

I want to talk about the tourism sector. Before 1971, Uganda was the leading tourist destination in the entire East and Central Africa. Entebbe International Airport was the hub for the region. Looking at the untapped potential, the then Prime Minister of UK described Uganda as the “Pearl of Africa”. Ugandans keep saying that we are gifted by nature. At such a time when we are grappling with this financial crisis, it is important that we look at such areas which can generate income. Tourism is one of them. We have a very huge potential that should be tapped. What is important is for Government to invest. Rwanda has invested in tourism and that is why our gorillas are migrating to that place. Uganda has not invested substantially in this sector while others like Kenya and Tanzania have invested. 

The tourism sector has the highest trickledown effect. A tourist who comes to Uganda pays US$ 50 at the airport. He/she moves in a Ugandan cab and fuels from a petrol station and they end up in a hotel. They sleep in a bed made by Ugandans and eat food supplied by Ugandans. As Government, I think these are some of the critical areas that we must invest in heavily in order to generate more income to run the nation.

I want to inform you that I am the new chair of the science and technology committee. Science and technology is the alpha and omega. We can stand in this Parliament and roar because of what is made by a scientist. This is a committee of Parliament that must feature in the national development plan because Government itself is emphasising sciences and, therefore, Parliament as the temple of legislation should have issues of science and technology at the top. I have seen that the President highlighted on ICT, but I think it is a component of science and technology. Science and technology is the foundation and the pillar.

Corruption is the biggest challenge to the NRM Government and it has eroded our society. It is affecting service delivery to the people of Uganda. It is important that our commitment in fighting corruption is genuine (Member timed out_) 

MS IBI: Thank you hon. Speaker, in your ruling you said that Members who have contributed on this particular motion should give chance to others. We have repeatedly seen those who have contributed come back to the microphones over five times. Hon. Colleagues, let us be honourable enough and respect the Speaker’s ruling. Some of us have been able to sit here up to the last minute; it is because of this. Starting with the next speaker, I will be standing to put you in order such that you respect yourself and be honourable enough. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members I am going to request you to help me to identify those who have spoken. If you look at Rule 57 sub-rule 8, it reads, “No Member shall speak more than once to any motion.” It is clear and if you have spoken, you are barred by the rules from standing up again to begin contributing. So, help us. Hon. Members, if such a Member comes up again, advise me and I will take appropriate action because that would be –(Laughter)- so you stand duly warned.

4.42
MR SEMPALA MBUGA (NRM, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): I thank you for the opportunity to speak. In Nakaseke County South, I am commonly called “Stamina.” I would like to join everybody here including the many Members on the Opposition, in thanking the President for a wonderful State of the Nation Address. Although many Members have spoken on the points I wanted to raise, I still have a number of issues in those areas.

My first concern is on agriculture. As you know, I come from a crop growing constituency and His Excellency in his address and manifesto – in the budget they talked about agricultural production and productivity, which is very good in order to boost the household incomes. 

Mr Speaker, in my constituency, we have a problem of pests, diseases and drugs. I know that in the second programme of NAADS, money is provided to the selected eight farmers per parish to purchase crops, including pesticides, but the money is too little. It does not even extend to other farmers outside the eight selected ones. We need to seriously address this problem if we are to increase production and productivity.

The drugs available on the market are of very poor quality and very expensive. In fact, they are fake! They damage and even kill our crops meaning there is no production. 

I want to propose that Government opens an outlet or appoints a very trusted dealer who can bring into the country quality products, pesticides and drugs, so that we can increase the production of our crops. I can hear the bell warning. 

I would also like to ask Government to increase on the allocation to the districts for the boreholes. The allocation is too small and yet clean water is a real problem in my constituency, which has about four to five boreholes - in fact, they must be deep boreholes. I am asking Government to be kind enough and increase on that allocation.

It was mentioned in the State of the Nation Address that tractors would be given to various districts, but when I read the budget, there is no mention of tractors. I am wondering -(Member timed out_)- (Laughter)

4.47
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): I thank you and join the rest in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address. I would also like on a special note to thank the Eighth Parliament for having approved and created many districts and constituencies that brought the Members of Parliament to 375 without considering the space where they were going to sit –(Laughter)- we cry about the administrative expenditure in this country and I think we are going to be the victims of that expenditure.

In the near future, I will propose that this Parliament be divided into the upper and lower chambers or alternatively – I represent Ntungamo District that was created in 1994, which by then was the smallest district. Today, it is the biggest district in the country - (Interjections)- it is one of the biggest in this country and the reason is that most of the districts which were bigger by then were chopped into pieces.

If I can represent a district very well, why not create two representatives per district. We have 112 districts and if we bring one woman and one man, we can represent these districts which are actually counties and not districts – (Interjections) - - (Applause) - so that we have 224 Members of Parliament who can fit in this Chamber.

Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that you are finding it very difficult to even give –(Interjections)- we are not even representing very well because the time you have given me is very little because you want to give chance to others. Hon. Members, I will need your support when I move the motion –(Interjections)- no, I will move it at a later stage. (Laughter)

Government created savings and credit cooperative organisations to alleviate poverty at the household level. Much as they have given huge sums of money to some of those SACCOS, to my surprise - much as we want Government to get tax back - I think if we want to alleviate poverty, then we should leave this money untaxed.  

That money is taxed and the people of Ntungamo requested me to ask this Parliament to help them to at least change the policy so that they do not pay tax on it.

In the Sixth Parliament, I moved a motion here to include the elderly - because they are wise - on the local committees from LC I to LC V. But I don’t know what happened later on, because the Electoral Commission organized elections for all the other groups, but these people are not represented. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, when you get into our city, you realise that buildings are so close to each other; motorcycles keep colliding with human beings while taxis keep knocking each other. There are also animals. There is a lot of confusion in our city. I would like to urge this Ninth Parliament to create a change by making Kampala a suitable city. For example, how can we have boda bodas in a capital city today?

4.53
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join all the other honourable members who have thanked the President for the thoughtful State of the Nation Address.

In debating this address, I would like to first of all address myself to the issue of the economy, especially the depreciation of the Uganda Shilling. In his address, the President said that tourism is one of the major areas he is looking at to help bring foreign exchange into the country. My only disappointment is that whereas we all recognize tourism as very important in as far as foreign exchange is concerned, we don’t allocate enough resources to this industry. Therefore, I would like to urge the Ministry of Finance and that of Tourism to allocate more resources into the tourism industry.

Another issue related to that is about what was said about the damage that walk-to-work demonstrations caused to our image and, therefore, reducing on the foreign exchange earnings from the tourism industry. It was said that the airlines that used to come with 80 percent load were this time round coming with only 30 percent. When terrorists attacked tourists in Egypt, the tourism industry was badly damaged too. But what the government of Egypt did was to launch an advertising campaign to erase that poor image that had been created by that attack on the tourists. But in Uganda, even when it was discovered that walk-to-work had damaged our image and the tourist industry, Government has not done anything to repair that image. That means the tourism industry has to heal on its own, which I know will take a long time with the dollars from the tourists not coming into the country. In that regard, I would like to urge Government to do more to improve the image of the country.

The second issue that I want to address myself to is about NAADS, which is a very important Government programme. This programme has got many components, but one of the items in this programme is that of the village procurement committees that have been set up. They are supposed to help in the procurement of inputs to the programme. However, when I visited my constituency in Kiboga, people told me that those village procurement committees that were set up were not being used to procure resources. Instead, the NAADS officials are themselves carrying out procurement. These farmers claimed that these procurements were being carried out at very high costs, which these people will have to pay back. They gave an example of procurement of five kilogrammes of beans at Shs 120,000. They also gave an example of the procurement of a small goat at Shs 160,000. According to these people, the failure to use the village procurement committees meant that the NAADS officials were free to do whatever they wanted – to keep doing the wrong things that they were doing before yet that is the very reason those committees were set up; to help in the procurement process.

The third issue concerns water. There is a very big problem of water for both human beings and animals in Kiboga. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Agriculture to allocate more resources into the building of valley dams that will provide water for the animals. But also, I appeal to the central government and Ministry of Water, to allocate more resources to build more boreholes for water for human consumption.

The last issue that I would like to talk about is electricity. The people of Kiboga have complained that load shedding does not seem to have a schedule. Power comes, but also goes any time. They have also complained to the effect that while they are not receiving efficient services, they are being overcharged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I call on the next contributor, let me ask the honourable members of the front bench to take up their rightful seats. Please, your time for sitting behind there is up. Please move forward and take your seats on the front bench so that you are visible. Okay, let us hear from hon. Amoding.

4.59
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative, National): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to speak to this motion. I just want to address myself to two things in line with the State of the Nation Address.

The first one is about the labour and unemployment issues that have been consistently raised. I thank the President for including it in the State of the Nation Address, and rightly, the Leader of Opposition who responded to it very squarely.

At an appropriate time, Mr Speaker, we are going to lay before you, a conclusive proposal which we are drafting as young leaders. In that document, we will be addressing this problem squarely and more broadly, hopefully during the budget debate.

However, let me address myself to one thing relating to the importation of goods into this country. I had an opportunity to travel to Ghana. While there, the peculiar thing I noted was that those people promote their local products. When you go to the market, you will only find products such as the African textile. And as visitor in another country usually you will want to buy a souvenir to get back home with it. Actually, when you get into their markets, you will hardly find anything that is imported. 

During my normal business, I have been receiving visitors and I usually take them down to the heart of Kampala. But one of the very shocking details that they find is that, our country is a flooded market of imported goods. They usually trek the streets of Kampala trying to find something that is unique to no avail. And I was glad when hon. Obua talked about the importance of promoting the tourism industry. I think there is a big problem in relation to importation of goods in this country, and that is the sole reason we have all these issues of lack of the dollar in the country, and most times when you talk about this issue, they say that you cannot disturb the market forces of supply and demand. I think this is a ploy from the western countries that want to find ease of importation, and sell of their goods, especially to developing countries, particularly in Africa. 

I appeal to the Minister of Finance and his team to stop thinking that the demand and supply forces can control an economy like Uganda. Uganda is still a very poor economy by all standards, and it is so vulnerable to forces of supply and demand. So, my appeal to the Minister of Finance is to review the ideology that they are using in terms of developing policies for this country and so, if we deal with issues of this nature, we can be able to create more jobs for this country, just like my colleague alluded to earlier. If we actually promote the tourism industry, we can be able to employ more people and we can be able to expand the levels of importation of the dollar in the country. That is the single point that I wanted to raise before this honourable House, and I think that in the near future, they can take into account the interests of people who are concerned about being part of the planning process. I am an economist by interest and by a little schooling, and I think we have some useful ideas to give to this important ministry. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.03
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are many issues to talk about in this State of the Nation Address, but because of time, I shall confine myself to two areas and the first is public service. On page 50 of the State of the Nation Address, the President stated that, “Government is cautious of the concern about salaries and wages paid to public servants. In due course, Government, through the Ministry of Public Service, will come up with a revised pay reform policy which will address all issues relating to pay”. This is a very good statement and I hope he will put it into practice. 

I was here in the Seventh Parliament and this issue was raised on the Floor of this Parliament. In the Eighth Parliament, the same issue was raised, and as far as I can recall, it has attracted much attention on the Floor of this Parliament and the same sentiments from His Excellency the President that they will look into the matter continues. Let us shift the attention of lamenting about salaries for public servants and instead push the blame to who is responsible. This Parliament has been looked at as one which has been reviewing salaries of public servants because the Constitution gives them that right. Equally, the Executive, as far as our Constitution is concerned, has that mandate to look at their salaries. It is bad for Parliament to attack other institutions like the Judiciary, and yet keep quiet when it comes to looking at the terms and conditions of public servants. Therefore, who is responsible for the terms of service for the public servants? It is the Public Service Commission, which is appointed by the President. It is, therefore, his responsibility to come up with a detailed pay programme for the public servants.

Secondly, let us look at the budgeting system in this country. It is the Executive’s function to budget for this country; it is not this Parliament and it is not the Judiciary. Let us move further to the public service ministry. This ministry is part and parcel of the Executive. So, why should we continue talking about Parliament? Why can’t the Executive sit down and come up with a clear structure of the pay for the public servants? I would like to inform the President and those who help him that the human resource matters a lot. He has talked much about power and about security, but without the human resource development, without having the right people with the right cues, however much he injects power into this country, however much there is too much security, there will be no development in this country. Therefore, there is need for the Executive to sit down and look at these sectors, particularly the Public Service. How on earth can you talk about the health sector, as my colleagues have stated, without looking after the human beings? Therefore, I request that the Executive, particularly the Ministry of Public Service and the relevant institutions, quickly try and look at this problem of pay to the doctors and teachers in particular. 

When you look at the way salaries are allocated in the various sectors – in the Uganda Revenue Authority, a director earns over Shs 20 million; the Auditor-General earns nearly the same – (Member timed out_)

5.08
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity to react to the State of the Nation Address. I would like to point out a few observations on the NAADS programme. Some of the challenges that I discovered about the programme recently when I went home are one, delayed release of NAADS money from the secretariat. This has delayed the whole process of planting, and late planting has brought about low yields. Whereas the government is talking about increasing production and productivity, this issue does not address it. I, therefore, call upon the NAADS secretariat to plan early enough and release these funds in time to the farmers. 

Another challenge is that the beneficiaries of the NAADS programme, who are identified to fight food insecurity especially when it comes to the 100 farmers per parish, are usually the poorest of the poor and what I have observed is that the poorest of the poor, as you all know, lack many things in their homes. They lack food and lack most of the essential items needed in a home; and what happens is that when they are given the seeds, they are tempted to sell them in order to buy books for the children; in order to take somebody sick to the hospital; in order to buy food, which is the most immediate problem that they face. So, I call upon the government to look at the issue of the poorest of the poor and design a formula to help them come out of poverty so that when seeds are given to them, they are able to plant and produce food and, therefore, fight food insecurity. 

Another problem, which I saw with the NAADS programme, is that procurement of the seeds is by the farmers themselves. Some of them are illiterate and they are chosen to procure. Sometimes the source of the seeds purchased is not known. Therefore, they have ended up producing low yields because sometimes the purchased seeds are not certified.

Another thing is the rising prices. I was told that each farmer was to get seeds worth Shs 51,000. But of late, the prices rose so high that a packet of seeds, which has been costing Shs 10,000 is now at Shs 100,000 in Kapchorwa. In fact, the type of seed that we plant for maize is a hybrid seed from Kenya. This costs Shs 100,000 per packet. The Shs 51,000 buys only five kilogrammes, which is very little for the farmers of Kapchorwa to fight food insecurity.

One thing I would like the government to include in the NAADS programme is soil fertility management. Kapchorwa District has a terrain which is so mountainous and steepy such that the water just flows at a terrible speed, carrying a lot of soil with it. I am calling upon Government to include soil fertility management for the farmers of Kapchorwa such that we may be able to fight soil erosion which is rampant. 

5.13
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to make a brief contribution in response to the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President. Before I go onto the direct response, I want to make a small response to what was discussed here yesterday. 

I would like to put it on record that I am one of those who are the pinnacle of the success of the peace talks in Juba. (Applause) I would also like to put it on record that it was me, and a few others, who drafted nearly all the documents that were transformed into agreements, which were signed in Juba. (Applause)

I would like to thank hon. Ruhakana Rugunda for the patronage he exercised when we were in Juba. He guided the peace talks. I am very glad that on the 26 August 2007, we delivered the most important agreement, the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement that was crafted very well with the assistance of my brother, Jimmy Akena, Ruhakana Rugunda and others.

I would also like to put it on record that it was not easy for us to achieve the little peace we have here. I want to put it on record that when we started the peace talks, it was misunderstood. Sometimes when my name is mentioned –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are moving away from the subject. I gave you leeway to talk briefly. It is supposed to be relevant to the motion -

MR AYENA: So, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the government for having been benevolent enough to listen to us so that my people in Oyam North and the greater north are now in a state of peace. (Applause)   

On agriculture, sometimes I think it is still a far cry when we talk about increased overdue agricultural production when there is so little money allocated to agriculture. Sometimes it pains me when I hear the President saying that we are going to restrict the export of grains. The mainstay of our economy is production of grains. We know that the only thing that can meaningfully bring money into the economy now is the sale of grains. If I produce only grains and you tell me not to export them, how do you expect me to improve all my lot? I suggest very strongly that if the government wants to restrict the export of all grains, it must put in subsidies for the producers of grain so that at least there is a buffer against problems that will be encountered in the agricultural sector.

In the address, the President is making provisions for NAADS, NUSAF and so on. But experience shows that most of this money that is sent to the sub-counties ends up in the hands of the local procurement officers. Can there be an arrangement where field officers shall be engaged to make sure that these monies reach the target; that is the poor peasants whose interest this money has been allocated for? 

When you talk about health - I have a very sad experience. I am winding up -(Member timed out_)

5.19
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Mr Speaker, there are a few issues I need to raise about the State of the Nation Address. Sometimes I really wonder whether the President is very serious when he is addressing the nation.

Investment in agriculture has been alluded to by almost everybody here because we need to eat food to be alive. But if you look at the per capita investment in agriculture, it is Shs 0.6 per Ugandan. How can we run an economy based on agriculture with such an investment? It is very sad and appalling! And you promised a very lucrative campaign manifesto of Prosperity-for-All based on such a minute investment. It is absolutely threatening to the nation.

I just want to bring your attention to agricultural financing in the country. Bill Gates gave us a lot of money, which is meant to go into the hands of farmers mainly for agro-processing and improving productivity. This money has gone into the hands of commercial banks. The commercial banks are lending this money to non-agricultural investments at commercial rates. The ministry is very silent about it and they have done absolutely nothing about it. We injected Shs 60 billion into the same commercial banks and they are left lending to farmers! And if they lend to you, they want to lend to you in terms of procuring equipment like machinery without giving you the seed capital to invest in what you would like to produce. The ministry is sitting silently on this. I am saying, give this country 20 years, and you have this population of 75 million Ugandans, how will you feed them? You are injecting Shs 0.6 per Ugandan; reduce that by about five percent, what would be your actual investment? How will you feed your nation? It is high time we started thinking progressively for this nation other than crafting manifestos that don’t make sense to the nation.

Mr Speaker, just to bring to your attention something related to agricultural extension -(Interruption)

MS NEBANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this Parliament, we are all elected and trusted by the people. His Excellency the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, was also elected by the majority of the people, 68 percent. To show that the elections were fair, you can see that there are some Members of the Opposition in Parliament. 

The President gave a State of the Nation Address; the Leader of the Opposition also gave his response to it and we listened to him. Is it in order for an honourable member - in fact, a well dressed lady - with all her knowledge, to stand up and start saying that His Excellency the President of Uganda, was saying nonsense. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member disclosed lack of understanding of the manifesto. She said it doesn’t make sense to her. I think she is just starting her state of mind and on that we cannot fault her. That is her state of mind. 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you for giving me opportunity to seek your guidance and procedure as we debate this motion. During induction, we learnt that we should listen to one another and be tolerant. During debates, we should try as much as possible to avoid personal attacks; but if we are dealing with policies, it doesn’t matter how much you support an ideological position. You must listen as to why somebody is giving that idea regarding that policy position. We talk in terms of policies and not in terms of personality. 

Mr Speaker, I would like your guidance on this matter so that some of us, particularly those of us who are still new, learn to listen and be tolerant. That is the guidance I would want to seek from you.

MR KIWANDA: A Member raised a point of order and you ruled on it. Is it in order then for the hon. Cecilia Ogwal to continue on the same point, when you already made a ruling? Was it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the rules are clear on that. Once a ruling has been made on a point of order that is final. Please wind up.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, it takes time to understand these things. Sometimes we are excited when we get to Parliament, but we shall eventually cool down. (Laughter)

Lastly, on education. There is what the ministry introduced, a thematic curriculum; this thematic curriculum means that children from primary one up to primary four are taught in vernacular, but unfortunately, this does not give room at the tail end of primary seven for examinations in the context of the same vernacular. It is very difficult for a child to appreciate an examination language in four years. What does that mean? It means we are segmenting the country. There are those primary schools that are not implementing the thematic curriculum, and there are those who are implementing the thematic curriculum. 

When you draw a policy direction for a country, why do you give an opportunity for the nation to be segmented in terms of implementation? These are questions we are asking and they are pertinent. What does this mean? It means in the long-run, we would have created a class of people raised in Uganda on a different platform and leaving the masses on another platform. Would that really amount to seriousness on the part of the Ministry of Education?

My suggestion is this, if we are implementing the thematic curriculum, go full blast. Tell us the merits and tell us how you are going to examine in four years something you have instructed in the local language. As a professional teacher and an economist, I get disturbed when we are running parallel curricula in the country and yet we subject the same children to a streamlined examination. It is very unfortunate. So, it is my plea that eventually we understand that it is not good to segment the nation.

Finally, on corruption. The President is very good at talking about eliminating corruption in this country, but he is actually doing absolutely nothing about it. When the CHOGM report came here, high level people were implicated, including the Prime Minister. Today the Prime Minister is sitting here as Prime Minister, but the former Vice-President is in the docket. 

What is this preferential treatment on the part of the President? This is what we are asking. If you are to be fair and truthful to yourself and to this nation, then curb corruption in totality. Don’t treat people differently when it comes to embezzling public funds. It is my appeal to His Excellency that he will come to terms with the reality that this kind of differential treatment, in terms of prosecuting whoever has stolen state resources, will not lead to eliminating corruption in this country. (Member timed out_)  

5.29
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me join the rest of the Members of this august House, to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. I would also like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for making critical analyses and responses to the State of the Nation Address. 

I would like to thank the President, particularly, for recognising Nwoya District and giving us a district status, and that is why I am here. I also thank the President for the peace that is prevailing in Northern Uganda because I know, without peace; my people would not be able to engage in production. I thank him for the various programmes that have been implemented, and still featured in his State of the Nation Address, including PRDP, NUREP, NAADS and many other programmes. 

However, I want to make a brief comment on health. On the 27th June, the Minister of Health invited us, particularly women Members of Parliament, to a meeting and we were shocked by some revelations that were made by their staff. It concerned maternal health and prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS. What was so shocking and what had everybody shivering was the revelation that we have a new strain of Tuberculosis - about 130 people have this disease, and there is no medicine for curing it; and these people are very busy spreading the disease. If I can recall - I don’t have the statistics here - but I think the official stated that treating one patient would require about four million because it is a different strain of TB. But the ministry does not have the money for buying these drugs. So, I am wondering if the Minister of Health can tell us if we should really keep this disease spreading. I know that as Members of Parliament, and as Ugandans, we interact freely. I am afraid we may even have the disease spreading here, if we continue going to the villages and coming back and the rest.

More shockingly also, in the same meeting, the ministry officials told us that the health system has collapsed. The human resource has collapsed and that is why the nurses are not working and the doctors are not there. In my district, we have only one doctor and that doctor also performs postmortems almost in the whole of the Acholi sub-region and Lira and Lango. So, if there is any accident, the district is totally without a doctor. That further signifies a collapse in the health system.

Then the drug system; I would really like to inquire from the minister. I worked in the local government and we used to have a policy where the money for buying drugs would be given directly to the district, and then the district would buy the drugs. At that time, we had drugs in hospitals, but when they changed the system and the money was being given directly to the National Medical Stores and they were supposed to deliver the drugs, now the drugs do not reach on time. When you get to the health centres they will tell you, “We last received the drugs three or two months ago.” And when you go and ask the CAO, they are not accountable - and accountable for what anyway! You ask the DHO: “We have not received the drugs.” Can we really make the districts accountable? I prefer the old system where money is sent and we follow up the money so that when you go and ask the CAO, the CAO can explain where the money has gone and then he/she can show the drugs bought.

I would also like to comment briefly on food security. As I talk, two sub-counties in my district are threatened. Actually, all the sub-counties in my districts are threatened by food insecurity. Two sub-counties are not receiving rain; the crops have failed and I receive phone calls every now and then - (Member timed out_)

5.34
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank His Excellency the President, for the comprehensive and elaborate State of the Nation Address that he gave. Also, allow me to thank Government for whatever they have achieved in the last financial year. 

In view of that, my people in Makindye East, and Uganda in general, would want His Excellency and his cabinet to improve service delivery. One area where they wish Government could do better is regional cooperation. Yesterday, we discussed the issue of South Sudan and it was completed and resolved. But I happen to represent a constituency where there are four private universities, namely: IUIU, the East African University, Kampala University and Kampala International University. Many of the students in these universities are foreigners and people coming from South Sudan. What is worrying is that, these people are armed and they use those arms to intimidate and cause fear among the population of Makindye East. I have seen the Minister of Security here and the Leader of Government Business is also here. This is not a simple issue! Some of you read newspapers. Last week you might have read on the front page of Bukedde that a Sudanese shot and injured a Ugandan girl. This is one of the many acts of torture and intimidation, which are taking place in my constituency. I know it is happening in hon. Lukyamuzi’s constituency as well because some of them reside in that area. So, we need to do something about it. 

Secondly, all of us are aware that Uganda is going through a trying economic period and one of the areas, which Government should look at, is to empower local investors so that they gain control of our economy. I feel it is unjust when some of these local investors, like the Government of the Kingdom of Buganda, decide to invest in estate development and Government of Uganda decides to rent and hire the investment, but then refuses to pay rent arrears to the tune of Shs 11 billion. They have failed and refused to pay, but we have seen the Government of Uganda rescuing individual businessmen to the tune of Shs 20 billion because of their business indiscipline. Somebody invests, you hire, but you do not pay! It is unjust, unethical and it is something which should be looked into.

Lastly, about Umeme. The other day we pushed away Shs 63 billion. I want to inform this House that as we subsidise power for the thermal plants, Government of Uganda continues to subsidise Umeme for power losses to  the tune of Shs 20 billion annually -(Interjections)- Umeme was supposed to refurbish the power distribution lines -(Member timed out_)

5.39
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been away from this Parliament for the last five years, but I am back. (Laughter) I want to congratulate all of you for having made it to this Parliament.

I have two issues. The first one is about security and the security minister is here. When you move around Kampala, you see many roadblocks. We do not understand what this is. We had some chaos sometime back, but it is a very big inconvenience. The policemen are asking about kitu kidogo and it is a very big inconvenience. Why do we have roadblocks up to today?

The other issue is about the election of the chairpersons of LC I. In the villages, the implementation of Government programmes is becoming a very big problem because the term for LC I chairpersons we have in the villages expired long time ago. So, the Electoral Commission should organise these elections.

The beautiful manifesto of the ruling party rests on three items: Prosperity-for-All, better service delivery and job creation. The government needs to put the above into consideration especially Prosperity-for-All. We need a lot to consider in this because Prosperity-for-All means better economic well-being of the people.

Better service delivery is a very big challenge to Parliament today. We have talked about agriculture, health and education, but regarding agriculture, this sector has suffered a lot due to budgetary allocations. There is lack of improved and genuine inputs in the villages, the sub-counties and districts. There is also the poor attitude of the people, especially towards changing from the traditional to modern methods of farming, and yet if we are to increase our productivity – leave alone production, because people are producing – there is need for attitude change. 

The 20 percent allocation to the local governments is too low to allow them monitor Government programmes, especially in rural areas whose services are still very poor. When you go to Mityana Hospital, it is in bad shape and I call upon the Minister of Health to begin from there in her maiden tour. There is not even an ambulance for that hospital.

Looking at the petroleum sector, in many countries, oil is regarded as a curse, but I urge Government, if we are to benefit from oil, to be transparent in the manner we handle this sector.

On education, especially UPE and USE. As much as UPE is in almost every parish, USE is still limited, especially in my constituency. You find only one secondary school in a sub-county. So, I request Government to partner with private schools so that some students are admitted by those private schools near the communities.

If we are to have meaningful service delivery, Government should create a monitoring system, starting from the parish level; we could have something like a monitoring team starting from the parish, sub-county up to the constituency. This leads to serious monitoring of Government projects. Otherwise, Government is sending a lot of resources to all these areas, but tangible benefits are not seen. Thank you. 

5.45
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I begin by thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address. Starting with the energy sector; in the last five years, I kept on demanding from Government the completion of the stalled power projects that were in Kigulu South. However, I salute the Ministry of Energy for having finally come to our rescue by beginning to attend to them. Unfortunately, we have two companies implementing these schemes; there is one under UEDCL and the other under rural electrification. But instead of it being rural electrification, it is becoming road electrification, because whereas the purpose was to help the people in rural areas, it is only helping people who are along the roads. 

I want to put the honourable minister on notice that whereas you intend to witness the handover tomorrow from UEDCL and rural electrification to UMEME, these people have been extorting money from the community. For one to get two lines or some poles to a certain place, one has to contribute at least Shs 1 million. How shall we tell the people we are representing that we took energy to them and yet they are being asked to contribute money? They will clearly see you as a liar. It is my humble prayer that the honourable minister intervenes immediately and does not sanction the handover tomorrow, until the people get power, especially those who have paid their money. 

Still on energy, even as we get excited that Bujagali Hydro Power Station will be commissioned in October and Karuma will be started in December, we should bear in mind their impact on climatic change. The water levels on River Nile have begun to drop; suppose it dries up, what will happen? It is my proposal that we begin exploring other avenues like biogas. I was in Thailand last week and was hosted to a biogas project, which produces 3,000 megawatts from 21,000 pigs. Here in Uganda we are talking of reaching 1,000 megawatts by close of what? Well, it is good, but if we explored the other cheaper and renewable avenues, I am sure it would help us. The minister should facilitate the Committee on Natural Resources to go and visit these projects so that they can come back here and propose similar projects.

On the issue of health, last week I moved to Iganga Hospital together with the MP and mayor of Iganga Municipality, but we found an alarming situation. Patients were sleeping on the floor while others slept on papyrus mats! I could not believe it. When I tried to contact the district leadership, I learnt that some mattresses were just being kept in the medical stores. This implies that the ministry is not doing enough to monitor materials that are being dispatched from the centre, to ensure that they are put to proper use.

Lastly, on security. I salute Government and the Ministry of Internal Affairs for trying to facilitate our Police with transport. For the last five years, we have been demanding for transport for Police and I am, therefore, happy that almost every district now has got transport. What we are pushing for now is accommodation because although our Police personnel and prison warders are smart in their khaki, their accommodation is wanting. Let us respond to that area of need. 

With transport, at least I am pleased because I saw hon. Lukyamuzi being requested by Police to use their vehicle to go back home during the walk-to-work campaign. (Laughter) This was very good – (Member timed out_)

5.50
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I want to make three statements concerning what was said on the Floor of this House. I suggest that if Members come across information on people handling firearms, they should not wait to come back to the House to raise it. They should go to Police straight away because it could be dangerous to anybody out there. So, hon. Members, whenever you see anybody mishandling guns or behaving suspiciously, report to Police. So, I ask my colleague, who saw Sudanese using guns to mistreat some of our girls, to go to Police even today, and not tomorrow. (Laughter)  

Secondly, I would like to appeal to colleagues, if they very strongly have the urge to make damaging statements, then they should be able to substantiate what they say. If they say I am corrupt, they should prove it. But to make bottomless statements without even caring – this is a general debate, but there is no immunity. If you accuse me and damage my name, you should be ready to substantiate. 

Finally, I would like to remind colleagues on the lack of provision of services that they should be aware that we now have 119 districts, which we need to provide with services. Surely, if you bear twins twice or thrice, and somebody else bears only one child each time, the demand by the one with one is less than the one with twins. (Laughter)  So, I request you, colleagues, to give chance to Government to –(Ms Alaso rose_)- I have finished. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. I congratulate you once again for persevering with us today and I thank you for your patience. We have managed to cover some grounds today. Let us start early tomorrow so that we can cover as many Members as possible. So, this House is adjourned to tomorrow 10.00 O’clock. Please, keep time so that we can move quickly.  Thank you. 

(The House rose at 5.53 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 15 July 2011 at 10.00 a.m.)
