Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 25 July 2019

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and I again apologise for the late start. We had many meetings this morning, on many issues. However, I hope that we shall be able to catch up.

Secondly, we are amending the Order Paper to allow the Attorney-General to present a number of Bills for our attention.

Now, there are a few matters of national concern.

2.57
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I raised an issue here about a subcounty called Lolwe. It is two hours on water from the main land with almost eight primary schools but without secondary schools.

I have written letters to the minister several times from 2016. The parents tell me that their children complete primary seven after which, they are forced to get married and others go fishing. It is my humble appeal that the Ministry of Education and Sports considers giving Lolwe a secondary school so that these pupils can go to school.

They cannot travel on a boat up to the main land, where they do not have accommodation. That is my prayer.

THE SPEAKER: The issue of the services to the islands is a very serious one. We would like the Minister of Education and Sports to explain to us what plans they have to establish a secondary school in Lolwe islands to support these young Ugandans. Come back to us in a fortnight’s time with an answer.

I think there is an answer coming on the issues regarding the cadets who have not yet been paid.

2.59
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, KIlak County South, Amuru): Madam Speaker, it is not about the payment. Three years ago, the Government recruited 1,100 Cadet Assistant Inspectors of Police. As a result, on 19 June 2019, Government confirmed only 800 of them to full Assistant Inspectors of Police.

Therefore, the concern is that 300 of them were left out and are still Cadet Assistant Inspectors of Police till now; they are not yet confirmed. Therefore, the prayer is that Government should clarify why they confirmed only 800 Cadet Assistant Inspectors of Police out of the 1,100.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is required to come back and explain to us why cadets are recruited at the same time and apart of them are confirmed while others are still police cadets. Come back to us on Tuesday on the 6th of August 2019.

3.00
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, a month ago, a woman from my constituency came to my office. She is in the third line of antiretroviral (ARVs). She tried to look for the medication in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital but it was not there. She could not find it in St Mary’s Hospital Lacor and Gulu Independent Hospital for a full month.

When I tried my best to look for the medication, Adjumani and Lira districts did not have it. I approached a doctor who was in Mulago National Referral Hospital and the medication is not there.

Therefore, when I went to National Medical Stores and Joint Medical Stores, after calling almost 12 different partners, they got the medicine in one place. When I visited the place in Lumumba Avenue, one of the medicines called Infraclavicular cost Shs 672,000 while Novara cost about Shs 63,000. That means a total of Shs 735,000.

This woman approached me -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I suppose you want to ask a question. What do you want the Government to do? 

MR AKOL: The question is, why should Government leave Ugandans to die when they are on line no.3 of ARVs?

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Health come and update this House on the absence for line three ARVs in northern Uganda? This is what the honourable member is complaining about. We give you Tuesday, 30 July, 2019.  Thank you.

3.02
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of national concern I would like to raise is a report from the Daily Monitor and the New Vision, which is very disturbing information, about what is happening on the ground. They said that the Napak tragedy list has 450 homeless and the New Vision reports “300 people from Katakwi have been displaced, homes have been burnt, cows have been stolen and homes have been looted.”

When I contacted the division commander about this, he said that it is all lies or false. The Napak Resident District Commissioner also collaborated the same information. They went to the ground in a helicopter to find out about this allegation.

My prayers is that the Minister of Internal Affairs moves along with the leaders of Katakwi and those of Napak to the ground so that we find out about this 450 or the 300 displaced people reported in the New Vision. We should also find out how many homes have been burnt and how many people they are talking about - if it is not false. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is for the Minister of Internal Affairs. You have heard that the Karamojong are being falsely accused. You should come and report to us next Tuesday 30 July 2019 about their compliant.

3.04
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning the compensation of our people who were affected by the road construction project that was on Acholibur-Gulu-Olwiyo road.

We learnt that Shs 60 billion that was meant to pay some of the residents along the Acholibur-Olwiyo road was given to a Chinese contractor instead of compensating the residents that were affected by this road project. I find this very unfair to our people since they have been patient. As we know, this road construction was completed two years ago.

Secondly, names on the tags on the signposts on these roads have been changed. For example, Jupa has been changed to Corner Ranch and Nyoo to Kinyoo. I request that if possible, we change the names back to the original ones we had before.

Lastly, I would like to find out about the loan we passed for the construction of Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholi-Gulu Road. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, to the Ministry of Works and Transport, if the allegation by hon. Achiro is true, it is very unfortunate. 

In the first session of this Parliament, our Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) had an occasion to intervene in an issue where money for Project Affected Persons (PAP) was given to contractors who placed it on fixed deposit accounts and they were earning interest. It took the committee to order Government to get that money back. Is this still the practice?
We would like to know from the Ministry of Works and Transport if they are still handing over money for the PAP to the contractors; this is wrong.

Therefore, the ministry should come back to us next Thursday with the answer together with that on the change of names of the roads that hon. Achiro has mentioned.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will talk about the loan. Please, update us on the process in regard to that Rwekunye-Apac Road.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of procedure I would like to raise is in respect of the directive you gave to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and explain the matter that I had raised concerning allocation of funds that had been budgeted for a health centre called Kahondo but now has been taken to Buramba Health Centre.

I have got today’s New Vision where there is an advert by the Ministry of Health for construction of a health centre at Buramba, contrary to what Parliament passed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that matter about changing the allocation from one health centre to another in Kabale District was raised when you were here.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Health is preparing a statement to this House about the health centres and projects that are going to be financed and when they will commence. 

You also directed that we should work with the Ministry of Education and Sports to bring the schedule for the secondary schools.

Therefore, we are asking for more time so that we can present a statement to the House, maybe on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it was not just about “when?”  It was the fact that we appropriated money for a particular health centre and the appropriation was taken to another health centre; that was the complaint.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as you recall, we said that it is not possible that an accounting officer can unilaterally do that. You directed that we should bring a comprehensive statement because many Members were saying that there had been an interchange of these projects. 

I commit that working with the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education and Sports, we shall come on Tuesday to state clearly the health centres, which are being funded in this financial year, as approved under the project and those that would be funded in subsequent years.

THE SPEAKER: When will you bring that information? The Ministry of Health is advertising and yet, there are issues about which health centres were approved and which one is appropriated for.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Madam Speaker, the response to the honourable member’s question will come on Tuesday. For the rest of the health facilities, we shall provide that information next Thursday.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, in that respect, I beg you to issue an order to stop the ministry from proceeding with the procurement process until this House is satisfied that what is being done is in accordance with the law.

THE SPEAKER: Does the advertisement have a timeline?

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, it does. The deadline is 29 July 2019, which is next Monday, yet this House sits on Tuesdays. I beg that you give an order to stop the procurement until this House receives a comprehensive answer and response that is satisfactory. (Applause)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, for that particular health centre he is talking about – there are actually two health centres in Kabale, one is in hon. Niwagaba’s constituency and the other in mine. The two health centres are different and there is no way this House can approve money for a particular item and an accounting officer changes it; it is not possible. 

The Ministry of Health technical people are here - you can give us maybe 30 minutes or an hour to get that information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we shall give you time until a half past four.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

LAYING OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE 3RD UGANDA CANADIAN BUSINESS EXPO AND CONVENTION

3.13
MR LAWRENCE BATEGEKA (NRM, Hoima Municipality, Hoima): Madam Speaker, before I lay on Table the report of the delegation of Parliament to Toronto-Canada to attend the 3rd Uganda Canadian Business Expo and Convention held between 29 June 2019 and 02 July 2019, allow me to make some few remarks.

First, on behalf of the delegation, I would like to thank you for leading the delegation to Canada and addressing Ugandans living in Canada and advancing for their plight; you asked them to be united without political divide.
Secondly, the delegation urges foreign embassies to be more helpful to Ugandans in Canada to acquire dual-citizenship so that they are able to enjoy privileges in both Canada and Uganda.

The delegation urges the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to help Ugandans living abroad to understand their country better and promote the spirit of patriotism. This was after realising that sometimes Ugandans living in the Diaspora do not have the correct understanding of issues here.

Madam Speaker, the delegation urges the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry Gender, Labour and Social on the matter of externalisation of labour to consider addressing immigration challenges to Canada so that Canada becomes one of the countries where our young people can go for labour opportunities. Therefore, we need formal ways of engaging Canada in this respect.

The delegation urges Ugandans living in Canada to embrace opportunities in tourism especially in investing in hotels and restaurants around gazetted areas like religious tourism sites, for example, Namugongo. 

Madam Speaker, as you may recall, these are some of the points you raised in your communication during that Expo. I wish to inform the House that while we were on that tour, the delegation joined the High Commissioner at the Uganda High Commission in Canada, Her Excellency Joy Ruth Acheng in Ottawa, at the celebration of the Canada Day. The other details are contained in the report, which I beg to lay. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Vice Chairperson of Committee on National Economy. Just for the record, honourable members, skilled people are welcome in Canada. Their population is just over 65 million. Therefore, they are happy to get skilled young people from all over the world. Therefore, I would ask our Government to take an interest in that and support our children to go officially and work on good terms in Canada.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CURRENT STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION OF INTERNATIONAL SPECIALISED HOSPITAL OF UGANDA IN LUBOWA

3.18
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda (GOU) approved the construction of the International Specialised Hospital in Lubowa pursuant to a Project Works Investment Agreement (PWIA) signed in October 2015. 

Subsequently GOU signed with the contractor (Finasi/Roko Special Purpose Vehicle Ltd) a Project Services Agreement in December 2015 for the construction, operation and maintenance of the hospital for a period of eight years and a direct agreement in December 2018 with the lenders and contractor.

Madam Speaker, the objective of the Project is two-fold:

1. 	To reduce the morbidity and mortality attributable to Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) and;
2. 	To reduce resource haemorrhage attributable to medical tourism.

To achieve the said objectives, the Government through the PWIA has embarked on the design, financing, construction, equipping and operation of the International Specialised Hospital of Lubowa, which is planned in two phases as follows:

    i.  Phase one comprising a 264-bed specialised healthcare facility with a built area of; 72,000 square metres including a health workers’ complex, 80-room hostel, specialised training school, sports facility and helipad among other state-of-the-art facilities;
    ii. Phase two (to be implemented later) expanding phase 1 into a medical city of up to 500 beds total capacity.

Madam Speaker, it is anticipated that the civil works will take a duration of twenty four months following the issuance of the commencement order, which was handed over to the contractor on 10 June 2019.

Progress to-date

Madam Speaker, it is important to note that the GOU represented by the Ministry of Health has thus far discharged all its contractual obligations stipulated in the PWIA.

Following the approval by Parliament to issue promissory notes for completed Milestones, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issued the first Promissory Notes and the project has since been declared effective after achieving all the conditions precedent in accordance with the direct agreement and note purchase agreement.

Madam Speaker, after fulfilling the aforementioned conditions precedent under the PWIA and Direct Agreement, the Ministry of Health handed over the site to the contractor to commence civil works on 10 June 2019.

It is imperative to inform the House at this stage that despite the Government having honoured its contractual obligations, it has come to our attention that there exists a legal dispute filed in the High Court (Miscellaneous Application No. 371 of 2019) between the Shareholders of the contractor- M/s Finasi Ltd and M/s Roko Construction Ltd. 

Whereas I am careful to comment about this matter, as it is sub-judice, the High Court has issued an injunction pending the determination of the suit to the effect that the status quo should be maintained and that the applicant- M/s Roko Ltd should not be evicted from the site.

It appears that the crux of the dispute emanates from the disagreement between the parties regarding the proposed admission of a Chinese sub-contractor-M/s Power China Guizhou Engineering Co. Ltd, to undertake civil works by the Contractor - Finasi/Roko Special Purpose Vehicle Ltd, which has been deemed oppressive by the applicant.  

Madam Speaker, whereas the Ministry of Health has no objection to the approval of the proposed sub-contractor as requested by the Special Purpose Vehicle (subject to proof of technical and financial capacity), we have reserved our approval as we await the opinion of the learned Attorney General as to whether any such approval would not be construed as contempt of court.

By the time I submitted my statement, there are certain events that had not taken place. I now kindly request that I give a chronology of events in this area.

On 7 June 2019,- this is attached as D-5 in the annexes that I provided, the Permanent Secretary wrote to the Solicitor-General requesting for his legal opinion on admitting a third party contractor to the International Specialised Hospital of Lubowa Project as per the project work and investment agreement following a letter she received on the 24 June requesting her to approve this new contractor - PowerChina Guizhou Engineering Co. Ltd. 

On 26 June 2019, she received a response from the learned Deputy Attorney-General, in which he said that he had made reference to the Companies Act of Uganda, 2012, the projects works investment agreement and concluded that the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) has a right to subcontract any work it has contracted under the projects works investment agreement. This letter is attached as Annex(D) (vi). 

Madam Speaker, still in that regard, the Permanent Secretary wrote to the Solicitor-General for his opinion when M/s Roko Ltd, the applicant filed a case in court and got an injunction to inquire from the learned Attorney-General whether this would not be construed to mean contempt of court. This was on the 3 July 2019 and it is attached as D(vii).

On 18 July 2019, attached as D (viii), the learned Attorney-General responded to the Permanent Secretary’s letter, in which he directed her to go ahead and approve the subcontracting saying it is not in contempt of court. 

On 19 July 2019, attached as D (ix), the SPV wrote to the Permanent Secretary questioning why she had delayed to approve the new third party contractor, contrary to the requirements under Clause 10.2.2 of the projects works investment agreement.

Subsequently, the Permanent Secretary responded to the letter stating that she still needed to inquire from the learned Attorney-General on a number of issues. However, the letter from the SPV stated that her delay to approve meant that she had accepted and they went ahead to possess the site and are currently on site, continuing with the work.

The Permanent Secretary has since again written to them today requesting for a number of documents - the consent from the SPV shareholders to the approval of the third party. This is attached as D (xi) and I will read what she has requested: 

    i. To clarify to the value and scope of work representing the percentage of work to be awarded to the proposed contractor; 
    ii. Where possible a due diligence report on the contractor and if not, for them to propose the best way the Ministry of Health can satisfy itself as to the suitability of the proposed contractor; 
    iii. A copy of the contract awarded to the proposed contractor in respect to the project, which they had alluded to in their letter; 
    iv. Where possible, for them to provide a filed resolution with the Registrar of Companies admitting the proposed contractor as the subcontractor for the International Specialised Hospital; and
    v. To clarify as to whether the proposed subcontractor possesses experience in carrying out works of a similar nature and the value in the field of the hospital construction, where possible, to provide evidence. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, to date, the Ministry of Health has not approved the third party; PowerChina Guizhou Engineering Company Ltd. There was a hearing in court, as per yesterday. I am not privy to what court decided but as far as I know, there is another hearing set for 15 August. 

In the meantime, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health has held one initial project meeting with the contractor, which was on 21 June 2019, in which the contractor presented several proposals for approval of the Chinese subcontractor as well as approval of phased designs and project staff, among others. These proposals are undergoing scrutiny by my ministry.

Despite the legal issues, the Ministry of Health is fully committed to ensuring that the contractor delivers the project on time as the Government expects that the SPV remains fully responsible to deliver the International Specialised Hospital of Uganda, in accordance with the terms of the projects works investment agreement and the modifications therein.

This is to further assure the House that there exists contractual safeguards and other project controls that will ensure that the interests of Government are safeguarded and that the taxpayer shall not suffer loss in case of any eventuality. 

All guarantees of payment to the contractor are conditional upon satisfactory completion of work and approval of milestone certificates by the Ministry of Health. 

Needless to say is the fact that there are contractual remedies, which may be invoked, in the event of default, such as recourse to arbitration, indemnification, and termination, among others.

The Ministry of Health has also constituted an experienced project management team that will supervise the contractor to ensure that there is value for money. A new owner's engineer has been designated in the place of Eng. Francis Wakabi, whose fixed-term contract of six months expired in June 2019, to ensure that there is no supervision lacuna. I have attached a detailed status update on the project milestones and I will go through it.

The first was a notification to Owners Engineer of expiration of contract, which I attached as Annex A. The relevance is that the service contract dated 10 December 2018 between the Ministry of Health and the Owner’s Engineer, Eng. Francis Wakabi, had to come to an end. We wrote to him on 2 July 2019. 

The comments are: this was a fixed-term contract of six months without an option of renewal and it was in keeping up with a presidential directive and Parliament resolution.

The second was the initial Project meeting between the contractor and the Ministry of Health and attached as Annex B.

Our comments here are that the contractor submitted a request for approval of Chinese sub-contractor; that I have alluded to and proposals of phased designs and project staff, which is still undergoing scrutiny. 

Still under two, there is the handover of the site. However, as you recall, I mentioned that during the handover, we noted a dispute. Despite the dispute, we handed over the site. Thereafter, there was a meeting held with the Permanent Secretary/ Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to try and settle the dispute which did not work.

The third was the issuance of milestone of certificate of completion No.1 in the sum of $86,370,954 and corresponding promissory notes issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 
Our comment here is that upon request of the contractor, he asked us to reduce the amount. We have written to the contractor’s bank to reduce the value of the advance payment guarantee from $ 49,980,000 to $ to 43,200,414. This is attached as Annex D. 

Closing date to trigger the sale of promissory notes. Madam Speaker, I cannot respond to that. The response shall be given by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is responsible for handling the promissory notes.

Notice of sale-funding. Our comment is that the seller delivered the first notice of sale on 17 April 2019. Due to delays in obtaining Bank of Uganda’s acknowledgment of receipt of payment instructions from the ministry, a fresh notice of sale was issued on 30 April 2019.

Endorsement and sale of promissory notes. Again, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will respond to this issue. 

Challenges

Madam Speaker, whereas this project is critically important to the country, since its inception, it has been fraught with a number of challenges. As I already mentioned:

    1. The legal issues, which if not expeditiously disposed of are likely to affect the progress of works;
    2. Already, it appears that the delay to sort out the shareholder dispute amicably has stalled the civil works on site although the third party sub-contractor is on the site as of today. We are hopeful that the parties will reach a negotiated settlement and continue the works in earnest. 

In addition, there exist a few additional challenges, namely:  1. Appointment of the Owners Engineer and proposed supervision team that has not yet been regularised due to lack of funding from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. At this point, I would like to bring to the attention of this august House that when the contract of the Owners Engineer expired, he was informed accordingly and the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury went ahead to appoint a team of engineers to supervise his contract. However, the Owners Engineer has since written an objection to the PS/ST, saying he is not leaving work but will continue with the contract. He further said that his contract has just begun and he has six months to go.   

    3. Need for clarity from contractor with regards to submission of key project documentations. Madam Speaker, to date, we are not in possession of key project documentations such as the training schedule for local health workers in Bergamo, Italy, the scope and value of works proposed for the sub-contractor, nomination of persons with powers of attorney and revised drawings, among others.

Despite the identified challenges, I would like to assure this august House that the Ministry of Health is committed to following up on this contract and keep you informed. 

Regarding the Draft Human Organ Transplant Bill, this was concluded by the First Parliamentary Counsel and handed over to the Ministry of Health. We are currently working on the regulatory impact assessment for onward transmission to Cabinet. We are hopeful that the enactment of this Bill will be fast-tracked and passed into law before project completion.

My ministry has submitted a list of requirements to the contractor to ensure that the project supervision team is apprised of all the relevant project documentation. However, I would like to inform this august House that upon appointment of the project supervision team, the SPV objected and indeed, indicated that they are only willing to work with the engineering workers.
 
We have gone ahead and instructed the contractor to provide us with a training schedule for the health workers abroad to be sufficiently skilled in the specialist fields that will be offered at the hospital as a measure of building the local content.

Again, I have attached a chronology of the challenges that I have gone through and mitigation measures. Since I have gone through them, I request that I do not repeat them.

Next steps 

Following the legal disputes, we have done a number of things:

    1. I wrote to His Excellency, the President and informed him about what is happening with the project and the need for him to come in and help us resolve the disputes. It is attached as Annex D(i). As I mentioned, the PS/ST has been corresponding with the Attorney-General. He has also written to the special purpose vehicle to provide a number of documents regarding M/s PowerChina Guizhou Engineering Co. Ltd. A project management team is already in place to supervise the project pending funding from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

    2. The Ministry of Health shall insist that the contractor carries on the works according to schedule without delay as the primary responsibility to execute the project is vested in the SPV and the legal dispute between shareholders notwithstanding. 

    3. The ministry will not hesitate to invoke contractual penalties provided in the project works investment agreement in the event of default by the contractor in order to protect the interests of Government.

Madam Speaker, such is the progress of works for the International Specialised Hospital of Uganda in Lubowa, which I am pleased to present to this august House.
For God and My Country.    

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the update. Since the matter is in court, I do not know whether we should debate and how we shall debate it.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You will appreciate that this particular supplementary request for the promissory notes to construct this International Specialised Hospital in Lubowa was approved by this House after being stampeded by Government, even when they were evidently glaring flaws.

I am rising on a point of procedure because in that report, which was debated here briefly, the learned Attorney-General, had given two contradicting legal opinions. Right now, in this statement that has been submitted to the House, he is the same Attorney-General being depended upon for legal opinion. 

Is it procedurally right to continue depending on the same personality who caused Government huge contingent liabilities because of the contradicting legal opinions? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, under Article 119, the sitting Attorney-General, is the Attorney-General. We cannot get another Attorney-General to give a binding opinion to the House. 

Honourable members, on a serious note, I would like to propose that the minister gives us fortnightly updates on this issue because if we start debating, I do not know how far we shall go and what decision we shall make and whether we shall not go into the merits of the case, which is in court - no, I am the most senior counsel here. (Laughter) 

Therefore, can I propose that the minister gives us fortnightly updates on this issue for the next one month? After that, if there is no progress, we may have to start talking about it. You have one month and we expect two reports.

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER ON PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECT BY M/S KALANGALA INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES LTD (KIS)

3.46
ENG. LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Madam Speaker, I am here to present this statement under Rule 53(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It is a statement on a Public-Private Partnership Project by Kalangala Infrastructure Services Ltd (KIS).

Several issues surrounding the implementation of the projects by KIS have been raised in the past on the Floor of Parliament but no responses have been made by the relevant ministry. The last time I heard about this issue was in February 2017 when the Woman MP for Kalangala was complaining about the reduced ferry routes between Bukakata and Luku. 

Prior to this, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure of the Ninth Parliament had handled similar matters of non-compliance by KIS, with no conclusive recommendations. I picked interest in the matter to the extent of closely scrutinising the several project agreements and I have made some observations and prayers. 

Colleagues, recall that on 16 January 2009, the Government of the Republic of Uganda represented by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other Government agencies, signed agreements for the implementation of KIS project, purposely to design, develop, finance, construct, operate and maintain infrastructure services to and on Bugala Island on Lake Victoria - the biggest island out of the 84 islands - for the benefit of its population, institutions and businesses. 

KIS is a subsidiary company; SPV Company, which is wholly owned by Infra Co Ltd and it was granted the development rights related to the project on an exclusive basis for an initial period of eight years. The main components of the project included: 

    i) Delivering ferry services between Bukakata and Luku; 
    ii) Designing and constructing 66-kilometer main island road that is Luku-Kalangala-Mulabana;
    iii) Developing a water supply system on the island; and
    iv) Setting up an electricity plant. 

Some of the agreements signed to this effect were: 

    i) KIS implementation agreement with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on behalf of the Government, as amended in 2012;
    ii) The right-to-use agreement between UNRA and KIS Ltd; and 
    iii) The Ferry License Agreement with the Ministry of Works and Transport, on behalf of the Government of Uganda. 

General performance of the project 

On this note, I congratulate the people of Kalangala for the services received so far and KIS for implementing the project and Government of Uganda for the partnership. The ferry is now operational, between Bukakata and Luku, although the number of routes has been reduced overtime. 

The main island road - Luku-Kalangala-Mulabana – which is 66km was constructed and is in a motorable and fair condition. The water supply system was built although it mainly covers areas of the town council and the electricity plant set up provides power to most villages apart from the seven where there are oil palm compensation issues. 

Observations

Unclear project life 

There seems to be a deliberate mix-up of the project components duration terms. While the ferry service agreement indicated eight years of initial operation, the final date of settling the support payment in relation to the main island road provides for 15 years. 

I further observed that the eight-year concession for the ferry services was extended to 13 years without any due process of justification and without any consideration of the heavy annual investment that Government is incurring. 

This was done way before the expiry of the initial eight-year period in an amendment. This essentially means KIS is here to stay up to 2025 or beyond. There is urgent need to harmonise the different concession durations to provide for better monitoring and evaluation of the project. 

Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that all this happened at the time when the PPP (2010) Guiding Policy was not clear about the role of Parliament and other stakeholders. Now that there is a window in the recently enacted PPP Act, assented to by the President on 5 August 2015, Parliament can swing into action, under section 30(1)&(3) of the PPP Act, to scrutinise the process and the report of the Auditor-General on the PPP implemented by KIS for purposes of ensuring that they are affordable, provide value for money and commitments arising therefrom are within the debt management limits and, above all, are consistent with national budget and policy priorities.

Ambiguous implementation arrangement 

A closer scrutiny of the project documents reveals that the project referred to, structured/arranged as a PPP project, is actually not one of a kind. I observed that all the major infrastructure such as the ferries and vessels, the water system and electricity remain assets of the investor at the end of the different concessions. 

Madam Speaker, despite the heavy investment by Government, the vessels shall not revert to Government after 2025 unless the current agreements are renegotiated. Government can only acquire the same infrastructure from KIS at willing-buyer-willing-seller market price. 

Financing of the road component (66km murram road) 

With reference to the agreements, I noted that some advance payments were supposed to be made and were indeed effected at the project start by Government of Uganda for these ferry services and before road construction. On the other hand, the implementation agreement also comes out clearly on the obligations of KIS to pre-finance the road component. 

The dilemma is: did KIS really pre-finance the road project using its own borrowed funds or used the advanced GOU funds for the project. 

Honourable colleagues, I think it is imperative that the minister clarifies on whether the advance payments made by GOU were not expended on the road project in form of pre-financing.

Otherwise, anyone would imagine a terrible situation of financial loss where the Government of Uganda continues to pay KIS interest and the return on equity for its own funds.

To allay the fears of this august House, the Minister for Works and Transport should clarify on this issue with impeccable evidence.

Cost of 66km road verses upgrading to tarmac:

Aware that the main island road of Luku- Kalangala has been planned for upgrading to tarmac or bitumen standards, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) should clarify on its mandate, the road project costs and cost by the 15th year for the sole purpose of establishing value for money. 

UNRA should also clarify on the upgrade of the project, when it is expected and for how long the Government will continue paying for the murram road long after the road has been tarmacked; the maintenance obligations of the same thereafter.

The oversight committee or monitoring and Evaluation:

The oversight committee comprising of officials from Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Energy, Transport Licencing Board, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the company has never been established as per the implementation agreement. 

This was supposed to be done within the first 60 days following project start; it is now over l0 years of implementation. 

It is, therefore, not clear which Government department sets the targets, supervises and evaluates the performance of KIS.

I can see a potential danger in fragmenting obligations to the different agencies, which are not necessarily involved in following up the service provider. It creates more risks for the Government while allowing the provider to take advantage and even receive payments where there are non-compliances.

Below is a highlight of some unfavourable terms or conditions in the agreement; I noted that the Right to Use Agreement signed between KIS Ltd and UNRA is neither in the best interest of UNRA nor Government of Uganda.

UNRA is supposed to make advance payments to KIS for annual ferry services, for a period of over 13 years. 

Payments made on a quarterly basis to KIS are always in billions of shillings and are made in advance without any advance payment guarantees. The Minister of Works and Transport should clarify on this issue. 

Exclusive rights were granted to KIS to operate and manage ferry services. During the term of the said agreement, no other person or entity of Government would be permitted to operate a ferry service in relation to carriage of any passengers, any cargo or vehicle between Bukakata and Luku. 

In the event that another ferry is put on the same route, Government would still have to pay KIS the annual charges. 

Termination

The agreement further reveals that termination of the said partnership is dependent only upon the actions of KIS the company and no room was provided for the Government of Uganda to terminate the same on notice to the company for non-compliance. 

The Oversight committee: I noted with concern that the mandate accorded to the oversight committee is not comprehensive enough for proper oversight. 

I further noted with dismay that sub clause 4.2 (b) takes away even the limited powers of this oversight committee and thus needs revisiting.

If I may read verbatim, "The oversight committee shall not have any authority to modify the terms or conditions of this agreement in writing, orally, by conduct or otherwise"; we found this disturbing.

Prayers

1. 	I call for a renegotiation of the concession agreements between KIS and the GOU to address all the unfavourable terms and conditions, especially that concern the ownership of major infrastructure at the expiry of the agreement. 

	The procured ferries should revert to the GOU at the end of the concession period.

2. 	The Auditor-General should expeditiously undertake a value for money audit on the project to establish the actual cost of the road component, maintenance cost, other attendant costs, procedures of the advance payments and the authenticity of advance payment guarantees if any.

3. 	KIS should be audited on an annual basis by the Auditor-General as a requirement for all PPPs under the Public Private Partnership Act, Section 30 (1) & (3).

4. 	A harmonisation of the different concession agreements should be done to ensure effective supervision and monitoring is done. 

	A time schedule for performance of the project in the remaining project life is paramount and should be availed together with the applicable penalties in the event of noncompliance as required by the law.

5. 	The minister should provide assurance to the people of Bugala Island in Kalangala that electricity will be extended to all the remaining villages and that it is affordable. 
	
	The minister should ensure that clean water is extended to areas beyond the town council for a healthier population on Bugala Island.

6. 	The Minister of Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development should assure Parliament beyond reasonable doubt that the PPP Unit; under his direct supervision has the required technical, financial and legal expertise to develop, negotiate, structure, supervise, re-negotiate and re-structure a PPP where necessary to manage public expectations and perceptions on PPPs.
I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nakate for the comprehensive research on this agreement. A lot of issues have been raised on the structure, content, the conditionality of the agreement, the roles of the ministries and others.

I would like to ask the Minister of Works and Transport to come and respond because many issues have been raised on this issue especially the terms of the contract.

You will respond to all of them and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will respond to those which relate to him under KIS. 

There are certain things the ministry ought to have done. On the issue of the Auditor-General, I will write to the Auditor-General to conduct the necessary audits because that is our work and then, we shall debate.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe you have forgotten - you forwarded to me a dossier of a whistle blower and I wish I had known that hon. Nakate was bringing this matter regarding how money has been consumed by corrupt officials.

It is a very big scandal to this country, Madam Speaker. I know you have given guidance - when I looked at that document, it leaves a lot to be desired.

I was trying to work with hon. Ngabirano because he also has some information on the resolution that this House would have needed a select committee to deal with this matter. 

However, now that – Madam Speaker, I do not know whether this will be considered as usurping your powers because you had already given a directive but I would suggest that the minister first responds and then, we bring that report and take a decision, or I could go ahead with hon. Nakate, if you give us time, to prepare together. She was my chairperson then and we got a document from UNRA where investigations were done. They had written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to say this must be terminated but nothing happened.

His Excellency, the President also directed for a special audit three years ago. Still, nothing has been brought to the attention of the minister. 

There is a big scandal in that project. You cannot imagine that this is the only entity where the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gives all the money for the whole year at the beginning of a financial year. When you look at the interest rate at which the money is given to them, it is terrible.
That is the information I wanted to give such that it helps you to give guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is true – people keep on writing - I had sent that matter to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to study it and advise me on how to move but they did not. So, in the meantime, hon. Nakate brought the issue in a different way. Anyhow, it is very important for this country that we find out what is really going on under this contract. 

Honourable minister, can we give you one month? 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for the zeal because whenever people bring information, you share it with Members, especially those on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

In my opinion, a month is too much. I would like to kindly request that the responsible ministers and officers answer by Thursday next week. This is an urgent matter because money is going every time. By one month, they will have paid.

THE SPEAKER: The areas of investigations are many. So, I move from one month and come down to two weeks. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should take note.

MR MUKITALE: I seek clarification, Madam Speaker. The question of PPP is a new trend. It has contingency liabilities. The Ministry of Health was just about to tell us what is happening in that hospital. That is another PPP. 

In the circumstances, I would like to request, in addition to your good guidance, that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Attorney-General should, in the same way inform Parliament about the status of the current PPPs in the country. 

Our budget right now has a commitment of 25 per cent of debt servicing. Contingency liabilities are outside that. Even the Production Sharing Agreements (PSAs), which we are going for, are a hybrid. 

So, this Parliament needs to be brought on board, in terms of the commitment and how some of them are being renegotiated without Parliamentary involvement so that we know how much commitment this country is getting into. I pray that they report on that.

 THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you should update us on the status of the current PPPs. I do not know how many they are. How many are they?

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we would be willing to share with the House the current status of the PPPs that we have engaged in. Though they are few, the prospects are there. So, if you give us two weeks, we can do that.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We will give you a fortnight to give us that update.  Thank you very much. Let me invite the Attorney-General.

4.09
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to lay before the House, the Electoral Laws (Reform) Bills as promised. I thank you for indulging us to amend the Order Paper this afternoon. 

I beg to move that the five Bills be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Attorney-General, present them one by one.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

MR BYARUHANGA: I beg to move that the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019, Bill No. 17 of 2019, which is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications, be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.10
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): I beg to move that the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019, Bill No. 18 of 2019, which is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications, be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Bill seconded? (Members rose) It is seconded. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.11
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2019,” Bill No. 19 of 2019, which is also accompanied by a certificate of financial implications, be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the Bill seconded? (Members rose) Yes, it is seconded. Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.12
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2019,” Bill No. 20, which is also accompanied by a certificate of financial implications, be read for the first time. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the Bill seconded? (Members rose) It is seconded. I send this Bill to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.13
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment No. 21) Bill, 2019,” also accompanied by a certificate of financial implications, be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Bill seconded? (Members rose) It has been seconded. Honourable members, I send that Bill as well to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR MUKITALE: Point of procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure at the first reading?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You may have noticed that the side on which I sit was not amused for one obvious reason. Way back in January 2019, I approached your office to inform you that as the Opposition, we had various amendments, beginning with the Constitution. 

Now that the Attorney-General has brought Bills to amend the various electoral laws, I seek your indulgence that you allow us to present our motion on Tuesday to seek leave to bring a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Constitution so that when the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is looking at these particular Bills, they also look at our proposed constitutional amendments to harmonise and come up finally with the laws that will cater for all of us. 

Otherwise, if we move in different directions, where upon the Attorney-General brings his Bills and subsequently, if we succeed in getting leave to amend the Constitution, we will be again coming with consequential amendments following our proposed amendments to the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, I therefore beg that you give us space on Tuesday to formally present our motion and subsequently we will move in tandem with the Attorney-General.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Clerk is directed to put the matter on the Order Paper for next week.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, in the Ninth Parliament “The hon. Stephen Tashobya’s report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs”, in 2015 presented here the many other amendments, which were required. However, because we were time barred, the business was saved for this Parliament.

In the spirit of national dialogue, Government mentioned the Constitutional Review Commission and named the former Attorney-General as the lead. It is now over a year but we are not getting any progress in terms of what is coming to give us a comprehensive Constitutional Review Commission, which could impact further reforms in the law and Law Reform Commission.

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for using your office and in the spirit of the Ninth Parliament business which we saved; the good work done by the Ninth Parliament that the Attorney-General also informs us on the progress of the Constitutional Review Commission and how we intend to accommodate the saved business of the Ninth Parliament?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to encourage the House to do its own business. You bring your own motion such that we do not wait for them. When they are ready, they will join us. Bring your proposal.

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In one of those Bills, they intend to injure the Independent Members of Parliament. Therefore - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you cannot discuss the contents of the Bill at first reading. I am sure; you can take that concern to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have a delegation from Kagogo village in Bukomansimbi, who are visiting Parliament. They were invited by hon. Nakiwala Kiyingi. They are represented by hon. Ruth Katushabe, hon. Deogratius Kiyingi and hon. Namaganda. You are welcome. They are there, very smart. Welcome from Bukomansimbi. (Applause)

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH ON THE INCREASED MALARIA DEATHS AND INEFFECTIVENESS OF ANTI-MALARIALS IN NWOYA DISTRICT; QUESTION RAISED BY HON. LILLY ADONG.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Madam Speaker, on Tuesday 9 July, 2019, hon. Lilly Adong raised a concern on the increased Malaria death and ineffectiveness of anti-malarial drugs in Nwoya District.

The Ministry of Health acknowledges that there has been an increase in malaria cases in Nwoya District from an average of 1500 cases per week in 2018 to 4,245 per week last month. While we registered eight deaths between January-April 2019, the last eight weeks we have not registered any Malaria death from the health facilities in Nwoya District. 

This is attributed to the action taken to ensure that the district has adequate stock of anti-malarial commodities as well AS strengthened behavioural change communication among communities specifically to seek prompt care upon onset of malaria symptoms.

Madam Speaker, the ministry has put in place a number of interventions that have seen a 50 per cent downward trend in the number of malaria cases from 4,245 to 2,015. The surveillance team has been strengthened to also capture death at community leave for those that do not seek care in the health facility.

The interventions include the following; 

    1. Community outreaches to test and treat malaria cases in the most affected communities.
    2. Community case management, testing and treatment of children under five years.
    3. Provision of long lasting insecticide treated nets to pregnant women in facilities.
    4. Provision of long lasting insecticide treated nets to children less than five years in the facilities.
    5. Training of health workers in malaria rapid diagnostic test. Training and mentorship of health workers in health centre IIIs and IVs on malaria case management.
    6. Provision of emergency malaria commodities. The rapid diagnostic test and intravenous artesunate, provision of fansidar to pregnant women in antenatal to prevent malaria.

Lastly, I would like to retaliate that the ministry’s commitment is towards provision of the highest possible level of health services to all people of Uganda through delivery of promotive, preventive and curative services at all levels. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Adong, do you have a supplementary?

4.21
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Besides that, I would like also to find out- because Artesunate or Coartem are required to be taken with milk. What happens when these drugs are taken without milk given the fact that our areas are predominately almost without cows?

I would like to disagree with the minister that for the last three months or sometimes, there have been no deaths. Children are dying. Could be that the health workers are not moving in the community, we bury these children. We attend the burial ceremonies and we bury these children. You find that symptoms are very similar. May be we should find other ways.

I would like also to appreciate the report that she said that they are doing community testing. I met a team moving around, except that they do not introduce themselves well that they are from the ministry. You find a vehicle just moving around and getting people to test and they give them drugs to anybody and I find it unwell. (Members rose)May be I take information from -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was a specific question and not a debate. - No, it is only the person who asked who has to raise a supplementary question. That is what she reported.

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the point I wanted to raise is that by the time we had indoor residual spraying in the north, there was no malaria. At this time, the malaria has come at a very high rate not only in Nwoya District but also Amuru District.

Madam Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister if they have a programme of bringing back indoor residual spraying; it was very effective.

4.24
MR ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I thank the honourable minister for the work they are doing.

Last Saturday, I attended a burial of a five-year old child. I have now attended five funerals of children less than seven years old. In Lutini village, Awere subcounty, there are no anti-malarial drugs. We have to speak the truth here. 

There are no anti-malarial drugs in health centres, specifically in Pader. The few that have reached head straight to the private health centres. Health officers diagnose and tell the patients to go and buy drugs from those private health centres.

Madam Speaker, we need your indulgence here. You have been here for the people. 

Secondly, I was listening to the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) yesterday - the mosquitoes have also developed resistance to the malaria drugs you are giving out. In Pader, we are losing seven to 10 children who are under 10 years daily.

Therefore, we seek pragmatic solutions. I am even willing to board a vehicle with you to go and check on that health centre; you will find no drugs there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, perhaps you need to pay attention to the supplies in the north - is it countrywide? Honourable minister, I understand your drugs are being sold. They are not working for the people.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, I hear the Members very clearly. However, I would like to state that the country has enough anti-malarial drugs. 

Usually, during the rainy season like this, we are very much aware that there would be an upsurge of malaria and we prepare in advance. However, we have situations where the orders are not projected to cover the new cases that come due to the upsurge. I pledge to follow this up and ensure that we have enough anti-malaria drugs.

Regarding the indoor-residual spraying, this exercise in mid-north was being sponsored by the President’s Malaria Initiative of the United States with funding from DFID. That project went on for five years. They shifted their intervention to eastern Uganda where indoor-residual spraying is still on-going.

Indoor residual spraying is extremely expensive. We have since talked about it and requested for funding but it is still a challenge. 

The Global Fund that provides money to us for anti-malarial drugs and the long-lasting insecticide mosquito nets is reluctant to move into that area of indoor residual spraying. 

However, we have been emphasising community case management of malaria as we work with our partners to start larvae-ciding; killing the larvae of the mosquito in those areas with very high prevalence of malaria.

As soon as we get the larvae-cides in the country before the end of this year, we are going to start larvae-ciding in the mid-north.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ELIJAH OKUPA ON THE APPOINTMENT OF THE BOARD OF UGANDA AIRLINES 

4.28
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Eng. Monica Azuba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the l3th Sitting of the 1st Meeting of the 4th Session of the l0th Parliament of Uganda on Thursday, 18 July 2019, hon. Elijah Okupa raised a concern over the appointment of the Board of Uganda Airlines.

Uganda National Airlines Company was incorporated on 30th January 2018. The Articles and Memorandum of Association for the Uganda National Airline Company established the Company and placed it under the Board of Directors for policy and strategic guidance.

While nominating the seven members for appointment to the Uganda National Airlines Board, I consulted widely with Cabinet ministers vide my letter referenced MIN/PERS/29/1, dated 04 April 2019 and within my ministry, in compliance with the company’s memorandum and articles of association.

Cabinet, under Minute 180 (CT 2019), directed all ministers to submit nominations of persons to be appointed on the Board of Directors of the Uganda National Airlines to the Minister of Works and Transport.

Subsequently, after two meetings, cabinet under Minute 206 (CT 2019) approved the appointment of seven persons as members of the Board of Directors of the Uganda National Airlines Company.

The establishment of Uganda National Airlines Company requires a board with members of long experience in Transport Planning, Business Administration, Financial Management, Legal and Aviation matters. Uganda National Airlines Company will, therefore, benefit greatly from the members appointed due to their long experience in their areas of specialisation.

Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the list of Board members of Uganda Airlines.

These are:

    1. Hon. Godfrey Ahabwe Pereza – Chairperson. He has proven experience from his former roles as chairperson of several parliamentary committees in addition to his high qualification in economics. He is now pursuing a Doctorate of Philosophy. (Interjections)  

	I hear some members asking about where he comes from; he is from the western region. The ministry went through all the requirements of getting members from all over the divide;

    2. Ms Rehema Mutazindwa. She brings to this board a wealth of experience in human capital management. She is a Muslim and comes from Buganda;

    3. Ms Catherine Asinde Poran, an experienced lawyer who has mastered in Commercial Law, has experience in Institutional Banking and is currently Head of Client Coverage. She brings contribution with her great expertise on issues of contract management; she is from the East;

    4. Mr Charles Hamya, a Fellow of ACCA (UK) given a pronounced accounting background with experience in tax auditing and business management at very senior levels; he is from the east as well.

    5. Ms Steven Aziku Zuwa, who has been a member of the national airline taskforce that spearheaded the revival of the Uganda Airlines. He carries a wealth of experience in Aeronautical and Flight Engineering with 19,500 Flight Hours, which makes him the most technical member of the board in matters of Aircraft handling.

    6. Mr Benon Kajuna, as per requirements, a representative from the Ministry of Works and Transport is Director of Transport. He is transport economist, experienced in the development and management of transport infrastructure and services.
 
    7. Mr. Godfrey Semugooma, the Director Financial Management and Acting Assistant Accountant General in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He is representing the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He is experienced in financial management services and has seen the delivery of a number of Government financial systems.  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.  I am also laying at Table their curriculum vitaes (CVs).

4.35
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised this issue last week because when we passed the supplementary budget, we had given conditions and one of which was that the minister lays the members of the board together with their CVs.

I raised this matter last week and I am happy that the minister has brought this issue. However, Madam Speaker, when I look at page 1 of 2 where she gives the qualification and experience, they say it should be in transport planning, business administration, financial management, legal and aviation matters. Those are the things they considered.

However, when I look at the CV of the chairperson, it does not fall in any of these which you have stated here. May be you need to clarify that.

Madam Speaker, of course, the majority of them have Bachelor of Commerce and financial management but we thought the majority should have been in the aviation industry and business management. What we see here is that majority of them are in accounting. Those were the concerns we were raising at the time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is number one and two ex-officio? The ones from the ministries, are they there by virtue of their offices?

MS AZUBA: No, it is number 6 and 7.

THE SPEAKER: Is Benon Kajura from the Ministry of Works and Transport, there by the virtue of his office?

MS AZUBA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: What about Ssemugoma?

MS AZUBA: Yes, from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE SPEAKER: That is what I wanted to know.

4.37
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to raise a concern basing on our Constitution- specifically the national objectives 1 and 3; where we have seen it a pattern that when it is any lucrative appointment in this country, they have vowed that the leadership should come from western Uganda –(Interjections)– These are very serious matters, if you do not want to listen to me raise a point of order. 

Our people are there but no one is there to appoint them. Every day, Umeme, ERA, UCC, URA. Now today again, we have hon. Pereza Ahabwe. With all due respect, he is a very intelligent with a PhD and a former MP here.

However, this is still violating the national objective of the Constitution because most appointments in this country, Madam Speaker, are queued. We are crying foul. Can the minister tell us whether this list can be recalled? We know of people with practical experience in the industry.

Last week, I gave an example of hon. Captain Otekat, with practical experience in the industry. However, now we are picking PhD students who have not even finished their classes and you bring them here-

THE SPEAKER: In Agriculture.

MR ODONGA OTTO: PhD in Agriculture. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am so hurt to the extent that the entire list should be recalled and presented in line with the Constitution to reflect a national character of this country. I beg to move. (Applause)

4.39
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Justice Forum, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, when we were passing the supplementary budget, the other condition, which was placed on Government was to ensure that the revival of Uganda Airlines undertakes the shape of a legislation by this Parliament. Documents that were brought here, a company had been incorporated under the Registrar of Companies and the minister was directed to ensure that whatever process they do, they must bring a Bill to revive Uganda Airlines like it was.

Madam Speaker, the defunct Uganda Airlines had been established under an Act of Parliament. The question you raise, for example, whether somebody is an ex-officio or not arises from the fact that the memorandum and articles were silent on the issues of that nature.

Therefore, the minister was directed to bring a Bill before this House for an Act so that the Airline is revived under an Act of Parliament and not memorandum and articles. This has not been done, Madam Speaker, and yet it was a condition precedent to the passing of the supplementary budget. 

4.40
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, when we received these jets, we were very happy but when you look at the board, no wonder that is why the planes are still at Entebbe sunbathing. (Laughter)

As a senior NRM member, I would like to say that, honourable minister, if you are the one who selected  members especially - you should be knowing areas of target, to put the country to rest, you would not have brought a chairperson from Western Uganda for God’s sake.

Madam Speaker, I know people want to bring –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, hon. Waluswaka is my friend. I would not have loved to put him on order. However, making a statement that the chair of the board should not have come from the west, according to the Constitution or whatever observation he made, makes me wonder why he should think that somebody from the west should not be appointed when there are many other boards where we have chairpersons who are from the east, north and central. For instance, the chairperson of the Board of Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) is from the east and there are many others. 

Is hon. Waluswaka in order to say that hon. Ahabwe because he is from the west, he should not have been appointed as the chairperson of the board and yet, other regions have participated in such positions?

THE SPEAKER: I believe hon. Waluswaka has his reasons. Substantiate why you do not want him to be there.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I said that for national balance and bringing sanity. The Constitution does not say an eastern, northerner or central person cannot be chairperson because over 70 of the chairpersons come from the other side; this is what I meant. 

Nevertheless, even these names that the minister has proposed – I heard a name like Charles Hamya and it sounded as if he comes from Butaleja but you may think such names are for persons from the east when actually that is not the case. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to move that you direct the Clerk to give us those lists with the proposed names and their dates of birth so that we get to know them. I contacted hon. Oboth and asked him if he knew people like Akello – so that we scrutinise. 

Next week, I will be able to know whether Hamya comes - because that name is either from Budaka or somewhere else. 

Honourable minister, for purposes of unity, next time, propose chairperson who is not from the western of this country. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not here when this matter was discussed. What was the purpose of laying those names on Table? What was the view? Was it to inform or take action?  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I was the one who raised the matter – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, were they laying the names on Table for information or action? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, allow me clarify this issue. As referred to in the document, because I was the one who raised the matter after noticing that people were complaining that there is regional imbalance and some of the recommended aviators had had their names missing on the list. 

We asked the minister to clarify this by laying these names on Table but she only managed to list two names and said that she had forgotten the others. That is how she requested to go back and bring the list to see whether there is imbalance or not. 

Madam Speaker, that is the genesis of this matter being brought ON the Floor of this House. It is a very serious matter here because it took us time. Hon. Odonga-Otto re-stated this matter because as the Members looked at the list, they noticed that there was no one from Busoga, Mbale, Teso, Karamoja, Lango and Acholi. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure so that we can put the debate in context. You asked a question that we need to clarify on properly, probably today or when we check the Hansard, but to know when we passed a decision of this list to come to the House. Was it for information or approval? If it is for approval, then the House should consider it and either approve or disapprove it. If it is for information, then, it should be treated as such. 

Wouldn’t it be better, Madam Speaker, to get clarification on this to help us move in a very clear direction? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I will ask the Clerk to give us the records of the Hansard of that day so that we can establish the purpose of laying the names on Table. Let us go to the next item. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT ON THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ANIFA KAWOOYA ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF ROADS IN SEMBABULE DISTRICT

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, before we go to the issue of Sembabule, hon. Asuman Basalirwa raised a very important issue on the appointment – because in future, these problems will come up. You know Uganda Airlines is a very sensitive matter. 

He raised an issue that I think the minister could tip a little bit; are we going to have a substantive law in the process of revamping Uganda Airlines? Or we are going to continue with a memorandum of understanding? 

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence because it is a very important piece of information for Parliament because the substantive law would not even allow these arguments to come up. Madam Speaker, if you could help us on this area; which hon. Asuman Basalirwa raised. 

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, I do not understand the memorandum of understanding that the honourable member is talking about. Uganda Airlines is a public liability company and it is being run as a public company. It was incorporated and now we are going back and I am being questioned on my – Madam Speaker, I would also like to answer another question asked by hon. Okupa about not having aviators on the board. A board is for policy purposes. We will have a CEO who is well versed with aviation. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the House had asked you to bring a Bill for an Act of Parliament to govern the national airlines. Are you going to bring the Bill or not? That is what they wanted to know. Is it going to remain a company? What is the legal framework other than the company?  

MR OBOTH: Thank you Madam Speaker and the Deputy Leader of Government Business, for giving way. I think you have enriched further what hon. Basalirwa raised and what hon. Odonga-Otto tried to expand. However, it is not clear to the minister. 

I do not want the minister to come on the Floor of this House and she portrays what I fear to say. Honourable minister, this should be in your best interest and that of Government that you run incorporation not merely a company. Incorporation can be like National Water and Sewerage Corporation but which also has an Act of Parliament. Do you want such a very important thing, like Uganda Airlines, as just a company?

I would like to offer company law lessons to the honourable minister. (Laughter) I heard her say that it is a public company limited by – I know the difference very well. 

However, the issue here is that it is in your best interest. These things would not be arising. How are these corporations owned by Government run? They run by an Act of Parliament? 

With the crisis we are in, we need this thing to move on. You had to have a legal personality to exist but the House says that is not enough. You need to exist as a Government owned – you know where they had put you as the owner and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. So, this would clearly sort it out. 

I think it would be prudent for you to make a commitment that you are going to process the Bill, bring it here; it would be good – (Interruption) 

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Chairperson, Committee on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The information I am giving arises from the fact that during the debate, there was the issue to do with shareholding, which was a very controversial issue on the Floor. So, who actually owns this company?  In one instance, there were two people and then, there were issues of who owns majority and minority shares. 

Therefore, in its wisdom, the House decided that the only way of addressing that lacuna, by way of legislation, was to have an Act of Parliament to address issues of ownership. That is the information I wanted to give, Madam Speaker. 

MR OBOTH: That is very useful information. I hope the Prime Minister and the Minister of Works and Transport –(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, hon. Oboth. Madam Speaker, I was equally in this House when this matter was being debated. I remember very well the resolutions that were made by this House. We need to be careful when handling this matter because there were two resolutions, which apparently seem to be conflicting. One of them was that Uganda Airlines must be managed or run by Uganda Development Corporation (UDC), which is existing. 

There was also a resolution, which came on the Floor, which did not override the other and both of them were passed. I think it would be better to refer to the Hansard, which was bringing out the issue of coming up with another corporation. How do we handle UDC, which is the investment arm of Government because according to that resolution, it was to be a project under UDC and another corporation parallel at the same time? That is the clarification I would like to seek. 

MR OBOTH: My colleague from Bulamogi is mixing issues. There is no legal deterrence that would stop enactment of a specific law handling Uganda Airlines. When you have apparent business empire like Mukwano Enterprises and UDC, which is the investment arm of Government, it does not mean that Mukwano Enterprises cannot create another company to live on its own. We are saying that Uganda Airlines would be an independent company created by an Act of Parliament; that is the interest of Ugandans who are represented in this House.

Honourable Minister of Works and Transport, I believe that this is in your favour. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us listen to the Prime Minister. 

4.56
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to say what my colleagues may not think is serious. I am warning you in advance. I am a bit concerned about the message we send outside the House. That is why I said my colleagues should not misunderstand me and I am not stopping anybody from raising anything. However, the impact of what you raise may have a divisive – (Interjections) – no, listen. It is very divisive and not good for this country. It does not matter and I am not stopping anybody. I am saying we should –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order on my learned friend, Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali. He went to law school and he is a practicing lawyer. He knows the law that governs sectarianism; where practicing sectarianism in itself, is sectarianism and not only commenting on those practising it. Is the hon. Prime Minister in order to make a submission as if he is not a lawyer and as if he is not the one who bought Uganda Airlines those days?

THE SPEAKER: I think the Prime Minister was making his preamble and I believe he was coming to other things. Please, conclude. (Laughter)  

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. I stood here not to be judged as a lawyer or not. I am a lawyer and it does not matter whether I fall in the six or zero class; at least, I am a lawyer and you are not. What class are you? (Laughter) 
               
THE SPEAKER: Members, order.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I am not worried whether colleagues judge me as a lawyer or not. However, I am just expressing my fear that whatever we discuss as august House should send unifying message much as we talk about sectarianism. The purpose of sectarianism – the law is there for you to use it. If you know that sectarianism is taking place, apply it because if you do not apply it and you come and practice it here, you are dividing people the more. 

In fact, you are anti-sectarianism. You do not want to practice sectarianism, yet there is law. Why do you make noise here, yet you have proof? Go and take people to court and nobody will stop you. That is my concern and I am glad you gave me chance to express my fear; that this House should be mature enough to keep our unity. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall conclude this matter after I have looked at the Hansard; to find out the conditions that were set by the House in respect to the board of the national airlines. I will then bring back the matter to the Order Paper. Thank you. 

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ANIFA KAWOOYA ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF ROADS IN SSEMBABULE DISTRICT 
5.01
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Eng. Monica Azuba): Madam Speaker, this statement is presented in response to a matter raised at the Ninth Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament by hon. Anifa Kawooya, concerning the deplorable state of roads in Ssembabule District.

The Ministry of Works and Transport through Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA), the Uganda Road Fund (URF) and the District Local Governments continues to implement road construction projects and maintenance activities in Sembabule District. The following projects are being undertaken:

    (i) The upgrading of Kanoni-Ssembabule and Ssembabule-Villa Maria, which is 110km. This project starts from Kanoni in Mpigi District through Ssembabule and Villa Maria and involves upgrading the existing gravel road to tarmac. The road works commenced in September 2014 and they were substantially completed in June 2019. This road connects Ssembabule District to Mpigi at Kanoni and to Masaka at Villa Maria. 

(ii) Upgrading of Lusalira-Nkonge-Ssembabule (97km): This road is under procurement as part of the critical oil roads development programme in August 2019; it will connect Ssembabule and Mubende districts.

Term, framework and periodic maintenance of roads

Uganda National Roads Authority is undertaking term, framework and periodic maintenance within Ssembabule District, which will significantly improve the state of roads in the district. This will be done through the following lots: one, there is maintenance of 14 selected National roads Phase VII. This is lot 14 and the roads concerned here include Ssembabule-Nkonge road, which is 58 kilometres. There is already a contractor called Mtech Technical Services. 

Second, there is also periodic maintenance of four lots of 234skm of selected unpaved national roads. This includes Mbirizi-Matete-Ssembabule–Katonga road. The road has a total of 58 kilometres and 22 kilometres out of it was upgraded to tarmac and the contractor is being procured to maintain the remaining section, which is Mbirizi-Matete–Ssembabule, which is 36km.

Third, we are doing periodic maintenance of four selected unpaved national roads totaling to 234 kilometres and included in this lot is Kyabakuza-Kyojja-Matete-Kaliro Road. 

Madam Speaker, a section of this road to be maintained is 70 kilometres and we already have a contractor on site and a call-off order is going to be made next week because all the assessment has been made and this is the only road that has been in bad state.

Force account works

UNRA has planned Force Account maintenance works for the first quarter of Finance Year 2019/2020 within the districts of Ssembabule and Lyantonde. The roads under this category include: Lyantonde-Ntuusi (58km), Lumegere-Kakinga (17km), Ssembabule-Matete-Mbirizi (18km) and Ssembabule-Katonga (22Km).

Madam Speaker, as I said, it is Kyabakuza-Kyojja-Matete-Kaliro Road, which is not in a good state and we are going to have a team and a call-off order is going to be made next week.

Through the ongoing and the planned projects, the ministry is on course to ensure that under its mandate, the state of roads in Ssembabule and the country at large are maintained in motorable condition. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see hon. Anifa Kawooya and so, there is no supplementary question. Let us go to item 6(d).

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. LILLY ADONG ON THE SEVERE PAY DISPARITY BETWEEN ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENTS OF POLICE WHO POSSESS ARTS AND SCIENCE QUALIFICATIONS

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, I am here to give a clarification on the issue raised by hon. Lilly Adong. 

Madam Speaker, payment in the Public Service is based, on among other things, job evaluation which assesses the skills, knowledge, qualification, effort (both mental and physical), job responsibilities and experience required to perform a job. 

Hon. Adong raised the issue of pay disparities for Assistant Superintendents of Police in the Arts category and the Science category.

Madam Speaker, entry into the Uganda Police Force is in three categories:

Experts

This category includes professionals with rare skills such as police pilots, aircraft engineers and others. 

Professionals

These are recruited based on their professional attainment and include, forensic experts, medical specialists, engineers, IT engineers and programmers.

General category

This covers other graduates other than the above and those recruited on fulfilment of basic minimum entry requirement such as Ordinary Level education, among others but who may grow through the ranks. 

Madam Speaker, the disparity pointed out by hon. Adong is true. Government, however, in 2017 approved pay policy principles and long term pay targets to be achieved gradually, taking into account the performance of the economy. The policy is geared towards achieving parity of pay within the framework of the job evaluation factors. Once the pay targets are achieved, the difference in pay, particularly between Arts and Science cadres, shall be addressed.

The ministry has already presented a request for consideration of supplementary funding in Financial Year 2019/2020 to narrow the pay disparity between the Arts and Sciences cadres. Once the request is approved, the pay for Arts-based Assistant Superintendent of Police will be raised to Shs 1,225,000 in Financial Year 2019/2020. Progressively, the disparity will be reduced and finally, eliminated upon implementing the approved long-term pay target of Shs 3,500,000 per month for both Arts and Science cadres. 

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this letter is to respond to the issues raised as above and inform Parliament that Government has approved plans for addressing pay disparities in the Public Service. Thank you.

5.11
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the response but I urge him to expedite the process. I do not know whether the minister is aware of the discomfort the pay disparity is causing in the force. When it now takes the officers to approach Members of Parliament, then know that the situation is grave. 

When you look at the students who perform well in Sciences, they are students who are from well-to-do families who could have studied in good schools. Aware that Government is even failing to equip laboratories in secondary schools, it means we are disadvantaging poor people who cannot do Science subjects; we are condemning them into low incomes yet they are at the same level. I urge the minister to work as fast as possible. Thank you.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whether you have money or not, if you are a scientist, you are a scientist. Some of us started in village schools and we became scientists. With sciences, you cannot work alone because I cannot explain certain things the way hon. Oboth did.

Honourable minister, I travelled with the IGP and the President and I talked to these pilots; their pay was very low especially for the police. For the President, he said, “These are my people, wait.”

Have you clarified the issue of the payment of pilots because this is not a simple skill and if you have - the other ones of the President were high and the ones for police were low - sometimes the Speaker goes to the police for transport because of her schedule. I remember I went during the coronation of the Kyabazinga in hon. Katuntu’s place. 

Honourable minister, have they started getting their money? We do not want them to say while up in the air that if you do not pay me, I am not going to land. 

MR OKUPA: Just to add on that, we had a challenge with the flight instructors and pilots at Soroti Flying School and the President gave a directive that the pilots should be at a specific level. It is so worrying that they took care of some but the ones in the police air wing were not catered for. I would like to confirm what hon. Waluswaka talked about because I flew with him in that police helicopter.

That was the matter the young pilots raised when they realised that we were members of Parliament. They said that they were still disadvantaged despite Public Service promising them and this was two years ago.

They keep promising them; those at Soroti Flying School have been fairly taken care of. Why can’t you bring these people to the same level because they were supposed to have been treated in a different category?

I hope the ones in the army also have the same problem. Those in the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and those in the Ministry of Internal Affairs should be brought to the same level; why should we disadvantage them?

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, it is true that Government would want to solve this issue of the pay disparities as soon as possible and that is why even as a ministry, we have submitted a request for a supplementary.

However, among the principles is the principle of affordability. When the budget comes here on the Floor of Parliament, there are many issues in terms of competing priorities. As a ministry, we have a phased strategy through the pay policy, which is going to be implemented over a five year period and at the end, we will know that the ministry would have achieved substantial enhancement and elimination of the pay disparities -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it seems the captains of the ferry also have a problem; let us hear from the islands.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These are police officers and they hold guns, which are deadly weapons but one earns a bigger salary than the other yet they are at the same level. Aren’t we in one way or another influencing insecurity and provoking officers?

As member of Parliament, I may earn more mileage because you know that I come from the islands; so, you may take it well but what about when you are at the same post, same level, same training and you all handle these dangerous weapons but with different salaries?

Maybe it is one of the reasons - you have seen juniors shooting at each other. The clarification I seek is whether this issue of sciences and arts should cut across all the positions, army, police, and education; shouldn’t we have a limit when looking for sciences.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are now abusing my generosity, this matter should have had only one supplementary and I thought there were issues of policy which were important. However, we are going into completely different areas. The minister has said that he is bringing a supplementary to address the disparity progressively. 

5.19
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. This issue has generated more issues and I have realised that we are doing a lot of ad hoc solutions, which is not helping the country. 

I imagine being in the Ministry of Public Service and with the entire technical workforce that you have, why can’t you have a blue print that addresses the human capital disparities in the country such that even if it takes us 10-20 years to realise, we will know that at least there is something technically that we can refer to. I am raising this because we have got a crisis, through immigration.

The immigration officers have been complaining for a very long time that they handle very sensitive work for the country but are being given very low pay yet their counterparts at URA are paid so highly. If we open this kind of discussion, you will find that there are so many loopholes across the board.

I would like to appeal to the minister, apart from addressing this very pertinent issue, to sit down and go through the detailed technical human capital planning for this country. That would do us better service.
	
MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I think I was very clear in the statement where I said that we have a pay policy and this was approved by Cabinet to address the pay disparities and it will also achieve enhancement.

I have even presented a figure where the arts are and where we would like to go at the end of the five years - 3.5; so, Government has a plan. As a ministry, we have a very detailed, thoroughly reserved pay policy and at the end of the five year period, all these issues will be addressed. 

The issue of the police pilots, Madam Speaker, I remember you told us here that you had also got some complaints. It is true, compared to other commercial pilots; their remuneration is still low but not as low as other professionals. We have put them somewhere and progressively through the same policy at the end of the five year period, they will all be at the same rank as pilots.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question I am answering is from hon. Sulaiman Hashim, Member of Parliament for Nebbi Municipality. The question was: “When will the roads of the newly created municipalities be tarmacked?”

Madam Speaker, first and foremost, municipalities receive road funds from Government through the Uganda Road Fund. Although the funding varies from one municipality to another, this means the municipalities plan and budget for the roads accordingly.

We also have another programme, USMID. This is a World Bank project through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and it supports both old and new municipalities in a phased manner. 

In its initial phase, the project supported the following 14 old municipalities: Kabale, Mbarara, Masaka, Fort Portal, Hoima, Jinja, Entebbe, Lira, Arua, Gulu, Moroto, Soroti, Mbale and Tororo. Following the successful implementation of the first phase, the USMID project has extended its programme to eight other municipalities including Mubende, Kasese, Ntungamo, Lugazi, Kitgum, Kamuli, Apac and Busia.

As Government, we shall continue to engage the World Bank and other development partners to cover all the 41 municipal councils. 

On the other hand, the Ministry of Works and Transport is responsible for ensuring that the municipal roads work in line with their strategies. Furthermore, a contract agreement was entered into on 23 January 2018 with M/s Saba Engineering, an Ethiopian company with M/s Ashok Consult Limited, to undertake a pre-feasibility and feasibility study for the proposed project to rehabilitate urban roads, which will be executed using asphalt concrete and double bituminous surface treatment and low cost seal.

Madam Speaker, the project is targeting 30 urban councils in three categories namely; the old traditional municipal councils, the newly created municipal councils and the rapidly growing town councils. The following urban councils have been selected under the project: Kira, Nansana, Makindye-Ssabagabo, Kisoro, Mityana, Kamuli, Kitgum, Kapchorwa, Bushenyi Ishaka, Rukungiri and Busia. 

Under the rapidly growing town councils, the following have been identified: Amuria, Amuru, Buyende, Kalungu, Kanungu, Kibuku, Malaba, Mpondwe, Nebbi and Wobulenzi town councils for low-cost-seal pilot project.

Madam Speaker, since the second question was asked by the same Member of Parliament, I request that I go ahead to answer it. 

The second question was, “When will the newly created municipalities receive road equipment?” As you are aware, the Government of Uganda procured road construction/maintenance equipment from Japan, which was distributed to 121 districts. 

Also, the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Uganda National Road Authority, Mount Elgon Labour Base Training Centre, National Construction Company and Kampala Capital City Authority – this covers Phase I of the procurement of the equipment from Japan.

Madam Speaker, in Phase II, the procurement of the new equipment from Japan to the 13 new district local governments created in the Financial Year 2017/2018 and Financial Year 2018/2019 are going to be covered. Funds are being allocated in the budget for Financial Year 2019/2020 to commence the procurement of the road equipment for these districts. The newly created municipalities will be considered in the subsequent phases. 

Also, as you are aware, the Government of Uganda acquired road equipment from China in 2010. They were distributed to various local governments. However, the equipment is not in good working condition at the moment. 

According to the Ministry of Works and Transport’s inspection team, the equipment was inspected in the Financial Year 2018/2019 and they came here with the cost estimates for their refurbishment and possible redistribution, among the local governments that have no equipment, which will include also the newly created municipalities. 

The estimated cost for the refurbishment is Shs 18 billion. This exercise can only commence after approval or commitment of the funds. This was put in the budget of the financial year 2019/2020 but it is amongst the unfunded priorities. 

In the short and medium term, arrangements shall be put in place to enable municipalities share equipment with the districts or local governments from which they were created. This is already being done. I saw this in Soroti where the district is sharing equipment with Soroti Municipality.

So far, Madam Speaker, no funding is reserved for road equipment for municipalities as far as the Uganda Road Fund, the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Works and Transport are concerned. This requires Government to continue planning, budgeting and lobbying for road equipment. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Does hon. Hashim have a supplementary question?

5.31
MR SULAIMAN HASHIM (NRM, Nebbi Municipality, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the responses. However, allow me to raise a few concerns. 

Whereas I appreciate and commend Government for face-lifting and beautifying many municipalities around the country, I also believe that when Government came up with the idea of creating new municipalities, they must have looked into the resources for face-lifting and beautifying them to cope with the rest.

Four years down the road, nothing is being done in these new municipalities. As far as the road funds are concerned, I believe they are meant for maintenance of the existing roads and maybe opening a few more because I know the funds that are sent to the districts and the municipalities are not actually meant for tarmacking those roads. 

Still, I pray that Government considers the newly created municipalities’ roads so that we also grow to the level of the other municipalities around the country. 

As far as the road equipment is concerned, they are very crucial for the maintenance and opening of new municipal roads. However, we are facing a big problem in doing this work in the municipality because we lack road equipment. For instance, the minister rightly said that in Nebbi, we also borrow equipment from the district. However, the borrowing is not helping us much because the district is also overwhelmed by their work to use the same road equipment.

Also, the road funds come at the same period. The district and municipality received money at the same time. Therefore, by the time the municipality needs the equipment to work on their roads, the district is also using the equipment on their roads. Therefore, it becomes very difficult to share and in most cases we end up not utilising the funds that were meant for that work.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, with that I –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please monitor the new budget cycle and try to assist the new municipalities to get their roads. Thank you.

Honourable members, earlier, we had asked the ministers for Health and Finance, Planning and Economic development respectively to explain the whereabouts of the money allocated to one of the health centres; let them give their answer.

5.34
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to inform this august House about Kahondo Health Centre II that hon. Niwagaba made an inquiry into. Kahondo Health Centre II is in Maziba Sub-County; this sub county already has a health centre IV and because of that, it has not been on our list for upgrade.

However, we have received several letters from the district requesting for its upgrade. I, therefore, directed my people to go and carryout a mapping survey to map out the distance between Maziba Health Centre IV and Kahondo Health Centre II. If it fits within the policy distances, we shall upgrade it this financial year -(Interjection)- no to a Health Centre III.

THE SPEAKER: I thought it is a health centre IV. Is it a health centre II?

DR ACENG: Kahondo is a health centre II and they requested for its upgrade to a health centre III. However, it could not appear on our list because there is already a health centre IV in the same sub county. Now in the spirit of dividing sub counties, when we carry out that mapping and it fits, we shall upgrade it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, could you also answer my letter on the upgrade of Kigandalo Health Centre IV to a hospital that I wrote to you on districts without hospitals and counties without health centre IVs? Kigandalo is bad.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the question but as you are aware, I only have a loan to upgrade health centre IIs to health centre IIIs. I have not yet been provided funds to upgrade health centre IVs to hospitals. However, we submitted a request for a loan to address this and once it is provided, we shall do it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: I seek clarification, honourable minister. I thought you would be affirmative because the documentation is with you regarding everything about the district centres and it was captured in the Budget. What I wanted from you was a confirmation that you are going to upgrade it to health centre III status since we have no health centre III this financial year. And that is the undertaking your colleague from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has made and not this ambivalence.

THE SPEAKER: They are going to do their survey according to their regulations. If they fail, you will let us know and raise it again. 

NOTIFICATION OF EXPIRY OF THE 60 DAYS REQUIREMENT FOR ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE OF FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS UNDER THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, 2015 (PFMA) FOR THE PATIENT’S RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Akamba is not here.

5.37
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): I could stand in for hon. Akamba. Under our rules and the Constitution, when a Member of Parliament seeks leave - Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic development, please listen - and then the requirement to give a Certificate of Financial Implication from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic development takes more than 60 days like it is in this case about the patients’ rights, a Bill that was seeking to introduce that -

Madam Speaker, this trend is threatening our representative role. I remember on the same Floor here, I was granted leave to introduce a private member’s Bill on the prevention of genocide; we are talking about elimination of hate speech, discrimination of all sorts - and I got leave from this House. That was in the previous Parliament but up to today, hon. Bahati as a Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has given me more smiles than the Certificate of Financial Implication.

You know what our rules would imply. However, if the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has it here; he could give it to us so that the honourable member could proceed with the Bill. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we do not need to wait for the minister, under rule 117(4). We have a right to continue with our Bill. Therefore, hon. Akamba should bring the Bill for first reading and hon. Oboth, if your Bill has over stayed, bring it for first reading because it is already over 60 days under rule 117(4). Yes bring it. Forget the minister and bring it.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE STATEMENT OF THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS ON THE OPERATIONS OF THE FISHERIES PROTECTION FORCE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we concluded the debate. We are just waiting for the minister’s response before we take the vote.

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Lt Col. (RTD) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Many issued were raised about the Fish Protection Force in regulation of the fish on the lakes. I will respond in three points: 

    1. The findings of the committee and I will talk about the success and the concerns raised by the committee and members.
    2. The concerns of the members of Parliament that were not in the report.
    3. The recommendations and also what we are trying to do to address some of the challenges.

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that since the fish protection force started operating, fish stocks have increased and factories, which had been closed, have reopened; and that fish protein is available on the market now as opposed to the previous times when there was no fish at all. However, they raised concern on the manner and conduct of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries’ (MAIF) enforcement officers.

Regarding the destruction of illegal boats, as leaders of this country, we need to take precaution and make sure citizens are protected. You notice that the boats they are complaining about that have been destroyed have no registration numbers or licences quoted. 

The other day when the MV Templar Boat capsized - we can retract the Hansard to show how Members bashed Government for failure to license and protect the citizens; and rightly so. Therefore, if we decided to allow small boats of any size on Lake Victoria and they capsize, who will take responsibility? It is Government. Any formula, which does not isolate variables, is defective. Let us address the issues of regulation very firmly as much as we deal with indiscipline.

As for the boats, I submitted to this august House, documents that were got by fisheries officers and the Fisheries Protection Force (FPF). Out of 3,500 cases prosecuted in the courts of law, about 2,760 were foreigners.

Therefore, I think the answer resides in one of the recommendations of this House that we amend the Fish Act. If we want to have small boats for fishing and for fetching water, then they must be licensed and suitable for that – 
(Interruption)

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, sometime back the Government of Uganda was licensing boats. The minister is saying that some of the affected boats have never been licensed but I want to inform him that the licensing was suspended and it is only last month that Government said they would like to start licensing the boats again. 

Therefore, what licences did you want to see on these boats when the Government itself had suspended the licensing some time back? Is the minister, therefore, in order to tell Parliament that a number of boats were destroyed because they were not licensed when licensing is just taking place?

THE SPEAKER: Who had suspended the licensing?

MR OUMA: The Government.

THE SPEAKER: Was it the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries or Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs?

MR OUMA: It was the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The licensing was being done by the districts long time ago before they suspended it. They now say they are going to look at the boats and start licensing them afresh. I wonder what licences he was talking about when Government suspended it.

THE SPEAKER: What law states that you destroy a boat if it is not licensed? Are the unlicensed cars destroyed? They are on the road. If the boat is not licensed, you de-commission it by telling them to park. 

Anyway, honourable minister, I think you should address the problem.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, when they have not started registration of vehicles you do not get them from the warehouse and start driving them. We must be very serious with lives of the citizens. That is what happened to MV Templar.

Although I am not the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, I will not buy this idea. If they close the licensing office today, you do not get a vehicle from the bond and start driving without a registration number plate, then blame Government.

The issue of sports boats and fetching water dominated the debate by so many Members. How can you use a boat to fetch water when you have reached the source? Why do you take small boats to the middle of the lake to fetch water? What if you drown? We must say we either regulate or we do not. 

THE SPEAKER: If you provided them with safe water, they would not go to that lake to fetch water.

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to explain since the minister does not come from the islands. For example, Bukhooli Island is a whole constituency made up of different islands. There is also a place called Buhoba and Bulagayi; these are swampy places where one cannot fetch water from the shore.

One must move a distance into the water and these small boats help people to get a distance away from the swamp to get water. Asking how one can use a boat to get water beats my understanding – (Interruption)

MS ADONG: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that unlike vehicles that the minister is referring to where one has to get a licence before driving it, fishing is a livelihood. It is a culture and it is like getting a hoe to go to your garden.

I grew up in Amolatar where we use a boat to fetch water and because the place is near the fishing lake, one cannot dig a latrine and so, people defecate near the water. Therefore, one has to get a boat and get inside to fetch water. Do you need a licensed boat to fetch water?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the problem is that very few people understand the way of life of the island people. 
 
LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, there were issues raised by Members on the conduct of the UPDF Fish Protection Unit. We have disciplined officers; I have brought here evidence that people were charged; it is even in the report. Those who have the report for which the committee investigated, which we are discussing, there are cases where we have prosecuted officers.

I would like to also say that apart from the officers being prosecuted, we have lost three men and an officer at the hands of illegal fishermen – (Interjection) – yes, in my report, there is a person who was injured and there are pictures. When we deploy these security personnel, as we punish them, we must also put in place mechanisms to protect them.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to be on record - and you know that you have set up a forum since we met last time. We have done a number of issues and taken some measures. We shall come and report to you and deal with most of the issues that were raised when you chaired a committee of all fishermen especially regarding the conduct of the UPDF.

About the ban on smoked fish, honourable colleagues, the ministry of agriculture and I have been here several times. There is no ban on smoked fish but you do not need to smoke immature fish. That is where the problem is.

Madam Speaker, dealing with people on the lake is like regulating milk - they are almost impossible. Therefore, there is no way they would be happy with regulations at all - no. There is resistance but I need the support of the House and all leaders from fishing communities. 

Let us address the indiscipline on both sides. If there is a UPDF officer –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honourable minister. I would like to seek clarification from you on how you differentiate between the smaller fish like mukene and the mature one? Is there technology that you use?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, these officers are operating with subject matter specialists - (Interjection) - Yes. In addition, before they are deployed, they are trained. The people who take offenders to court are fisheries officers. Therefore, they know. There is no way you can mistake mukene for immature fish and in the committee’s report, they also acknowledged that fishers of mukene are not arrested - (Interruption)

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I would like the honourable minister to take time and get interested. We have people that operate on the lake and then they stage patrol roadblocks. Recently, as I drove from my home, I came across a patrol truck which had stopped a lady and they called me. When I told them that we should go for measurements at the fisheries department at the district, they said no, we are trying to examine.

However, they had already told the lady that these are immature fish and yet it was the required size. Therefore, we have a problem. Honourable minister, are you in order to just stand here - some of you have not even gone there to see how people suffer.

Madam Speaker, they have a tendency; they deal with a few dealers and then they remove all the patrol trucks and allow the dealers’ motorbikes to pass; that one hour is only for those dealers. They then leave that roadblock and arrest the traders in the markets. Honourable minister, just spare a day and move to Mukono; it is not far. You do not even need to go on water. We shall be on the land so that you see exactly what is happening.

Secondly, the involvement of individuals who are not even from the army - they connive. Is it in order for the honourable minister to come here and state things based on hearsay? I would like him to come and spend a day in my area; he will come here and give a true report. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is an offer that you should go to Mukono or Amolatar so that you find out the realities about the sizes of the fish before you talk about them here.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have also been to Mukono and Katosi. I welcome the invitation but I would like to encourage Members - I am a simple person; call me and we will take it up with the CDF. 

However, when you come here and you do not have the name or the particular incident - how can we really keep talking and not acting? Get me evidence; we have offices, there are structures. I will welcome any Member -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall we had a long debate yesterday. Let the minister conclude. However, yesterday, hon. Amule named the victims and their injuries, including the cars used by the officers to sell fish; it is on the Hansard. If you have others, write them down, copy to me and give them to the Minister.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I have received an email I think from the Woman Representative of Amolatar. She actually provided evidence and we are taking it up. I have had a meeting with hon. Abott - we took up the matter.

Honestly, I really do not know; you know that we hold these offices in trust. We can come here and talk but taking action is done in the office. Get me evidence then come here and say, I went to the minister, I brought a case and nothing was done.

THE SPEAKER: Please, produce the names.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, a colleague raised an issue that the Fish Protection Force is dominated by men and it is not gender sensitive. Madam Speaker, I do not know of any fisher monger that is a lady. In this business, you need to know the kind of people - I think those from the fishing community know what it is.

THE SPEAKER: No; but honourable minister, one of the biggest owners of boats on Entebbe landing site is a woman. She has 300 boats.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, on the land, we have both male and female officers. However, on the water, it is not easy. I will to tell you why in confidence.

Madam Speaker, there were issues to do with closing landing sites. I was here in this House and I provided evidence. These people went there and saw the closed landing sites. Out of 70 landing sites here in Wakiso District, only 35 were gazetted and out of these 70, foreigners, whose origin we could not even trace, were the ones in control –(Interjection)– yes, I would interest the Committee on Agriculture to really take interest. However, in any case, we are in East African Community; we shall see how to deal with it.

There was an issue on impounded vehicles. Madam Speaker, the law is very clear that these vehicles should be auctioned. Members came and talked to us. We have been trying to find a way of getting out of it and maybe caution some of these people because some of the owners of the vehicles did not know where the vehicles were going. The drivers simply go and look for good business because there is a lot of money in fish. 

I know two of my friends whose vehicles were impounded. One of them confidently told me that his vehicle was destined to Kampala but the next time he heard about it, it had been impounded somewhere in Jinja, carrying fish. Therefore, we thought that probably the Members have an issue. You started this dialogue. 

Madam Speaker, we said that we would talk to the President and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries so that we harmonise; look at these cases and probably pardon them. However, if Members insist that we follow the law, then, we shall auction them. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will do it. 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, in Kampala and other urban centres, I have seen people put up signposts - I do not know Luganda but in Buganda here, I have seen a signpost read, “Toyiwa Wano Kasasiro” with a fine of Shs 100,000. I do not know whether you have tried everything possible to put up signposts or a written warning on these landing sites such as, “Do not engage in carrying immature fish. Vehicles once caught will be auctioned.” Is there anything of that sort? 

I am saying this because we are the ones supposed to inform the communities of that illegality yet we have not exercised that duty. However, we are now taking these vehicles but we have not told them about that effect. What do we do? 

For example, I do not carry out fishing or I do not engage in that business but I own a car, my driver goes there unknowingly thinking, doing a side business to get something quickly but he gets a problem. What do we do? What have you done in that respect? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these are Ugandans and I would like to propose this: if amnesty can be given to killers and they go free, sentences are committed, why don’t you just forgive these people and give them back their things? 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, let me start with your suggestion. You chaired the meeting and we agreed that amnesty must be asked – 

THE SPEAKER: No, we asked you to take our proposal to the President.

MR RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, amnesty must be given to people who have confessed their sins and that they will not do it and we are imploring the leaders to cause this action. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister, for allowing the simple clarification I am seeking. Honourable minister, the Speaker gave us a scenario where those that have murdered and killed are given amnesty but you are saying that amnesty is given to people that have confessed. 

On the waters, these people have no space to confess and no room to say sorry. When they are arrested, they are not given any opportunity to either apologise or do anything. They are just tortured and killed. How best can they seek that amnesty or forgiveness, when they are not given any opportunity to be listened to? I just seek to know that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a very lengthy debate yesterday; we stayed here until almost 8.00 p.m. Please let the minister respond. No, you will ask him more questions from outside there.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, someone raised an issue of insecurity and piracy on the lake as well as rescue capacity. I would like to say that we are trying to repair existing boats and acquire new ones to make sure that our fishermen are protected, once they are on the lake.

There was an issue on the lakes we have not gone to. Together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, we have said this thrice in this House; that we shall go as we get capacity. The resources were not adequate to cover all the lakes. 
The people of Bunyoro, particularly Buliisa and those near Lake Albert where we still have a very huge challenge, you have to bear with us. We shall come when capacity is built. The good news is that on Monday, we passed out another group and we think we shall go to Lake Albert at an appropriate time. 

There was an issue on the sensitisation of the fishing community. Madam Speaker, there have been so many sensitisation programmes amongst the fishing communities; they know this. The trouble is not that they do not know that fish is mature. There is a lot of temptation and the people who go on the water - the fishing community know who these people are. Their life is on the water. During the day, they are drinking and you need to –(Interjection)– I did not say that but it is true. 

Therefore, I would like to agree and also disagree with my colleagues at the same time. We do not have problems at the gazetted fish landing sites; the problems are mainly at the illegal ones – you know, you can create a landing site by just cutting the tree, providing and it is illegal. It is like operating an illegal market. 

Recommendations of the committee 

We should routinely transfer enforcement officers - I agree with the committee and the last time we met with you, Madam Speaker, we agreed that these people and transfers have been effected.

The officers should be adequately trained to equip them with the requisite skills and knowledge. We are doing this and they are working with subject matter specialists. Much of the work of persecution and enforcement of standards is by the officers. They should work with technical fisheries officers for proper coordination. We have been encouraging the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries staff to work together with our officers. They move in the same car. So, there is coordination. 

There was also a recommendation that we equip the army and the enforcement officers with vehicles, money and the necessary resources. Appropriation is by this Parliament. We have engaged the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on this matter. We have prepared a paper to Cabinet to make sure that the people who are operating on the lake are adequately protected and facilitated.

In the same vein, we would like to encourage Members from the fishing community to always come and report any irregularities and challenges. As colleagues from both sides, we need to protect our national resources and make sure that exploitation of the same is done within the law and without hurting anybody. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much, for giving me the opportunity to respond. I would also like to thank the committee who have raised concerns that have shaped the way forward on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural issue in relation to the response by the honourable minister. My issue is about the very vital information that the minister has not talked about, yet the communities are demanding. He has talked about the boat size, yet the committee informed us that the National Fisheries Research Institute is trying to conduct a study to inform us about the appropriate boat size to use. The people are requesting to know the outcome of such research and the minister has not told us.

On closure of the landing sites, Madam Speaker, Lake Kyoga has been closed for the last two months and people do not know when these landing sites will be opened. The minister has not told us about this.

With the knowledge that the operations teams have committed many atrocities as is indicated in the report, including death of some fishermen, I have not heard any specific intervention that the minister will undertake in relation to the enforcement teams that have committed the atrocities. When you turn a blind eye to the mistakes that have been made by such people, you will be abetting crime. 

I do not know whether we are proceeding right with the response of the honourable minister - which is half baked - and we consider it wholesomely, yet he has left out very vital useful information.
 
MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to look at the islanders as people of Uganda. I also want the Government to understand that the lake is where we get all we want and I also accept that there have been illegalities. I would like the Government to answer my question; what special programme has the Government got for the islanders?

The minister is talking about smoked fish. When you smoke fish, it becomes smaller. We cut the fish and when these people meet you with that cut fish, they say, this is undersized, yet the minister is saying that there is nothing wrong with that.

The minister has not answered about the masquerades, who are employed. The committee is also complaining about the Association of Fishers and Lake Users of Uganda (AFALU) and the minister has not talked about it. The people, who are concerned about business, are the ones running with these people saying, “This one is competing with me. Can you fail him?” They do it. 

The minister talked about the boats that were destroyed, which were used for sports. You have come to my home and destroyed my boat; what are we going to tell this gentleman or woman? That your boat was destroyed in December and it is not working!

The minister is has not answered because the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, is saying these boats, which are double pointed; we have no problem with them. When the army destroyed them, they destroyed them without knowledge and any illegal implication. Therefore, I would like to ask the minister, what are we going to tell these people whose boats were destroyed by mistake?

Lastly, your commander in Lolwe accepted, before the committee, that they killed Fredrick. He was the one in charge when this gentleman was being killed. You are telling us that people were arrested yet the commander who was in charge by the time Fredrick was killed has not been arrested; what has been done with him? 

Why do we transfer people from Bukooli Island and bring them to Buikwe? Don’t we have courts in Namayingo? There is a Kangaroo Court in Buikwe and our people are being fined between Shs 2 million and Shs 3 million. What are you doing with the Kangaroo Court in Lolwe where our boats go and they are captured and the people are told to bring between 20 and 30 jerrycans of fuel before they are released? It is a matter of “bring money and go.” What are we going to do?

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a long debate yesterday. Can we have a way forward?           

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification about the 28-inch boat that is provided for in the Fisheries Act. Honourable minister, you know well that most lakes have lost their depth due to dumping of sand and sticks. For example, Lake Kyoga has lost its depth by two metres; from six to four metres. That means that that lake cannot now sustain the 28-inch boat as it was originally indicated in the law. What is Government going to do? Are you going to desilt the lakes so that the 28-inch-boat is able to operate on the lake or to amend the Act? 

Secondly, about alternative livelihood; my district has had prolonged drought through the seasons. People have been hit by hunger and it is a disaster. Farmers have failed to harvest anything and the lake is sealed off. These people hardly eat and they have decided to go and die at the lake rather than die of hunger in their homes. What is Government preparing for such people because they are very many? Do you have alternative livelihood for those people so that they leave the lake for you to enforce properly? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all of you contributed yesterday.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to start with the Member who said that I have not talked about the size of the boats. I deliberately did not want to answer because the minister in charge of the sector has told you that they are considering amending the law to provide for appropriate boats for shallow bodies and lakes and it is in the report. The minister will bring the law at an appropriate time.

About the islanders, Madam Speaker, Uganda considers the islanders citizens of this country. We have implemented the palm oil programme in Kalanga, we have put ferries on all our lakes. All special programmes that are meant to improve people’s livelihoods are in these islands. You only need to identify an appropriate alternative enterprise for the islanders other than fishing.

On the issue of the Association of Fishers and Lake Users of Uganda (AFALU), Madam Speaker, we have explained that the officers were using AFALU –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a pint of order. Livelihood is cultural, genetic and acquired over 700-1,000 years. Is the minister in order to tell the House that we change the cultural way of living of the people around the lakes as if we can also dare tell the Banyankole to stop keeping cows? (Laughter) 

Is he in order to infringe on the cultural rights of other people, which is enshrined in the Constitution? Can they also start digging and stop looking after cows? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday there was a proposal that people should stop fishing and that alternatives be given to them. I do not agree with that because people have a right to be on the lake. What you should do is to assist them to get the right fishing gears and train them but do not move them away. (Applause)

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I was responding to a question on giving them alternatives. They should choose alternatives according to their wishes. We have changed culture over time. There is no community that has not evolved culturally – (Interjection) - yes, I dig more than you do. You ask people who have visited my farm.

Madam Speaker, a Member raised the issue of working with AFALU and I would like to say that they used AFALU since this was a new area; they had to use people who were friendly on the lake. At that time, they were considered friendly. However, in areas where we have established units, we are not going to deal with AFALU. 

We communicated to you, Madam Speaker, in the meeting you chaired involving Members from the fishing communities that AFALU is not part of the regulatory group. We use the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the enforcement – by the way, the Fisheries Protection Force is only a supportive unit. The actual work is done by the fisheries officers, who are the subject matter specialists.

On the issue of kangaroo courts, I do not think I am competent enough to say any court of law is a kangaroo court. Hon. Ouma, there are offices established for trying corrupt officers. There are many cases that have gone through the courts. If you think one of those courts passed a wrong judgment, it is only wise that you use appropriate organs of the State to prosecute them.

Have lakes lost depth? Yes, they have and this is known. However, we need to change the law so that we conform to the situation. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has briefed the committee that he is going to bring the law to make sure those shallow water bodies can get appropriate boats.

Somebody raised the issue of giving people alternative means of livelihood. I do not want to run into trouble with my friend, again, that we are changing people’s culture. However, when one door closes, another one opens –(Interjection)– yes, that is the law of nature. 

You know we have two main growing seasons in Uganda. Some wise communities, during the dry season, engage in activities such as apiary and crafts that actually do not need rain and communities surviving on that. A community which does not want to change and which has no leaders to guide them on how to survive will have problems. 

As Government, we have a duty to run these programmes in all districts in the country. I would like to say it confidently here that – because we appropriate money in this august House – there is no money that goes for the livelihood of the people that is selective of any community. As leaders, we should help our communities to change. Thank you, Madam Speaker and I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the recommendations, honourable members. 

Clerk, have you given them the summary? Is it on the iPads? Anyway, it is in the report. I just wanted to simplify it but you have them in the report. What is the issue, hon. Atkins?

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I am glad that you have been – in your reach – to every part of the country, more specifically the fishing communities.

Madam Speaker, you have got delegations and petitions focusing on one thing; “our only source of livelihood has been shut down.” Their sons and daughters are out of school. People borrow from banks to do fishing business and they have already defaulted on bank loans. They are losing houses and land because of defaulting on loans.

I expected the minister to focus specifically on what Government is going to do in the immediate term, the medium term and the long term. The minister is focusing, instead, on the long term. What is it, honourable minister, that is going to save the starving communities?

When I go to my constituency, I literally weep and break down when I see houses written on: “This House belongs to the bank and is on sale by the bank.” Why? It is because the old man or woman there has defaulted on the loan. Even mature fish is impounded. Can we get clarification and a clear statement from the minister on whether that is Government policy? It is against the law to impound mature fish.

You are not providing even that simple and basic leadership, which is my first question. Madam Speaker, when the minister talks about experts; are they university professors because we know the content and construct validity depends on extract judgment. Which experts are you talking about, Mr Minister? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were 16 recommendations of the committee but particularly, I would like the minister to take an interest in recommendation No.9; on the provisions of section 30(d) of the Fish Act, which deals with detention  subject to orders of the court.

These people are not taken to court but to a place and they demand that now you have done this, bring this; that was the kangaroo court hon. Abbott was talking about. Honourable minister, you better take interest in that and that section gives conditions under which someone who is not the owner of the vessel that has been impounded should be handled.

If he is not the one who has committed an offense, you cannot make an order in respect of that vessel; so, I would like you to take interest in section 30 of the Fish Act because it gives protection to an owner whose vehicle is just impounded but is not involved in the business. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the 16 recommendations of the committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the whole report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report, adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, honourable members. There is small Bill of one clause, before we go to item No.9. I want us to deal with that one clause.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (General Duties) Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay the Members have supported the motion please give your justification.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, the amendment of this Bill, which is section 38 of “The Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013” is for repealing subsection 1 (b) in order to permit the unrestricted exchange of information by the Financial Intelligence Authority with other authorities outside the country.

Currently, section 38(1)(b) of the Anti-Money Laundering Act does not permit the unrestricted sharing of information; by the Financial Intelligence Authority of Uganda with other civil authorities outside Uganda.

The repeal of section 38(1)(b) of the Act will meet the requirements of the Financial Action Task Force standards on sharing information and also conform to the international best practice of information sharing.

Accordingly, the Financial Action Task Force requires that section 38(1)(b) of the Act be repealed because it is a hindrance to fight anti-money laundering. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear the report of the committee.

6.37
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and would like to report on the following observations and recommendations.

The current section 38(1(b) of “The Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2019”, restricts the disclosure and use of information by the authority, where the Government has a treaty, agreement or arrangement with a foreign state or international organisation.

1. 	This provision was identified by the Financial Action Task Force as falling short of its standards because it restricts the exchange of information by the authority, by imposing the requirement for the Government to have in place a treaty, agreement or arrangement with a requesting foreign entity before information could be exchanged.

2. 	The repeal of section 38(i)(b) will enable Uganda to satisfy the Financial Action Tack Force standards on sharing of information and conform to international best practices on sharing of information. According to FATF section 38 (b)(i) of the Act is as hindrance to the fight against money laundering. 

3. 	The Egmont Group, a united body of 164 financial intelligence units, identified the anomaly in the law and requested Uganda to rectify the position.

	Uganda reached the financial stages of being considered for admission to Egmont in September 2018 but faced a challenge of non-admission because of the anomaly.

	It will lead Uganda to be placed on the monitoring list if it is not addressed; Uganda exited the monitoring list in October 2018 and should preserve this status quo.

4. 	Uganda was admitted to Egmont in July 2019 on the premise of the opinion by the Attorney-General, wherein he stated that in order to remove the ambiguity in interpretation, section 38(1)(b) would be repealed and section 38(1)(a)retained. Failure to repeal section 38(i)(b) will lead to Uganda being removed from Egmont.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendment. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The report has been signed by the necessary minimum numbers. Any comments?

6.41
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, so much, Madam Speaker, the minister and the chairperson of the committee. My understanding of the amendment is that section 38(1)(b) of the Anti-Money Laundering Act restricts disclosure and use of information where the Government of Uganda has a treaty with another country. 

Therefore, it means that if there is a treaty between Uganda and the United States, I am presupposing – and I, hon. Odonga, is found in this money laundering saga, the information about my activities should not be disclosed because there is a treaty between Uganda and the US –(Interjections)- the information shouldn’t be disclosed in spite of the treaty –(Interjections)- that is not what it is saying.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to give my colleague is that the way the law is - if, for example, another country requires information about hon. Odonga Otto and we do not have a treaty with that country, Uganda will not be able to disclose that information because it is on reciprocal basis. 

Therefore, FATF has said that is a restriction that sort of shields those who are suspected to be involved in the money laundering. The requirement of FATF is that there should be unfettered exchange of information between the various financial intelligence authorities. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you so much for the clarification. What I would like to know from the minister is, can the committee tell which treaties are directly being affected? We need to know whether as we are, and as the law is now, we have a reciprocal arrangement and treaties with those countries A, B or C. Probably, the House will need that information.

I do not think I would go blindly to say, let information be shared about me with whoever needs it around the world because the issue of the treaty does not arise. We need to know which treaties are in place. I think that would be very useful information, if the minister or chairperson has it.

THE SPEAKER: Sample all the treaties that you have talked about – because what the minister is saying is that the present law says that if we have no treaty between us, I cannot disclose to you. If there is no treaty, I have no business with you. That is the present law and that is what the minister is trying to change. 

Do you want a sample of the treaties under FATF?

6.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I need to bring my colleagues to context. We have section 38 (1), if I may read on the disclosure and the use of information. This is the original Act of 2013 and Sub-section (1) and states, “The authority may disclose information to an institution or an agency of a foreign State or of an international organisation established by the Government of the foreign State that has powers and duties similar to those of the authority where: (a) the authority has reasonable grounds to suspect that the information would be relevant to the investigation or prosecution of a money laundering offence or a substantially similar offence and (b) the Government of Uganda has a treaty or arrangement with that fallen state or international organisation regarding the exchange of such information.” 

Madam Speaker, this is what was provided in 2013 when we enacted this law. 

When we amended this Act in 2017, we envisaged this and provided Section 38(a): Exchange of information by a competent authority and it reads, “Competent authorities may exchange information and provide international cooperation both upon request and spontaneously to foreign counterparts in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering or terrorism financing and any related activity subject to the regulations made under this Act.” 

When we made this provision, we did not delete Section 38(1) (b), which provides for restrictions for exchange of information with countries where Government has a treaty. So, this is what we are trying to provide for. We are trying to open exchange of information with countries even where Uganda does not have treaties and this was rejected. 

We are doing this because – when this law was enacted, it was subjected to an evaluation by Egmont Group, a body that oversees money laundering activities in the world and their evaluation pointed this weakness and it required the Government of Uganda to come back and make an amendment. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I have now understood. In fact, we are being compelled by some people who have established themselves internationally; they are asking us to go home and remove this clause. We need to get information from Uganda as and when we want, whether we have a treaty with them or not. That is the other way and Uganda can as well get information from any country whether we have a treaty with them or not.

I personally do not have a problem with that. However, I just have two concerns. You remember our President has been – I am relating it to the ICC – Uganda has been having reservations of being a signatory to the Rome Statute that creates the International Criminal Court and that has been the same position of the United States of America because they have the capacity to protect their citizens. They do not want their citizens to be subjected to those kinds of international crimes.

On this Floor, I remember, when the Speaker was in the Chair, she complained and said a diplomatic note should be extracted and taken to the Kenyan Parliament because of the harassment of members of Parliament who try to drive, by road, to Nairobi. At every stop, the police would ask for money. 

I just wanted us to open our eyes that – well, we may open up to the whole world and say you can get information from Uganda as and when you want. However, supposing we have a situation where there is no reciprocal enforcement? I am just thinking aloud.

Madam Speaker, I have just forgotten a law. There is another piece of legislation, which provides for reciprocal enforcement - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is to stop money laundering. What the law is saying is that you open up. Even if I do not have a treaty, there is someone laundering money in your country and I need information. Give it to me; that is what it is saying. 

MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this amendment is good for – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are a member of this committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Just give me one minute to explain some information, which may be very helpful. Sometimes, if you stop me, you might miss something tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: You are a member of the committee. Are you debating the report?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am not debating the report, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: First sit down; you will give the information later.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me give the information now.

THE SPEAKER: No, you will give the information when somebody is on the Floor but not in your own rights. 

6.51
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, I wanted to provide some useful information that Parliament passed the Private Data Protection Act, which protects information about individuals whether financial or otherwise.

It has to be related with the international law because internationally, especially the European Union, pushed to ensure that this law is in place such that individuals’ data is not taken advantage of. Therefore, a person has a right to sue anyone who moves the data without their consent and we passed that law.

THE SPEAKER: What are you saying about this? How does it relate to this law?

MR RUHUNDA: I was allaying fears because they are talking about individual information. We now have a law here which protects our information as Ugandans because we have already passed it. Therefore, the money laundering information has to fit within that framework.

6.52
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, under chapter 3 - the methodology, the committee held meetings and received memoranda from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Finance Intelligence Authority and Bank of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Where are you?

MR AOGON: Under chapter three, the methodology, 3.0 before you come to the observations. I would like to believe that by Government saying that there has to be a treaty for us to disclose information, there was some wisdom behind it.

Therefore, in this case, who of the two between Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development represented Government at that time? Because what was the view of having the old law? What was the justification?

All these issues border on security; when we talk about disclosure of information, it is a security issue and when we talk about disclosure of information, it is a security matter. Other countries can take advantage of our country. It is possible.

Look at what is happening between America and China; they have wars due to issues of information. We do not need to rush this issue. We need to think about it critically. For instance what did ESO say? Where is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aogon, this is a simple matter. Supposing the Government of Uganda is chasing a criminal in Tanzania then Tanzania refuses to disclose them because they have no treaty with Uganda? The minister is proposing that we remove that provision so as to be free to access information from Tanzania without a treaty.

MR AOGON: Before I take information from hon. Oboth, I would have loved to hear the voice of Teso here. The External Security Organisation and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs have had challenges and we know that. We can speak here but they know. They are people with experience and know the heat. If you have not dipped your finger in the hot can of water, you cannot know the temperature - (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Aogon for giving way. I was privileged to be a Member of Parliament during the processing of this Bill. This Bill was not necessarily an initiative of Uganda. It was a requirement for all countries that are in the fight against terrorism and money laundering to have this law; the Anti-Money Laundering Act.

For all of us here, any monies more than Shs 20 million that get to your account, which is not from your salary, is queried whether you are sending it out or receiving it here. When we are making this, it could have been an oversight on our part to be restrictive on sharing of the information. 

Now the application of this law, as the Speaker has said - when you want to get similar information - we have sent our own teams here to go to Malta and other places to carryout investigations on corruption tendencies and money laundering yet we are noncompliant.

When you see the objects of the Bill and the effects in the existing law, it is very instructive. This law should not attract a lot of debate; what you want from the other, you should also be able to give; sharing of information –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Aogon for giving way. I would like to add to what hon. Oboth has said. In fact, when we were making this law, Government of Uganda refused it because this law stayed since 2003. 

Madam Speaker, it is at this instance - because there was money to be received from the World Bank - when Government agreed that the money will be allowed. On the day we were processing it, the agreement issue came up and that is why I wanted to bring it here.

A member said that we need to have agreements with other countries and the reason was that they wanted to sign agreement with others and not sign with others for purposes of money laundering. The people, who were insisting on the agreement - if you check the Hansard, were money launderers.

Madam Speaker, having said that, the committee has done very well and I am a member. They have deleted sections 1 and 2. However, I would like to ask my chairperson and hon. Aogon that if you look at section 39 and leave it in the current state, the agreement still exists –(Interjection)– section 39 - If you read it, it says, “agreements relating to the authority collection of information from the data base referred to in this Act must specify the nature of and limit in respect to information that the authority may collect from that data.”

Therefore, if we are saying that the information should be shared freely from here and there, then we do not need these agreements to do with information. That is why I wanted you, my brother hon. Oboth and my legal counsel, to also look through this. Should we maintain it since we have an opportunity in section 39? We can leave subsection (1) but the one which deals with the agreement on information; I would like to propose that since we are deleting section 31 and 32-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am reluctant to entertain spontaneous amendments. We shall allow the committee to look at it and then report to us. Those are good ideas but - yes.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala is referring to the Act of 2013. This Act was amended in 2017 and section 39 was deleted.

7.00
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Oboth has partly established the case I wanted to make that this law may be good. However, he has alluded to the fact that it was pushed on the Government. That originally, our Government was not in for it.

However, we need to be careful with some of these laws that we make. At the beginning or at one point they may sound good but there are points where they can gang on us, just the way the ICC was very good; countries praised it but the very countries that praised it started saying, “This law is bad; we should move out of it.” 

Madam Speaker, these big brothers - the big countries - can easily witch-hunt a person. They can even look for a leader here. You have heard of cases where they accuse some of our leaders of involvement in malpractices. They can allege anything.

The International Criminal Court was hiding but we have eventually seen their true colours. They are hiding but they will start witch-hunting our leaders. They would say, “So and so was involved in money laundering. Surrender that person.”

THE SPEAKER: Do you object to surrendering money launderers? (Laughter)

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a short submission that originally, money-laundering and terrorism were looked at as merely domestic crimes. They have now moved to an international level because the acts and omissions cut across borders.

Therefore, there is need to open up not only the cooperation but also in the areas of investigation and enforcement. That is why I recommend that we amend section 38(1)(b) of the principal Act. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 1 as follows: Amendment of Section 38 of the Anti-money laundering Act, 2013. Clause 1 is amended by deleting the words, “Sub-section 1 (b)” and substituting it with “Sub-section 1 (b) and 2.”

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment to the repeal of subsection 1(b), which the Bill seeks to amend. The provision, if not deleted, will be redundant.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have looked at the law. Since the committee chairperson has added subsection 1 (b) and 2 and section 39 of the old law was never amended, I would like to seek your indulgence. If we left it here, then we would have done nothing because it has agreements in relation to money-laundering activities yet they are saying one must sign State agreements to deal with that.

Therefore, at what stage could we delete section 39? Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Show me the Bill.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, when this matter came up, we were informed that this section was consequentially amended in 2017. However, if that is not the case and there is no harm in deleting it now, I beg to move that section 39 be deleted.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, before we rush to delete it, we should first check properly; maybe there is something in section 38. If you are very sure that there is nothing, we can delete.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does anyone have the principal Act here?

MR MUSASIZI: Here is the principal Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, the minister can formally move a motion that we delete section 39 of the principal Act but Let us deal with section 38 first.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, as a consequential amendment, I beg to move that clause 39 be deleted from the Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 39 of the principal Act be deleted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, deleted.

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Clerk will amend the headnote under the Title to include section 39. I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and greed to.) 

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and greed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering, (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments.

THE SPEAKER: I think you also need to report on section 39.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering, (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it with the following amendments. It deleted section 38(1)(b)and section 39.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING,(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering, (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Anti-Money Laundering, (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and greed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED,“THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING, (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2019”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes.

7.16
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the original committee report together with the minutes that we prepared during consideration of the Bill.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank you for availing us a slot on the Order Paper to consider this Bill. In addition, I wish to seek your indulgence; that you allow us more time to consider the Local Content Bill. It is generating a lot of interest. The stakeholders asking to appear before us are still quite many. We request that you give us more time.

THE SPEAKER: How much more time? Other stakeholders are interested that we pass it quickly.

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, Madam Speaker; the stakeholders are interested that we pass the law. However, we still feel that we should give this Bill desired justice and invite them to appear before the committee. We feel that we should be able to report back to the House in the middle of next month.

THE SPEAKER: That is about three weeks.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, our effectiveness as the finance committee is not in doubt. If we ask for more time, there is a reason. I pray that you allow us three weeks, Madam Speaker, to conclude this Bill. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: It would be fair. The Bill was first sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Committee, we had some challenges there and then you wisely guided that it be sent to the relevant committee. Therefore, they lost sometime. Therefore, three weeks would be good. 1
 
7.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I also wish to thank you for allowing us to slot in this Bill.

We are actually time barred; we were expected to have passed this by the end of this month because next month, we have to report back to the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) as well as our regional body. Therefore, they were waiting for this amendment so that we can be full members of the FATF and the Egmont Group. I think now that now paves way for us to be full members of those organisations. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The committee on finance is granted three weeks extension on the Local Content Bill to report to this House.

Honourable members, thank you for the work done. House adjourned until Tuesday at 2:00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.18 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 July 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

