Tuesday, 14 July 2015

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have a lot of business today and so we will be making some adjustments on the Order Paper to accommodate the Leader of the Opposition who has to go for a meeting with the Prime Minister. As soon as the movers of the motion in item 9 are in the House, we will make those adjustments so that he can respond to the State of the Nation Address.

Honourable members, the legal committee has now entered the final stages of finalising the report on the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill and that process should be coming in. So, I urge the Whips from all the parties in the House to do their utmost best to ensure that when those debates begin, we have the number of the members that can make us progress with this particular important business. It is important because we need to finish it in time to pave way for the implementing legislation also to be introduced, which now will confirm or implement what will have been adopted in the amended constitutional framework.

Therefore, these are important and the process might be taking long. So, I urge you members to do your very best and suspend a lot of the other activities - I know they are pressing - but if we can deliver the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill and electoral reform laws that will be following it in time, it will give us the opportunity to go out and do what we must do to get back here.

Yes, Mrs Cecilia Ogwal, on what matter do you rise?

2.09
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): You talked about Whips.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I was only giving instructions to the Whips.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information reaching me, as the Whip of the Opposition - indeed we looked at the list - we agreed at the beginning of the Session not to tamper with the composition of the committees because this Session is going to be marred with a lot of problems like absenteeism and so on. It is because we felt that if we bring in new people, it would be difficult for them to catch up with new issues and complete whatever we expect them to do. So, we agreed with the Speaker and I also shared it with my colleague on the Government side that Members be left where they are.
 
But, Mr Speaker, I am very surprised - and I think it is unethical - that my colleague decided to bring in new members. When I looked at the new members, they are made up of Members the NRM Secretariat. I have no problem as to who is there, but to tamper with the system, which we have agreed on as a method of work in Parliament, was wrong.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members from the NRM Secretariat?

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes, members like the hon. Richard Todwong, the hon. Dr Omona - these are issues which I thought should have been dealt with from the backdoor and not through the front door because you and your colleague, the Speaker, should not be involved in these things.

So, we should not play politics where we have already agreed on the rules. The rules we agreed on were that we carry on the membership from the last Session to make things easy for us. 

Therefore, from my side, Mr Speaker, I want to say I sat with the Clerk and was able to show and convince her that we have not changed anybody. However, we only agreed to move one member from the FDC Party to another committee in order to create space for one other person. The whips from the other parties have decided their members should not be moved but stay where they are as agreed. 

I hope the Speaker can deal with the issue in as far as the Independents and Army representatives are concerned while the NRM Party can help us to sort out this matter without causing further delay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, honourable member for Dokolo District who is also the Chief Whip of the Opposition, when a request is made by a whip to do changes, the Speaker cannot say no. If the request is made like you did for the hon. Member for Kitgum, I could not say no. I had to come and announce it here and the House had to approve.

Therefore, once the request comes, it does not involve the Speaker because the rules say the Speaker has to bring it here. That is all we do. But to go into the details of who goes where; we cannot do that. Yes, do you want to say something, hon. David Bahati?

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Just want to assure the Chief Whip of the Opposition that we collaborate with her and once we agree on something, we do it. That is actually what we did, but also the Rules of Procedure require that every Member of Parliament be assigned a committee and the four people we assigned were Cabinet ministers but when they took on other roles, they became backbenchers and they had to be assigned to some committees. So, just we filled those gaps and we will continue to collaborate with you on common issues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but honourable member for Dokolo District also the Chief Whip of the Opposition, the matter that you have raised should not take us away from what I was saying. My point was that the whips of the parties must ensure that we have attendance by members. That was my request and I will keep it at that. Thank you very much, honourable members. Yes, member for Padyere, had you a matter to raise?

2.14
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. About a month ago, National Forestry Authority (NFA) evicted about 3,000 people from Omyer Forest Reserve in Nebbi. Suffice to mention, some of the people who were there had been occupying the place even before the de-gazzetment was done in 1948.
 
However, the annoying thing is that after burning houses and so on, they have proceeded to give the end of this July ultimatum to the evicted people to uproot all crops grown there. Remember, some of them are still living under trees; children have nowhere to study because their school which was already up to P6 level also got destroyed and burnt down. Even the churches for the Protestants and the Catholics were burnt down.

Mr Speaker, some of the crops are perennial; they are not seasonal. The issue is: if you give one month to someone to uproot his crops, which probably are one month in the ground or like cassava which takes about two years to harvest, it is double jeopardy and punishment. 

The question therefore, would be to the Minister of Water, Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu, if he is aware of this eviction and if so, to what extent are they justified to evict the people without even considering their right and two, to give an ultimatum for their crops to be removed within a period of only two weeks from now? Thank you very much. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I request that the Minister of Water and Environment makes a statement to that effect tomorrow. So, cause that response to come in tomorrow. Otherwise, we appreciate the question raised and the concern and it will be addressed appropriately, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not just about making a statement here. Action has also got to be taken to deal with some of these issues because such a statement must translate into some actions in the field where people are affected.
 
2.17
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I wish to bring to the attention of Parliament the issue concerning the football icon called Owiny Menasey that I talked about a couple of weeks ago. He led the Ugandan football team to the UK, played barefooted but defeated the UK team. It is sad to let you know that the old man passed on last Monday morning. 

I recall that the Rt hon. Prime Minister had promised that he would bring the matter to the attention of His Excellency, the President, so that that man would be awarded the medal of honour for the distinguished service he rendered Uganda, more specifically in the football fraternity. 

So, I would like to inform you that I have been in touch with the family as well as the Ministry of Education and Sports, which has decided to attend the funeral only that they do not have the facilities to finance it, and that whatever they will do will just be a token. 

So, I feel that a person who lifted the image of Uganda to the extent that even when we talked about it last time, Mr Speaker, you wondered whether the Ugandan team played in winter or summer - whether it was winter or summer, it is in the history of football that the Ugandan team played the British counterpart barefooted and defeated them! That is something which cannot be done again. But that team did it and the captain has passed on and he is going to be whisked into his grave as a nonentity.

Therefore, I beg you, Mr Speaker, that if there is anything that the government can do, even now that the man has passed away, at least give him a decent burial. It will encourage the family, and particularly the people from Lango Sub Region who have taken sports very seriously. That is why we have Denis Obua. We also had the late Akii-Bua and so on. Seeing you go in to your grave like a dead dog is not worth struggling. So, I am just begging you, for the purpose of the current and the future generation, that the man be given a decent send-off. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it was during Prime Minister’s Question Time when this matter was brought up and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister made some statement in that regard that some contacts were going to be made, this person was going to be looked up and that certain things were going to be done. But now that he has passed on, the rules change and there are things we should do to make it okay.  Anyway, as we always do when heroes of this country leave us, we stand for a while and observe a moment of silence. Let us do that for Mr Menasey Owiny who has passed on. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Cecilia Ogwal for raising this and informing us. First, we want to send our condolences to the family, but also to assure the family and hon. Cecilia Ogwal that now that we have been informed, Government will follow up on this issue. We shall also make sure we are represented at the send-off of this hero who contributed to the development of football in our country and make a substantive contribution. The burial is on Friday. Before Friday, we shall have done something. Thank you.

2.22
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the rights of people who are arrested by police, especially those being arrested recently connected to political activities in the country. 

Article 23 (3) of the Constitution properly provides that an arrested person shall be restricted or detained in a place that is gazetted under the laws of Uganda. Such a person shall be told, in a language he/she understands, the offence he/she has committed or the reason for his/her arrest and that such a person shall have access to his/her lawyer, doctor and next of kin. 

My understanding of the law is that after the arrest, the police should make it as convenient as possible for a suspect to enjoy these rights. However, of recent, police have adopted a culture of arresting suspects from one area and taking them to another area. When the suspects are taken, they are not told why they are being arrested and where they are being taken. I know this for a fact and I can testify because I have ever been a victim of such an arrest. When I was arrested together with the now Katikiro of Buganda and my colleague hon. Medard Sseggona, we were driven to Western Uganda and held at various police stations.  

Last weekend, a group of youth belonging to TDA were arrested at a press conference at the Centenary Park here in Kampala. Ordinarily such suspects would be detained at Jinja Road Police Station or at most at the Central Police Station in Kampala. They were instead driven to Nagalama Police Station in Mukono District.

When relatives traced them at Nagalama and attempted to access them, those relatives were teargased, bullets were fired in the air and seven of them were arrested and detained. When we went to check on them together with the Leader of Opposition, we were told that those people were being charged with invading a police station. The next day when other their relatives went there with a lawyer, they were told that those people were being charged with terrorism. In court yesterday, the same group was charged with disobeying lawful orders.
  
Mr Speaker, it is so sad when police starts telling lies to the citizens of this country. Dr Kizza Besigye is another example. Whenever he is arrested say in Kasangati -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you now like to raise the point?

MS NAMBOOZE: He is driven to Nagalama Police Station in Mukono District. What I want to raise as a matter of national importance is: why has the police chosen to bring back the old culture, which was used to be practiced in the days of the colonialists where Ugandans would be arrested say in Kampala, they would be driven to Karamoja? Why is it that people are being tortured in such a manner and their lives put at a very big risk? People are put on pickups, handcuffed and driven at a terrible speed.

Mr Speaker, we would like to protest that, especially we people of Mukono. We do not want Mukono District to be turned into a detention centre of some sort and we do protest the manner, in which suspects, arrested from around Wakiso and Kampala, are being treated especially those connected to political offences.

Lastly, is the issue of Nalufenya Police Station where so many people have been taken and detained with their relatives not accessing them yet they have stayed in police cells for months! The few who have managed to escape talk about the conditions in these police stations of Nagalama and Nalufenya as being so bad; women are detained together with men in the cell. The police cells do not have toilets and so on. The single toilet at Nagalama Police Station, for example, does not even have a door. I therefore pray that Government comes up to explain this.

And through you, Mr Speaker, I would like to request the Parliamentary Committee on Human Rights to visit these police stations mentioned: Nagalama, Nalufenya and Kireka. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, honourable member, for raising this issue and, the Speaker, for giving us an opportunity once again to shed light on it.

One, last week when a similar matter came to this House, we said that all Ugandans everywhere, should enjoy their freedoms and liberties but should do that within the law; all of us should work within the law. The police are guided by the law to stop and prevent crime and in doing so, they should do it in a manner that gives dignity to those that they have arrested.

The question of facility or support to detention centres is a matter that we have been looking at. The budget of police has been increasing. But I think that this is a matter that all of us – because the role of appropriation is with Parliament - should address so that the detention facilities in our country can have the necessary facilities to give dignity to those arrested.

But, Mr Speaker, I am also aware that there have been some discussions between political parties and the Minister of Internal Affairs, which have yielded some results in terms of the activities of the candidates for flag bearers of FDC. At an appropriate time, I would expect probably the Opposition to brief the House on the progress. Otherwise, we understand there is good progress in terms of how they are going to be moving. I thank, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, point of procedure.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. With the wave of absenteeism in the House, we on this side are unable to register on our machine. But we can see on the other side, the electronic machine registering our colleagues. Are we safe now that members on this side are unable to register electronically? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a technical problem. I am sure the technical people will rectify that. I can see them now around the machine. There should be something happening to that effect.

Honourable member, after item four, we will move to item nine as earlier communicated to allow the mover and seconder of this motion of item nine. If they are ready, it will be coming after item four.

LAYING OF PAPERS
2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the following:
    1. The tax expenditure for financial year 2014/2015
    2. II)   A request by Government to borrow up to $ 100 million from the International Development Association (IDA) to support the Skills Development Project
    3. III) The Supplementary Schedule No. 3 for financial year 2014/15.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those items. Item one on tax expenditure for the financial year 2014/2015 is referred to the Committee on Finance to handle. Item two is referred to the Committee on National Economy; and item three is referred to the Budget Committee to handle within the framework of the rules and report to the House to advise us on how to proceed.

LAYING OF A REPORT OF A PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION ABROAD

2.32
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki, Budaka): Mr Speaker, as you know, Uganda is a member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are proceeding under Laying of Papers.

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report of the Ugandan Delegation to the 26th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Seminar, which took place from 17-21 May, 2015, in Dhakar, Bangladesh.  I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. At an appropriate time, we will bring this matter so that we can debate it.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY 4 JUNE 2015

2.34
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, to move a Motion to thank His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, for the clear and precise exposition of Government Policy contained in the State of the Nation Address to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on Thursday, 4 June 2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the members for Sheema District, Ndorwa, Mbarara Municipality and Igara. Would you like to speak to your motion?

DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker,
“WHEREAS Article 101 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires the President to deliver to Parliament an Address on the State of the Nation;
AND WHEAREAS His Excellency, the President Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in compliance with the constitutional provision, delivered the State of Nation Address to this Parliament at the International Conference Centre in Serena Kampala on 4 June 2015;

AWARE that the State of the Nation Address gave a broad projection on areas of strategic significance to Uganda in particular, concentrating on the basic priority sectors which are: the roads, electricity, railway, defense and security among others;

COGNISANT of the fact that in his address, His Excellency, the President informed the nation that Ugandan economy continues to be vibrant amidst the economic challenges and reforms on the local, regional and international levels;
FURTHER COGNISANT that, for Uganda to be competitive and address the economic challenges identified in the State of the Nation address, emphasis must be on investment in infrastructure, value addition, industrialization, building the service sector and the state pillars to ensure the state is capable of governing its people and protecting them, developing the human resource through education and improved health care for all, continuing to promote a private sector led economy, which is a more efficient vehicle for enterprise identification and growth and developing the infrastructure especially electricity, roads, railways and others and integrating the African market to assist the private sector;

 NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
    (i) That Parliament of Uganda expresses its gratitude to His Excellency, the President for his clear and precise exposition in the State of the Nation Address.
    (ii) That Parliament commits itself to the promotion of the great ideas values and quality cherished by His Excellency, the President in the State of the Nation Address.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has justified the motion and it has already been seconded.

MR DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, the fulfillment of a constitutional obligation under Article 101 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is not, in my opinion, a mere ritual as others may be tempted to think or persuaded to believe. 

It is a fulfillment of a command; a fulfillment of the wishes and aspirations of the people of Uganda vested in the President of the Republic of Uganda and exercised in accordance with the Constitution of this country. 
May I, at this moment, take this opportunity to salute His Excellency, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the republic of Uganda, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, Fountain of Honour and the National Chairperson of National Resistance Movement (NRM), for executing his constitutional mandate on 4 June 2015, by delivering to Parliament the State of the Nation Address.

In a nut shell, in this year’s State of the Nation Address, the President highlighted successes scored by the Government in the 2014/15 financial year in the different sectors that exist under the Government of the Republic of Uganda. He also brought forward areas of strategic focus for 2015/16 financial year and other years to come, in line with Vision 2040.

 The key areas of focus, Mr Speaker, are:
    (i) Enhancing internal revenue collection to boost service delivery to the people of Uganda 
    (ii) The addition of 1,627 Kilometers of electricity to be added to the existing 1,400 that we have at the moment
    (iii) The $338 million of Energy Fund that has been set aside for Isimba and Karuma dams
    (iv) Shs 170 billion earmarked for science innovation for us to invest in science, technology and innovation whose investment is no longer a choice but an imperative obligation on the side of any sane Government that exists, including the NRM Government.

Generally, the key areas highlighted in the motion are: road construction, extension of electricity especially under the Rural Electrification Agency, science innovation, and operationalization of Operation Wealth Creation, agriculture, peace and security including the 2016 general elections at all levels.

Mr Speaker, it is my humble appeal and honour to invite Members of Parliament to support the motion that the thanks of Parliament be recorded in respect of His Excellency, the President for fulfilling his constitutional mandate and obligation of delivering to Parliament the State of the Nation Address. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Seconder of the motion, can you do it in seven minutes?

2.42
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I also would like to thank His Excellency for delivering the State of the Nation Address and specifically for highlighting important issues that the country is looking at if we are going to transform this country.

Mr Speaker, the President emphasized the issue of agriculture and it was noted that agriculture is the backbone of the country and every one participates in it across the country. In his speech, the President noted that the four-acre plan is continuously going to be supported because this plan reaches out to the people. Therefore, if we are going to transform this country, we cannot forget agriculture. No wonder that is why he emphasised the issue of transiting from subsistence to commercial farming.

Again if we are going to transform this country, where more than 86 percent of our people dwell in agriculture, we cannot just leave that sector alone.

Mr Speaker, coffee in this country is one of the major crops. The President emphasised we must work hard to ensure we produce 20 million bags of coffee which can make us the second largest producers of coffee in the world. That means that, if we export 20 million bags of coffee annually, we are going to increase on the revenue for our country. Exporting coffee means a lot. It means that we are going to even create value addition and so creating more employment opportunities for our people.

The President further emphasised on the issue of restructuring NAADS. You are aware that as Members of Parliament, we have been grumbling with how the previous NAADS had been working. As I speak, restructuring of NAADS is ongoing. Everywhere we go and also in our constituencies, everyone is working with the Operation Wealth Creation team to ensure that our people access materials. People have not been accessing agricultural materials simply because NAADS was not reaching out to them; it was just an office thing.

As I speak, all the planting materials for coffee, tea, beans, cassava and many more – people outside there are busy planting and I believe it is going to transform our country from that peasantry status – (Interjection)- Mr Speaker, hon. Betty Nambooze is distracting me. I do not know why she is focusing on me.

Anyway, Mr Speaker, even Mukono Municipality has benefited from the coffee that is being distributed throughout the country. His Excellency, the President did not – (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not intend to interrupt my honourable sister, but she has talked about my constituency as a beneficiary.

First of all, I am wondering why hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro who knew she was going to support such an important motion came dressed in UPC colours. (Laughter)

However, is it in order for hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro to mislead this House that we are growing coffee in Mukono Municipality, when the urban authority rules are very clear that no such farming can be done in a municipal council?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House has every year allocated money for urban farming. I do not know whether it includes coffee or not.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. We need to keep on learning more and more. But what I was saying is that, His Excellency did not stop on that but given the fact that we have some districts that do not have enough land to practice commercial farming, he has gone an extra mile to encourage people to practise backyard farming. That is why there is emphasis on poultry keeping, mushroom growing, piggery, goat rearing and so on. All these are to ensure our Ugandan families transit from earning less than Shs 20,000 to Shs 30,000 per month to Shs 20 million annually.

When we achieve this, now that Parliament has given NAADS more money, it is going to help transform our economy and our people and that is why we are moving into the middle class economy.


Mr Speaker, I also would like to salute the President for promoting scientific innovation; he emphasised it when he was raising the issue of supporting scientists.


You remember the banana initiative, which is a new innovation that is going to create export of banana, which was not previously exported in form of flour; it is going to create employment opportunities. Some of the Members of Parliament wanted to kill that project. But how could we wish to kill our own scientific innovation in this country? On that note, I would like to salute the President for continuously supporting scientific innovations. If we continue at this rate - you people are talking of citizens going to seek for employment elsewhere but if we do not support the scientific innovations, employment opportunities are not going to be expanded in this country. So, we should wholly support His Excellency, for raising this important concern.

No wonder, when my colleague was talking about the priority sectors, he mentioned electricity. When we have electricity, it means that value addition is going to be a very big component in terms of transforming this country.

Mr Speaker, when we look at countries that have developed like Singapore and those others in the eastern part of the world, they have emphasized scientific innovations. So, without supporting that, Uganda is not going to transit from the peasantry to the middle class income economy as we would expect.

Therefore, on this issue I call upon Members of Parliament that whenever we have any scientific innovation, we should support and give it an adequate budget that can help our country to continue growing. For instance, the Kiira car innovation is something that people still wonder about - nobody had ever innovated in manufacturing such kind of car. 

I also would like to support the elevation of Ministry of Education and Sports to incorporate that element of science and technology to ensure we are focused in whatever we are doing. We should promote science and innovation for Uganda to develop at a rate which we want it to.

Even when the President talked about agricultural development in the country, he highlighted a few challenges. And that means that it is now upon the Ministry of Agriculture to address them so that the people engaged in agriculture can practise and do agriculture as a business. One of the issues he brought out, and which he usually puts emphasis on, is the issue of drought where we can encourage our people to do irrigation - (Interjection) - I have been given seven minutes and I am about to finish.

Mr Speaker, the resident also emphasised the issue of pest control. We have invested a lot of money in supporting agriculture. So, when His Excellency brings out those issues, it becomes incumbent upon the Ministry of Agriculture to prioritise and ensure they are addressed such that our people can practise agriculture without those challenges. I beg to move. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

2.52
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much, for this opportunity. Allow me to join the previous speakers in thanking H.E the President for the well thought out State of the Nation Address.

I thank His Excellency, the President for the address, which reported on most of the issues that affect the people of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I would like to salute the President on the issue of security. I would like to put it on record that in Uganda today, there is security all over the country. I would also like to put it on record again that where there is no security, there cannot be development. Everything we look at today and everything we want cannot be achieved if we do not have security.


Mr Speaker, let me further put it on record that Ugandans are doing a lot of business because they are secure. You can do business from 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 a.m. the following day. People are working trans-day and night. If we didn’t have security, it would not have been possible. So, I thank the President for putting a lot of emphasis, in the State of the Nation Address, on security and also indicating that Uganda will continue to invest heavily in it.

Mr Speaker, Uganda has contributed a lot not only on internal security but also in terms of regional security. Our brothers are sisters around us wouldn’t be comfortable today if it were not because of the work of UPDF. So, I salute His Excellency, the Commander-in-Chief and the UPDF for their contribution, especially in averting an imminent genocide, which was about to happen in South Sudan. 

Apart from that, I again salute the President that the fact that he was nominated to chair or steer peace talks in Burundi was not by chance. It was because of what he has already exhibited in our country, that he was trusted with that noble cause to ensure our brothers in Burundi are also secure.

Uganda has become a regional pacifier. It is also becoming a continental pacifier. When you look at what UPDF is doing in Somalia, you cannot help but simply salute the President of the Republic of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I want to put it on record that the way to go nowadays is Pan Africanism. And if His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni is able to steer this country to make sure that we invest heavily in security and also that we are able to make sure that the countries neighbouring us are secure. I think that is the way we should move to make sure that we gain several strides towards Pan-Africanism.

My colleague, hon. Nyakikongoro, talked about science and technology in our country. Even if we get so many scientists in this country or come up with a lot of innovations in this country, we cannot put them at a commercial level if we are not secure. I therefore salute the President that he has always emphasised and continues to emphasise the importance of security in our country.

Mr Speaker, our brothers and sisters from northern Uganda today are able to practice agriculture just because that part of the country is secure. We lost many years when they could not do anything in agriculture and were just living on handouts. However, because of the secure situation in northern Uganda, today the people there are able to produce their own food. They are also getting surplus food which is helping us in our food industry. I salute the President for that.

I also continue to indicate that without security, you cannot have any kind of development. The schools we are craving for, you will find them empty if there is war in this country. Today, the Government of Uganda has been able to construct very good schools. In places like Mubende, there are secondary schools which look like a university. If it was not for security, we would not have had those schools.

I support the President to invest as much as possible and continue investing in the security sector because other investments will be in vain if we are not secure. That investment is also translated into the professionalism in our army. I salute the UPDF because they are highly professional today and that is why we have been able to gain those strides.

Mr Speaker, I would like to indicate to honourable colleagues and all Ugandans out there that there is nothing more precious than life. If we do not have security, our lives are not assured; that is why I continue saluting His Excellency the President. 

Allow me also to note that in the State of the Nation Address, emphasis was put on infrastructural development. I believe and think that all members do believe that infrastructural development is the background to any kind of development. Looking at the road infrastructure today, Uganda is at a take-off stage nowadays. My sister, hon. Ntabazi, is witness that today they are able to go to Bundibugyo on a tarmac road that was unthought-of some years ago. Our colleagues from Kisoro - bending those very sharp corners - also have tarmac roads and that is an indicator of development. 

Uganda being an agricultural country, without those wonderful roads, agriculture would be in vain. I thus salute the President for that kind of infrastructure. I again salute him for the electricity infrastructure. 

Mr Speaker, we are talking of the problem of unemployment in our country today but with electricity, we have continued to attract many more investors into this country. This kind of investment is helping us to create jobs for the young population of this country and I am sure, in a few years to come, the problem of unemployment will be reduced to understandable levels.

We usually crave for good hospitals and schools in this country but I continue to say that without security – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Would you like to wind up in 30 seconds? Are you okay? 

Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the Address of the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President to this Parliament on Thursday, 4 June 2015. That is the motion I propose for your debate and as the procedure now is, the first person to start this debate will be the Leader of the Opposition, for 45 minutes, in his reply to the address by the President.

3.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is a great honour for me to talk to you in a special way this afternoon, in response to the President’s Address on the State of the Nation. 

Firstly, I would like to welcome you to this last session of the Ninth Parliament and I thank you for the good work you have done for our country. This is the last time I address you, presenting to this House a response to the State of the Nation Address, as Leader of the Opposition. 

In the Tenth Parliament, we will be sitting on the right hand side of the Speaker because we shall be in Government. (Laughter) We wish to thank and congratulate all Ugandans on managing to survive and push on under the prevailing harsh economic and political conditions and yet it appears that even harder times lie ahead, as evidenced by the current free-fall of the shilling against the foreign currencies and the escalating prices of goods and services. Fortunately, another opportunity is coming next year for Ugandans to deal with our 30 years of dilemma, once and for all. 


Mr Speaker, the President has a lot of people to praise him, as we have already seen from the last four people who have spoken. I will therefore not praise the President for his presentation to us. I will make a critique of the President’s speech and also offer what we think we should have done, if we were in power.

My presentation this afternoon is largely our response to the President. The response is in line with Article 6(e)(4) of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006; where it is provided that the Leader of the Opposition shall study all policy statements of Government with his or her shadow ministers and attend committee deliberations on policy issues and give their party’s views and opinions and propose possible alternatives.

In his address, in which he chose to account for 30 years of his rule instead of one financial year as expected, the President started with an intriguing quotation from the Church of Uganda Prayer Book and I quote: “They left undone what they ought to have done and did that they ought not to have done and there is no truth in them.” We think that if there is anyone to whom the quotation rightly applies, it is our President. 

Allow me cite a few examples to prove our case. When the President captured power in 1986, he gave his transitional government a term of four years. However, before the four years elapsed, he added another five more years to himself. Was there truth in what he had told us? 

In his 2001 presidential elections manifesto, President Museveni put it in black and white that he was seeking his last term as head of state. That was 2001 but he is still the President; he lied to Ugandans. The President is now set to make 30 years in office, as per February 2016. To the great disappointment of Ugandans, this country in its entire history is yet to witness a peaceful handover of power from one President to another. Indeed, “There is no truth in them.” 

The President found the cooperatives thriving and robust as the farmers’ collective voice, their marketing and producer movement and suppliers of affordable farm inputs. What happened to them? He killed them within two years after grabbing power.

Also killed was the Farmers’ Cooperative Bank that was helping the peasants to access cheap money as working capital. Similarly killed were the Uganda Tea Growers Corporation, the Uganda Cooperative Transport Union, district farm institutes and numerous stock farms that assisted in modern agricultural development. In fact, as I make this presentation, the previously famous and booming Agricultural Show in Jinja, which ended last week - like all the other long dead similar annual shows that used to take place in all district farm institutes across the country, the Jinja show is also on the verge of extinction. However, I heard my colleagues talk about agriculture and praising it. Indeed, “They did that they ought not to have done.”

He found a robust investment arm of Government - the Uganda Development Corporation; he killed it and gave away some of its investments like Nytil and Dairy Corporation for $1 each and sold others or their equipment at giveaway prices in the name of privatisation. If you asked where the money went, there is no answer. 

The President found a peoples’ bank - the Uganda Commercial Bank - and gave it away at a paltry $19 million with its entire assets including the UCB Building, which we all know was its headquarters and many branches and numerous assets. Compare this to the small Nile Bank without any physical assets - land or buildings – which was sold at $24 million at about the same time. Recently, and when the President was talking to us, he was lamenting about the UCB; instead of apologizing, he was simply lamenting. Maybe he should have apologised to Ugandans for having given away our bank for no good reason. 

President Museveni found a thriving Uganda Airlines with ground handling and catering facilities which were all cannibalized and given away to relatives. Today our airline is no more as neighbours benefit from what indeed, “They (he) left undone what they ought to have done.”

The President found a railway system that was running up to Kasese and Pakwach and killed it in the interest of foreign trailer trucks owners. Perhaps regretting his errors, he is now preoccupied with construction of the most expensive standard gauge railway segment in the world as if the gauge was the problem. 

The President found a sound public education system; maybe a bit narrow but sound and not like that of today where children in upper classes in government schools have been found to be below P.2 standard in reading and arithmetic. A study was done recently and children of P.6 and P.5 were given tests on P.2 work and they did not know how to write, read and add up arithmetic. Where increasing numbers of parents are forced to opt for expensive private schools and leave free public schools – the UPE and USE systems which were badly implemented. All these were very good ideas but they were badly implemented and they have been mismanaged.

Mr Speaker, the health system has been neglected and destroyed by those in power and their agents. They seek treatment abroad even for delivery of their children and grandchildren. According to a recent UNICEF report, Uganda is among the 10 top countries in the world with the highest maternal, newborn and child mortality rate and about 40 per cent of Ugandan children are retarded or die because of malnutrition. 

It is noteworthy that in his Budget Speech, 2015/16, the Minister of Finance says the budget, “seeks to rebuild the health system to improve service delivery….” This is a clear admission that the health system has been destroyed but not built over the 30 years. If you talk to the people of Bugiri, where I come from, about government hospitals, they know exactly what this means; their system has broken down.

Do we still need to ask as to who has destroyed our social service delivery systems? The long serving Chief Executive Officer (CEO) is known. Under his governance, almost all state and government institutions, systems and service delivery have been destroyed; thanks to his greed for power and concentration of it, in himself coupled with his micromanagement of national affairs.

Mr Speaker, in his manifesto for the 2001 elections, President Museveni wrote four times asking for his last term. He repeated the same request over and over verbally at rallies and on Radio and TV programmes. The last term was to end in 2006 but it never was. Indeed, “There is no truth in them.”

Point No.5 of the NRM 10-Point Programme was to construct an “independent, integrated and self-sustaining economy” that would stop the leakage of Uganda’s wealth abroad. How come then that after 30 years under the same regime, guided by the 10-Point Programme under the same president, this Parliament has just passed a budget whose biggest item is an allocation for payment of external debts mounting to Shs 6.6 trillion? Why does Uganda still import more than it exports? What sense do the crafters of the 10-Point Programme make of this today?

When he was still a revolutionary, the President once wrote correctly and also used to say that Africa’s problem was leaders who overstay in power. Such leaders become intolerant to divergent opinions even if they are better for the country than theirs, assume positions of infallibility, blame others for their own failures and misdeeds and take sole credit for all achievements. This is where we are as a country. 

In his address, the President outlined five pillars of his next programme namely: roads, electricity, the railway, defence and security and the cost of capital. The rest of the address were aspirational statements about agriculture, livestock, oil and timber. 

For obvious reasons, the President said practically nothing about the current political situation in the country that is worrying citizens. He said in one sentence that the political situation was “very good” and added that everything is provided for in the Constitution and in his Manifesto, so there was no need for him to say anything, not even a word about the coming general elections and the necessary electoral reforms.

Mr Speaker, from where we sit, we do not think that our current political situation in the country is very good as the President said. We see it differently. We see turmoil under the sky. We see uncertainty and a dark cloud hanging over the country. We are sure even the President sees it but he pretends that all is well. Otherwise, why is he deploying heavily-armed security forces and making Kampala a garrison capital city, a fort of sorts? This is scaring off investors and causing capital flight.

The President said, “Everything is in the Constitution and the NRM manifesto." Surely? Is that the same Constitution he once referred to as “mere pieces of paper” which he has continued to ignore, rape and abuse at will for his personal interests?

In 2010, the President produced a five-year campaign Manifesto 2011/15 titled, “Prosperity for All, Better Service Delivery and Job Creation”. He keeps on changing the titles while saying the same thing.
In the foreword by presidential candidate Museveni he states: “The focus in this manifesto is on the services that have a direct link with the quality of life and human development especially health, education, water, sanitation, as well as infrastructure focusing on electricity and transport system”.
 
He adds: “The investment in commercialisation of agriculture will make Ugandans more prosperous” and that investment “in the development of the oil and gas sector will be used in development of infrastructure and human resource for prosperity for all Ugandans”. 
The question is how far have these stated manifesto objectives been achieved in the last five years of the 30-year old rule by Yoweri Kaguta Museveni?

In the first chapter of the manifesto, he promises to deliver democracy, good governance, rule of law, constitutionalism, promotion and protection of human rights, independent judiciary, an independent electoral commission, zero tolerance of corruption and above all prosperity for all. This does not sound like Uganda. To us, all of these lofty promises and principles have turned out in reality to be hot air and worse still have, in fact, been grossly violated in order to ensure regime survival. Ask hon. Amama Mbabazi and his supporters who are the most recent victims of the vicious regime actions.

Mr Speaker, the fear of the President losing power has become a big impediment to necessary reforms that would make the country more free and democratic and thus realising sustainable economic development and stability.

The President believes in more control of the public administration sector rather than in service delivery. The centre piece of this governance and philosophy is keeping control of the army, police, security agencies and of late telecommunications, including social media. He has become a real Big Brother of George Orwell’s famous book, “Nineteen Eighty-Four.”

He has built a ruthless police state that mainly serves his personal interests and those of a clique of cronies in his regime. Some commanders of the police force see the Opposition as enemies of the state not opponents of government. More often than not, the police shamelessly issue more warnings against the Opposition than against criminals and lawbreakers. More resources are spent on controlling the Opposition than on criminals and terrorists. In just the last few days, how much resources have been wasted on fighting Mbabazi and Besigye because they were going to talk to the people? Actually today, I saw that they have finally approved Besigye to hold a rally in Kampala but Police deployed tanks and everything else they could think of. That is just a waste of resources. Is this the freedom and democracy which cost over 500,000 lives in the Luweero Triangle and over 1,000,000 lives more in the north and northeast to protect the regime in power?

Mr Speaker, recently, the police have gone to the extent of pulling down posters of political leaders who have expressed their intention to contest for the presidency of the country. What crime has one committed by doing that? Now they have started deploying thousands of policemen and women to prevent aspiring presidential candidates from reaching the voters for consultation.

The police, whose annual budget the President has increased to more than 10 times since he appointed the current Inspector General of Police in 2005, behaves and acts like a militia wing of his ruling party. Recently, the Inspector General of Police, Gen. Kale Kaiyihura, did not disappoint his boss when addressing a security team at Mukono High School that was to take charge of Namugongo on Martyrs Day, June 3. He reportedly warned, “Anybody who is eyeing to lead Uganda come the 2016 elections should forget about it,” adding that they fought for this nation and cannot hand it over to anybody anyhow. “What I can assure you is that we are fighters and fighters don’t get old and tired,” he said. Gen. Kayihura knows very well that we, the Opposition have chosen the path of the ballot and dialogue - a peaceful path; we have no guns and do not wish to use them ever. Then why is he talking tough and threatening us with guns bought by us, the taxpayers?

He added that they have military skills, are still fit and well organised to fight anybody who will try to push them away. “We have got military skills and weapons; so we shall always dominate any group that will try to disorganise us,” the General was quoted threatening. He has never denied those media reports. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda’s personal and de facto single-party dictatorship is underpinned by a superstructure of militarism. The personal rule largely relies on the military, the security agencies and increasingly a militarised Police Force while the ruling party sadly lies dormant most of the time, with the exception of the Parliamentary Caucus – of our colleagues across this table – only to be activated during election campaigns.

It is therefore not surprising that as resistance against his rule increases, the President is deploying more and more still-serving-soldiers in purely civilian jobs outside the army. He has deployed the military in the Police Force, in registration of voters and citizens, in ICT section of the Electoral Commission, in Parliament here, in tax collection, in enforcing law and order (especially on the lakes) and now in distribution of agricultural inputs to peasants in villages – which hon. Nyakikongoro was talking about. 

Civilians trained through chakamchaka as party cadres and of recent the so-called crime preventers are also being brought into the military-security system. We have seen them in the north wearing the President’s posters and protesting against the unwanted Amama Mbabazi. The country has now been set on a war footing and inevitable violence. We hope sanity will prevail and this is averted.

Mr Speaker, instead of building a democracy where the army is subordinate to civilian order, mainly to secure our borders, we are increasingly seeing soldiers being entrenched in civilian roles because although there is the NRM party, the reality is that the President rules with the UPDF and security agencies, as his personal power base. The NRM is simply a coating on the bitter pill on which the personal rule has survived for almost 30 years. 

Large numbers of military personnel, for example, have been recently deployed in the countryside, allegedly to manage NAADS programmes but in reality to intimidate the masses and in preparation for intervention in the coming electoral processes.

Mr Speaker, I will ask my colleagues in the NRM about what political party worth its salt will allow one of its leaders to use his powerful office to criminalise aspirations of some other leaders vying for the top position in the party.

What political party worth its salt allows its leaders to go all over the country carrying sacks of money and buying support for its supposedly popular chairperson while at the same time restricting, harassing, persecuting and brutalising political opponents? No wonder then that Uganda is one of the worst performing countries as regards the rule of law.

According to the 2015 Rule of Law Index by the World Justice Project which was released in the USA on 02 June 2015, of the 102 countries sampled, Uganda stands at number 95 and the worst in East Africa. Repressive laws have been put in place and more are being processed to further reduce the freedom of those deemed not to be pro-regime. This is rule by the law not rule of law. Laws and law enforcement officers are used to fight political opponents of the personal rule and to ensure a long life presidency. This is the real state of our nation although “some fortune-hunters”, as they were recently baptized, pretend not to see it. 

Mr Speaker, the budget, recently read, promises an increase in the budget deficit of 7 per cent of the GDP without giving us reasons for it. The sectors allocated a lot of funds and whose allocations were increased are those for public administration that contribute to regime protection and survival. 

After 30 continuous years in power by one leader, which is equivalent to one generation, Uganda should be by now a transformed developed or at least a middle income country. Unfortunately, Uganda is at the bottom of the list in most development indicators, whether in health, education, water and sanitation, electricity coverage, administration of justice, name it. 

The State of the Nation Address hardly said anything serious about these issues as was expected and as promised in the NRM manifesto. Instead, it was the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in his budget speech who surprisingly, addressed several issues that should have been covered in the State of the Nation Address. 

In his campaign manifesto of 2011/16, the President proudly informs us that “Since 1985/86, the share of agriculture to national output has declined from 53.9 per cent to 22.8 per cent in 2009/10”.  Under agriculture, we are informed that subsistence farmers constitute 60 per cent or 3,000,000 households of the farming households. This is what explains, though inadvertently, the rampant abject poverty in the country, especially in the rural areas. 

The 60 per cent subsistence farmers, outside the cash economy plus the non-subsistence farmers now total about 70 to 80 per cent of the population and we are told that they now share less than 20 per cent of national output (GDP).  

Clearly agriculture should be one of the national priorities for funding but to the NRM Government, it is not. We need to bring all those subsistence farmers into the cash economy so that there is development.  

For 30 years in power, the NRM Government has sung an empty song of modernising agriculture and transforming the economy, but where is that on the ground? On the ground, we still have and see primitive and backward farming methods.

Mr Speaker, the government priorities are different. In this year’s budget, the Public Sector Management got almost Shs 800 billion and Shs 6 billion for Public Administration, a total of Shs1.4 trillion which is four times the allocation for agriculture. Agriculture has about Shs 500 billion while administration is about Shs 1.5 trillion. 

The high expenditure on public administration clearly indicates the low ranking of agriculture in Government’s set of priorities. Regime survival, corruption, bribery and patronage through public administration are now their No.1 priority. This is the most serious mistake and indictment of President Museveni’s government rating regime survival higher than the economic and social interests of 80 per cent of the population who depend entirely on agriculture. 

They deny agriculture funding yet it is well known that investment in agriculture has the highest job creation potential. I am sure that my friend, hon. David Bahati, will agree with me on that. Food is the biggest driver of the cost of living and therefore, focus should be on investment in agriculture in order to raise living standards and the quality of life.

Rt. Hon. Speaker, a just released Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) report indicates that the number of undernourished people going hungry in Uganda is about nine million or about 25.5 per cent of the population. This is about the same figure for those who are chronically poor.  

We agree there should be adequate investment in infrastructure but if some of the funds that have been invested in trunk roads had been invested in improved productivity in agriculture, the growth of GDP would have been even higher, thus eventually making more funds available sustainably for improved road infrastructure. 

The roads do not automatically bring more income to households. Otherwise, why is it that with thousands of kilometers of trunk roads improved, together with GDP growth of 6 per cent, poverty remains still the biggest national problem? 

If roads per se had an immediate impact on poverty, it would have been seen in Busoga for example, where I come from, where paved roads and the railway line to Kenya have passed for decades. Instead Busoga has the highest density incidence of poverty in the country. Even rural Buganda, which is crisscrossed by more tarmac roads, is not significantly different from Busoga in terms of poverty.

Good trunk roads without deliberately adding new productive capacity in the country may actually instead boost the movement of imported goods produced elsewhere as is indeed the case in our country today.  

Foreign businesses benefit more from our modern roads than us the citizens largely because of Government’s poor planning, poor policies and wrong priorities which do not put the interests of ordinary people at the centre. 

Pro-people policies and budgets must be of necessity pro-agriculture and pro-small scale and medium enterprises because that is where most people are. This has been the missing link for 30 years. 

With no consistent value addition industrialisation and agricultural modernisation policies, there will be no clear linkages with road and infrastructure improvements as is often assumed. 


Infrastructure development in Uganda is among Government priorities linked to high opportunities for corruption, patronage and cash donations to rulers, as recent events have shown. 

Indeed, the costs of infrastructure projects often become more expensive because of corruption, excessive red tape and deficient supervision consequential to the corrupt procurement processes.

Mr Speaker, another most prominent issue brought out by the current budget is the extent of indebtedness by the country, shown by the fact that debt repayment is Shs 6 trillion, which is 25.7 per cent of the budget. It is the single highest allocation in the current budget. 

What then will the debt level be like when loans totalling to $ 13.8 billion (about Shs 48 trillion) for the Standard Gauge Railway, several hydroelectricity dams, the oil refinery, the oil pipeline, airport expansion and for acquisition of more armaments are added? 

The minister does not tell us what the old debts were contracted for.  Some of the external debts are long term; 30, 40 or even 50 years but we are yet to know whether the funds have been well utilized - where, when and how. In fact, as I stand here, some borrowed money of about $ 2 billion remains unutilised for years while attracting strictly enforced interest payments. 


While I hope the Shadow Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be given an opportunity to reply to the Budget Speech, I wish to comment on some areas that should have been handled in the President’s address.

Whereas the President identifies five areas of his government’s focus in the coming years, namely, roads, electricity, railways, defence and security and the cost of capital, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development identifies seven strategic areas, namely, defence and security, private sector enterprise development, infrastructure development and maintenance, commercialisation of agriculture, increased domestic revenue mobilisation, increased social service delivery and efficiency in government management.   

Whereas the President boasts of great achievements in economic development and service delivery, the minister is more forthcoming and truthful with information that shows that only modest achievements have been made and we thank the minister for that.

For example, the minister shows that with regard to roads, only 167 km were upgraded to tarmac against a target of 250 km and only 129 km were reconstructed against a target of 170 km.

On health, we heard the usual focus on quantitative figures but even here, the minister’s figures show modest goals. For example, whereas the government plans to rehabilitate nine identified hospitals next financial year, this is against the background that Government was able to rehabilitate only 13 hospitals in the last five years. 

However, statistics and other figures on health do not tell us whether access to public health facilities has risen from 17 per cent of the population where it has been for a long time.

On education, there are promises of increased student loans to a paltry Shs 6 billion. At this rate, when will the loan scheme roll out to all needy students without discrimination?

In this age and time, access to piped water in our capital city still, shamefully, covers less than 50 per cent of the residents. The same applies to electricity. Every day, we see Ugandan children carrying jerry cans of water and water vendors ferrying jerry cans of water on bicycles and motor cycles. That is 50 years after independence.

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development paints a dim picture of the country where agriculture has been registering a negative growth of 1 per cent for the last five years. Manufacturing has also been contracting. Construction in the industrial sector has registered growth largely on account of public infrastructure investment and building roads. The services sector, which is seen as the star performing sector, is only boosted by information and telecommunication services innovations such as mobile money.

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of imbalance of payments where the minister shows that foreign exchange earnings from exports were a mere $ 700 million whereas imports were $ 5 billion – I think there is a mistake there. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, the minister accounts for the imbalance in oil imports and materials for Karuma and Isimba dams but oil prices had fallen drastically so there must be other reasons. One of the reasons is capital flight because of uncertainties caused by the potentially explosive incoming general elections. Capital flight and reduction in foreign aid are also causing serious problems leading to the rapid fall of the shilling against the dollar. We shall need some more explanations as to why the dollar is rising.

Mr Speaker, tax collection in Uganda, at 13 per cent of GDP, is among the lowest in Africa with an average of 18 per cent collection to GDP. This is because our tax base is very narrow and many fat cats with direct and easy access to the powers that be easily evade taxes with impunity.

Alternative  Policies

Mr Speaker, the following would have been our policies and priorities if we, the Opposition, were in Government.

First and foremost, we would guarantee economic freedom, equal opportunity and justice for all. Members across the table may not know that some of us suffer economic injustice in our own country on the account that we are in in the Opposition. We cannot do business with Government because we cannot have access to it.

We would ensure decent conditions at the workplace, including a reasonable minimum wage for Ugandan workers through appropriate legislation and solidarity with the economically weak and through a strong system of social security. 

We would deliver an economy underpinned by strong agricultural, industrial and services – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition, who is a shareholder in The Monitor, to say that he cannot do business with Government when Government advertises in The Monitor every single day? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is information.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I do not want to talk about -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: We would put in place a meritocratic public service that is efficient, well-motivated and values honesty, excellence and national service as core values of nation building. We think that the Civil Service needs to be really focused. If we do not do something about our Civil Service – (Interjections) - I hope that is not an act of a civil servant. Highly skilled and motivated public officers, teachers, health workers, Police men and women and our armed forces would be the primary foundation for delivering on our policies under strict supervision and induced self-drive.

We would deliver a small and efficient Central Government and economically viable local government units with power devolved to federal states or more economically viable regional governments.

Mr Speaker, we would protect, promote, abide by and enforce the rule of law and constitutionalism to the letter, as the foundation of legitimate business, investment and economic justice.

We would invest in creating an educated and skilled human capital for a workforce of women, men, youth and entrepreneurs.

We would initiate a systematic and comprehensive investment programme in transport and energy infrastructure driven not by politics but by the mission of unlocking Uganda’s untapped economic potential.

We would pay greater attention to reducing youth unemployment from the current 83 per cent with annual targets and ensure job security and guarantee a secure workplace.

We would modernise agriculture by making available to all farmers genuine farm inputs including hoes, ploughs and tractors at subsidised prices, access to markets through rejuvenated cooperatives and best performer incentives. 

We would do all it takes to attract foreign investors but require that foreigners wishing to invest in and on land go into partnership with our nationals who own that land. We would not displace our citizens.

We would ensure that natural resources, including oil and minerals, are managed to the benefit of all the people of Uganda.

We would raise the Pay as You Earn threshold to Shs 500,000 and minimum wage to Shs 180,000.

We would provide school meals with forward and lateral linkages to agricultural production of maize, beans and milk.

Government sponsorship would be for all students and would be equal whether you are in a government university or private university or colleges with cash top-ups.

Student loans would be available to all those needy students who cannot afford the tuition top-ups.

We would initiate a health insurance scheme for all, not just for those in formal employment thus delivering a modern health care system focusing on universal access and equality.

We would restore dignity to the elderly by paying those of more than 65 years a monthly stipend of not less than Shs 50,000.

We would reconstitute the Electoral Commission, through a consultative process, to reflect conditions in a multi-party system.

We would reinstate two presidential term limits.

We would promote equal opportunity and fairness in employment, promotion, justice, welfare and wellbeing of public officials.

We would ensure defence and security through modernisation of security forces and improvement of their welfare. Those small grass thatched houses that soldiers have slept in for 30 years would be history in five years.

We would review the recruitment, training, promotion, remuneration and welfare of service men and women.

We would raise education standards in addition to access, focusing on quality and skills. That is what is lacking in UPE.

We would protect the vulnerable, support the elderly, orphans and other vulnerable children and improve emergency services response.

We would restore freedom and liberties. Some of us feel that we do not have them to the full.

We would focus on unity and foster reconciliation among the people of Uganda starting with the transitional government of national unity, which is coming next year.

We would put more resources in safe piped water powered by solar energy for the rural people.

We would invest more in lighting rural areas with solar energy. How can we be using paraffin in this modern age to light our homes with all that smoke, which some of us suffered when we were young?

Mr Speaker, we would be pro-people not pro-regime and its survival as is the case under the current state of quagmire in which Uganda finds itself.

In short, we would grantee people’s freedoms and human rights and promote more inclusive economic empowerment and employment.

Finally, there are things, which we think Ugandans want. Again from where we sit, where we are not politically privileged and nobody hides information from us or fears us, we know how Ugandans suffer to eke a living. We know what they want from their leaders and Government at the moment.

Ugandans want – [Power outage in the House] – Ugandans want power, constant power. Ugandans want a Uganda with a sound socio-economic base underpinned by a system of social justice built on a strong foundation of inclusive democratic institutions, systems and processes.

They want a prosperous Uganda without grinding poverty, disease and poor or no service delivery.

Ugandans are yearning to see a peaceful change of Government through credible free and fair competitive elections under an inclusive electoral system not fast passed the post.

They want fair electoral laws and electoral procedure, rules and regulations managed under an independent Electoral Commission.

They want a Uganda in which the freedom to organise political parties around aggregate interests to win power is guaranteed and seen to be real and respected by those who hold power, now and in the future.

Ugandans want a culture of tolerance of different views and diversity in politics, religion, ethnicity, gender and age. They want peaceful co-existence. What we are seeing, of recent, is not peaceful co-existence. 

Mr Speaker, Ugandans want to be involved in the conception, design, formulation and implementation of projects affecting them directly. They do not want the current situation of policies, programmes and budgets, which promote poor delivery of health, education, water, utilities and other services.

In conclusion, aware of the times we live in, in our country, we hope that serenity will prevail over the demonstrated dire urge for power by the current President. We know that there is always the first time for everything and therefore, we hope that the President can start to listen to logic and care more about the future of the country than about himself, as his history as President has shown us. For God and my Country, thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Leader of the Opposition for the response you have given to the President’s speech. Honourable members, that is the response but we will not schedule this debate for today. The general debate on this motion will start tomorrow and we need to agree. If we do not agree on the framework, which we are going to use to carry out this debate, I will impose a three-minute debate rule and the debate will take place tomorrow and half of the next day and then we will conclude.

Therefore, honourable members, if we do not agree on the framework, I would urge those who would like to speak to register so that I go by the register and we finish this debate quickly. The debate will start tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

In the gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Kampala City Academy. That area is represented by hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi and hon. Sempala, the Kampala Woman Member of Parliament. They have come to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, there is an iPad that has been forgotten, misplaced or lost. If your iPad is missing, please check with hon. Jacquiline Amongin, the Woman Member of Parliament for Ngora District. She has an iPad that belongs to another Member of Parliament. Clerk, can we go back to item five?

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL, THE PREVENTION OF GENOCIDE COMMISSION BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I shall be receiving the list of people who are going to contribute through your Whips. We will get the lists so that we can see how to process the debate.

3.57
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, The Prevention of Genocide Bill, 2015 under Rules 110 and 111.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance;

WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94(1) of the Constitution and clause 4(b) of Article 94 of the Constitution and Rule 110 empowers a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE THAT the Constitution under Objective XXVII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy states that Uganda’s foreign policy should be based on the principles of respect for international law and treaty obligations and further imposes duty on the state to bring domestic laws into conformity with obligations under international laws;

FURTHER AWARE THAT Parliament, pursuant to Article 123(2), enacted the Ratification of Treaties Act for the ratification of treaties, conventions, agreements and other arrangements committing Uganda on the international sphere;

HAVING REGARD to the United Nations General Assembly Resolution No. 96(1) and reaffirming that genocide is a crime under international law, contrary to the spirit and aims of the United Nations and condemned by the civilised world;

APPRECIATING THAT Uganda ratified the Geneva Convention of 1949 and the 1948 Convention on Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and subsequently, Parliament domesticated the Geneva Conventions Act, Cap. 363;

NOTING THAT Parliament enacted the International Criminal Court Act, 2010 to give force of law to the ICC established under the Rome Statute to which Uganda is a signatory;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT historically, genocide has inflicted great losses on humanity and that national effort is still required in order to liberate mankind from such odious scourge;

FURTHER NOTING THAT the International Conference on Great Lakes Region Protocol on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crimes of Genocide, War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity, on 29 November 2006, called on member states to adopt or further develop a comprehensive approach to prevention and punishment of genocide and to endorse a number of common goals;

MINDFUL THAT Uganda reaffirmed its commitment in recognising that crimes of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity are crimes under international laws and are crimes against people’s rights, which she undertakes to prevent and punish;

COGNISANT, therefore, of the historical fact of the genocide and the obligation that establishing both legal and institutional frameworks is crucial in combating genocide, pursuing the causes of peace, reconciliation, democracy and human rights in Uganda;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, The Prevention of Genocide Bill, 2015, a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” I, therefore, do move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by Sheema District, Vurra County, Nakifuma, Mawokota, Ayivu, Kapelebyong, Nyabushozi, Bukooli Islands. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Genocide encompasses all acts intended to annihilate a national, ethnic or religious group partially or in its entirety; create circumstances suitable to cause such events; create sterility in the group or other measures intended to prevent wilful procreation or forcefully abducting children of the said groups to integrate them into another. 

In the wake of the genocide that was organised and supervised by unworthy leaders and other perpetuators that decimated millions of people in the world, there is need for a new resolve to fight the ideology of genocide and all its manifestations and to eradicate ethnic, regional and any other form of division.

The existence of a legal framework alone cannot act as a panacea for total elimination and eradication of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. The emphasis should be laid in strengthening and promoting national unity and reconciliation, which when absent or deficient, potentially trigger acts of genocide and its consequences.

This further calls for establishing institutions that promote peace, unity and social progress through preventing genocide. The National Committee for the Fight against Genocide, if inaugurated, shall be an independent national Organ with the following responsibilities:

    1. To organise a permanent framework for the exchange of ideas on genocide, its consequences and strategies for its prevention and eradication.
    2. To initiate the creation of a national research and documentation centre on genocide.
    3. To advocate for the cause and prevention of genocide survivors both within the country and outside.
    4. Developing the capability to make timely and meaningful responses to issues and concerns regarding genocide. 

With the violence that consumed the country and the threat of impunity that prevailed, it necessitates a complete measure to be put in place. That measure is presented in the Bill that we seek to introduce, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The seconder to this motion – Member for Sheema?

4.05
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion for the introduction of the Prevention of the Genocide Bill, 2015.

Mr Speaker, in 2005, the World Summit for Heads of States and Governments affirmed that each country has a responsibility to protect its population from genocide war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. 

Upon this, Mr Speaker, I think it is important for a country to have a commission that will detect early warnings with regards to genocide and other related war crimes.

Mr Speaker, you are aware that - I do not remember the year but when there were issues of the Kayunga demonstrations, most of the people here in Kampala were at tenterhooks, especially with regard to ethnicity issues. There was this issue termed as tambula nga omuganda, which most of us never knew and many people were affected. This commission would detect that kind of thing to ensure that our people are protected and that they get to know what is going to happen.

Mr Speaker, if it had not been the Police to swing in to protect its citizens, I think we were getting into genocide. We all want to enjoy peace in our country, we want to live peacefully in our country and I believe that this Commission would be alerting the relevant actors to the risk of genocide, and war crimes. 

Mr Speaker - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Is it procedurally right for a Member to read typed notes and assume that she is supporting a motion when she is just reading because she does not understand what she is supporting? Is it procedurally for a Member of Parliament to start reading yet she is supposed to speak from her mind what she knows?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, courtesy is the rule of this House and the lack of it can cause problems. I call upon Members to be courteous to their colleagues because that is the only way we can show leadership in this country. (Laughter) However, there is no rule against referring to notes. The Member was just making a fairly constant reference to her notes and that is okay. Please, proceed.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you so much for the ruling, Mr Speaker. Indeed, I was referring to my notes and we all refer to our notes.

Mr Speaker, the Commission will be mandated to do research and analyse issues with regard to early warnings. I believe that if we have such a Commission to prevent war crimes, which my friend would definitely support, I believe it would help this country. We all want to live in this country peacefully but without having such a Commission to alert the relevant stakeholders and actors, I believe it would disorganise us.

Mr Speaker, cultural genocide is something that we do not pay attention to and these are some of the things that the Commission will be handling. Uganda has different cultures and in order to live in harmony without hitting each other, without - (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am obliged to seek clarification from the speaker holding the Floor because she does not seem to understand the concept of genocide. In law, when you formulate a law, that law should be implementable not by anticipation. Does the honourable member holding the Floor understand that genocide, even at international levels, is complex? If that is so, why is she wasting time to explain what is not explainable? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was a clarification.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Speaker, the learned friend who is still learning needs to know that these are nitty-gritty of genocide. Ethnicity is part of genocide, if you are not aware and therefore, the Commission needs to pay attention to those nitty-gritties that are likely to turn into genocide. You are talking at the international level but we need to look at the local level before we look at international levels.

Mr Speaker, I would like to support the Bill and to second the Bill that the mover of the motion is - (Interjection) - I have not given you clarification. I am still on the Floor, my honourable colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the prerogative of the Member to allow and she has not allowed.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Therefore, Mr Speaker, curtailing genocide needs a complete entity that is going to handle all these issues, which even honourable members do not understand right now and that is why they are seeking for clarifications.

I beg to move that honourable members, you support this Bill in order to have a Commission that is going to handle issues of genocide and its prevention in this country. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have a rule against anticipation and I will be strict regarding that rule. 

The motion that I now propose for your debate is a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill; The Prevention of Genocide Bill, 2015. That is the motion. It is not about the content of the Bill but about the right of a Member of Parliament to be granted leave by this House to present a Private Member’s Bill. 

Therefore, does a Member have the right to move a Private Member’s Bill in this House? [MEMBERS: “Yes.”] If he does, does that require a debate? [MEMBERS: “No.”] If it does not, honourable members, I put the question to the motion so that we can then debate when the Bill finally comes. (Laughter) I put the question to this motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill; The Prevention of Genocide Bill, 2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have the right to present this Bill and all facilities of Government are at your disposal to prepare it and bring it to the House at the earliest convenience. Congratulations.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON A PETITION ON THE WRANGLES SURROUNDING THE CORONATION OF THE BAGWERE CULTURAL LEADER

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that last week, we had this matter coming and it was urgent. Our rules say 45 days for the committee but since the matter was urgent, I requested the committee and its membership to present an interim report today to guide us on how to proceed. If there are administrative recommendations that we should make to curtail a worsening situation, we would be making them after presentation. That is why it is urgent that we do it now.

4.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margaret Komuhangi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on a petition on the wrangles surrounding the coronation of the Bugwere cultural leader.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, on 7 July 2015, hon. Dr Twa-Twa Mutwalante, MP Iki-Iki County, presented a petition on behalf of Bugwere clan leaders in accordance with Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The petition was referred to the sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, in accordance with Rule 29(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for consideration and report back on 14 July, 2015.

Mr Speaker, I am glad to report, on behalf of the committee, that the petitioners prayed as follows:

    1. Urged Government to halt any activities surrounding the installation or recognition of a cultural leader of Obwa Ikumbania bwa Bagwere until free and fair reconciliation is done. 
    2. Urges His Excellency, the President of Uganda, to fulfil the Kibuku pronouncement, which he made regarding the leadership wrangles in Obwa Ikumbania bwa Bagwere. 
    3. Urges Government to investigate and pronounce itself on the issue. 

Mr Speaker, the committee embarked on considering the petition on 13 July, 2015 and held meetings with the Members of Parliament from Bugwere area. These included Dr Twa-Twa (Member of Parliament, Iki Iki) to speak to his petition, hon. Saleh Kamba (Member of Parliament, Kibuku County), hon. Sarah Kataike (Woman Member of Parliament, Budaka District), hon. Judith Mary Amoit (Woman Member of Parliament, Pallisa District), hon. Jacob Opolot (Member of Parliament, Pallisa County), hon. Kezekia Mbugo (Member of Parliament, Budaka County) and Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

In the course of considering the petition, it was brought to the attention of the committee that the same matter is currently before the High Court in Mbale. Section 16 (1) of the Traditional and Cultural Leaders Act, 2011 read together with Article 246 (1) of the Constitution provides that, “Any dispute or conflict within the traditional and cultural institution or within the community shall be handled by a council of elders or clan leaders or a representative body chosen and approved by the community in accordance with the tradition, norms and customs of disputes or conflict resolution pertaining to that community.” 

Further, Section 16 (2) of the Traditional and Cultural Leaders Act, 2011 provides that, “Where a community fails to resolve the conflict or dispute in sub-Section (1), the matter shall be referred to the courts of law.” 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee could not proceed with the petition in view of Rule 64 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The committee recommends therefore that since the matter is already before court, the petitioners should wait for the court process to take its course. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the matter is in court then that makes it sub judice. Rule 64 gives the Speaker the prerogative to determine whether a matter is sub judice or not. In the instant case, this matter stands sub judice and the committee cannot proceed to handle it. 

However, we urge the ministers and the people responsible for this sector to look at the sheer urgency of the situation and take steps to make sure that it does not escalate into violence. That is the final report of the committee. Can we approve this report and proceed because there is basically nothing to debate?  

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the interim order. There is an interim order on that case from court.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS KOMUHANGI: Can I read it verbatim? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just lay it on the Table.

MS KOMUHANGI: I lay it on the Table, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, it is a motion that had been proposed for debate. However, we cannot debate this motion. It is a conclusive report of the committee. I put the question for the adoption of the report of this committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If what we got from the papers was right that the election of the new king took place yet the interim order was in place, what does that mean? A coronation took place yet there was an order. I think you need to make that clear so that someone does not masquerade. The minister of the sector should also clarify to us what took place. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a whole ministry in charge of this sector. Parliament could not proceed with it because the matter is sub judice. We cannot begin debating what we have just ruled is sub judice. The minister will find a way of handling this and can come and brief the House at an appropriate time. Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that the motion for the second reading of this Bill was moved to this House and the committee reported on the Bill. I proposed the question for debate and deferred debate on the general principles of the Bill on second reading to today. Debate starts now and each Member will be taking three minutes. 

I had already proposed the motion but I can propose again that the motion for your debate the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” be read for the second time. 


4.22
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the mover of this motion together with the Chairperson of the Committee on Health for the beautiful report presented. 

I will start with page 2 of this report and I would like to correct a mistake that this report was read for the first time on 6 March, 2015. I remember very well that it was the year 2014 and that is why the Bill is titled, The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014.

I would like to inform the chairperson that the Bill was read for the first time on 6 March, 2014. 

On page 5, I would like to insert a measure proposed in the Bill to discourage tobacco use -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are discussing the general principles of the Bill.

MS KAABULE: Okay. I support this report but I would like to emphasise the point that this Bill is a Public Health Bill. There is a lot that is talked about in as far as farmers are concerned but I would like to thank the chairperson for emphasising that tobacco is a public hazard. The Bill will go ahead to inform the public about the hazards of smoking. 

I would also like to emphasise what was mentioned in the report regarding the responsibility of the public to ensure that everybody remains healthy. The number of members talked about on page 16, in as far as this committee is concerned, should also be emphasised. 

I remember sometime back when Members were talking about most of the tobacco products: shisha, kuba among others. 

However, when we talk about tobacco products, we also emphasise that some of these products are harmful and also move together with another Bill that – (Member timed out_)

4.26
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I second the motion and I would like to congratulate its initiator, in the names of Dr Baryomunsi. I think it could have been one of the reasons that he became minister later on because he had expressed interest in areas of that kind.

Tobacco smoking is surrounding so many issues but predominantly, it is dangerous to human life. Globally, it is responsible for the death of six million people every year.

In Africa, the situation is worse, especially in developing countries. On a number of occasions, when people feel redundant, poor and frustrated, they end up smoking tobacco.

Tobacco smoking, in terms of health hazards, generates nicotine the emission of which is responsible for respiratory diseases like lung cancer and that of the oesophagus. This is a very serious defect which Uganda should struggle to eliminate.

However, in terms of action against tobacco smoking, it is not enough to put in place a law without providing a solution. We should all do what we can at all times, to make sure that we avoid redundancy and unemployment among young people.

They resort to smoking as a solution especially for those who are extra-frustrated with life, yet it is dangerous. In terms of law, Mr Speaker, we have a standing case which persuades everyone to take action about smoking.

In a case of Environmental Action Network v. the Attorney-General and NEEMA, Justice Ntabgoba had the following to say; he made a declaration. This declaration is very important and I would urge everyone to read the ruling of this Judge. The declaration he made is as follows: “smoking in public places constitutes violation of the rights of the non-smokers and the general public and therefore interferes with fundamental Human Rights of the people who are innocently sitting in a hall where possibly there is a public show.” 

He also issued a declaration that smoking in public places constitutes an offence under sections 156 and 172 of the Penal Code. (Member Timed out)

4.30
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I second and support the motion that the Bill on tobacco control be passed in this House.

Mr Speaker, we are going through series of meeting and discussions about the dangers of tobacco smocking. However, my concern is on the sale and growing of tobacco. I would like to propose that we put a total ban on tobacco growing and selling.

This is due to the number of people who are dying as a result of tobacco smoking and exposure which is quite high. What is very alarming is that these are young people who are still energetic and could do much for this country.

As for me, I do not want these other measures. This Parliament passed and put a ban on public smocking, but even as we speak now, people are still smoking in public. Why don’t we put a total ban on this?

The economic contribution of tobacco growing is eroded when people die; consider the burden of death; the cost of those burials we attend every other day and the medical expense for the treatment of lung cancer. All that renders the value that tobacco adds to this nation is invalid. People are dying – (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, recently we were debating here to regulate “Khat” and “Mairungi” and it is on record, Mr Speaker, that hon. Mariam Nalubega of Butambala was one of the ardent supporters of “Mairungi.”

The honourable member is today giving reasons to the effect that tobacco should be banned totally. Is she in order to keep on changing positions in a space of hardly a year. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Butambala District you stand duly reminded. (Laughter)

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you Mr Speaker for your wise ruling but I know very well that we are discussing tobacco and even the report which is before us, does not relate to “Khat”, which the honourable member is talking about.

I have evidence that many people have died due to consuming tobacco but I do not think that the honourable member can produce any evidence of those who die due to taking “Khat”

Mr Speaker not to divert this debate, I still say that we should put a total ban on growing, selling, advertisement and all sorts of activities related to tobacco. This is due to the danger it poses to the nation and the whole world. I beg to support the motion.

4.53
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to join my colleagues in thanking hon. Chris for bringing this Bill.

I support the Bill with all my might. I would like to say that as much as we have some economic gains out of tobacco, we cannot compare them with the detriments it causes to the human life, which is invaluable; in fact life is so expensive that it cannot be bought.

Having said that, I would like to argue that, if we want to succeed, there is serious need for sensitisation of the people, yet the Bill is talking about reduction on the coverage on advertisement.

However, I feel that we should really find a way of advertising the negative effects of tobacco smoking. This way, we shall make even the smokers themselves who are not aware of the negative effects of cigarettes to see the dangers.

For example, if we have big billboards like in other countries, showing the negative effects of tobacco, I think that even the smoker themselves, and the people close to them will take note and smokers will begin smoking responsibly.

Having said that, considering the Bill and the report of the committee they talk about public smoking - trying to protect the passive smokers; but what about the private smokers? 

Inside our houses, we have men who smoke; they smoke when the women and children are there. I do not see how these women and children are protected in their private homes. 

May be at committee stage, we should try to see how we can protect the women and the men because if we drive them from the public, definitely they will go private and begin smoking from their bedrooms, and the women are really suffering as far as smoking tobacco is concerned.

I have also noted something that I have not seen in the report – but before I go there, in clause 3, which talks about the establishment of the committee, I find that this committee follows people who are very busy. Therefore, if we are to put all these people - these are very responsible people and again if we are to leave them the way they are, I feel that if this meeting coincides with the meeting at their parent ministry, they will of course first go with the meetings at their parent ministry rather than the meeting of this committee. I propose that we reduce the number of these people and maybe look at the standards being proposed.

Finally, I also do not see the strategy proposed to address this issue because we have been told that tobacco has a very serious impact on the lives of people. I also do not see how they are going to raise funds to address this. For instance when we look at HIV/Aids -(Member timed out)

4.37
MS PAULA TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the mover of this Bill particularly the health committee chaired by Hon. “Biteks” and the initiator Hon. Baryomunsi, Minister of State for General Duties. 

I would like to support this Bill with all the necessary efforts because we know tobacco is a health hazard that has been proven. It causes cancer related diseases; it affects people’s hearts and causes high blood pressure. When we look at the burden of disease that this country is suffering with and the cost that this country incurs in terms of treating cancer patients, it is really very unfortunate and therefore, we always say that prevention is better than cure - the sooner we pass this Bill, the better. 

We have information that Uganda Cancer Institute right now requires about Shs 10.6 billion to treat the cancer patients and yet we know the causes of some of these cancer related diseases. That is why we are saying that growing of tobacco and the use of tobacco should be regulated very seriously because it does not necessarily affect only the users of tobacco but also those who are exposed to the users.

We are told that smoking alone causes about 71 percent of lung cancer. I do believe that with this increase in cancer related disease, we need to act as soon as possible because we have other disease challenges particularly maternal health related challenges, which have stagnated, and of late we are informed that even the indicators are not doing well as far as maternal health is concerned.

Therefore, since we know of the causes and the means of addressing use and exposure of tobacco, the sooner we take action, the better. However, I know that we always come here and legislate but when it comes to the enforcement and implementation of some of these laws, it becomes a very serious problem. Therefore, I do appeal to Government that once this Bill – Which I know is going to be passed - (Member timed out)

4.40
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Women Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to add my voice in thanking the committee and the mover of this Bill because I am a person who represents the community which initially used to grow tobacco; this Bill has been long overdue.

Tobacco growing is a risky venture. When my women and people used to grow tobacco, we realised that growing tobacco takes six months and that is half a year and  some days, I have been reliable informed that it takes one year.

First of all, you start preparing the nursery beds during the dry spell and that means you have to collect water to irrigate the beds. Who does that - it is the women and the children. After watering, during the rainy season, you transplant and when transplanting, you have to use pesticides and fertilizers. But who weeds tobacco –it is still the women and children. Tobacco growing deprives the young children of going to school because most of the time when the women are attending to the tobacco gardens, they go with the children and therefore, perpetuate child labour.

That put aside, tobacco growing has caused so many defects in the young children especially when a pregnant woman visits the tobacco garden - definitely the child will be born with defects in the lungs and in most cases the children are born with abnormalities. That is why the people from Masindi District decided to de-campaign tobacco growing.

In 2002 you remember, Mr Speaker, we went around de-campaigning tobacco and the kingdom took it up. With my king, we de- campaigned tobacco growing and gave them the alternative of growing rice. –Today, although we have some people who remained in tobacco growing, we know that those few ones remaining will also abandon tobacco growing soon.

Tobacco growing is not gender sensitive; after tobacco getting ready; it is the women who harvest it. It is still the women who dry it and carry the tobacco leaves to the market. However, when it comes to collecting money, it is the man –(Laughter). It is not fair for the woman to do all that work and they end up going away without anything after being exposed to so many dangers – I know there is - (Member timed out)

4.44
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Women Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and the report. Aware that tobacco is one of the main cash crops bringing income to our Government and aware that in West Nile tobacco is grown as a main cash crop and many people have been benefiting from it -

Aware that in some cultures, tobacco is used for fortune telling and also it is a way of cleansing, tobacco has been grown without people knowing its dangers. I am now discovering that in West Nile cancer is very common. We have cancer of the throat, cancer of the stomach and cancer of lungs, all because of the tobacco that we are still growing.

Apart from the diseases caused by tobacco, tobacco does not bring in enough income. You work from January to December and in the end you get only Shs 500,000 which cannot help. The money you spend for treating cancer is from Shs 2 million onwards, which is nothing compared with what you earn.

I, therefore, support the motion to eradicate tobacco. However, the Bill is only about controlling. It is very important to let those who are addicted and cannot stop have an outlet. Let them find somewhere to smoke. We must make it very difficult for them to smoke easily. One way is by not allowing them to buy a single cigarette anytime anywhere. They must buy the whole packet so that those young ones who may not afford the whole packet cannot buy. 

The second way is by not providing rooms anywhere for smokers. In some areas, for example in lodges, whole floors are reserved for smokers. Remember that those rooms have to be cleaned by workers, who will be inhaling those fumes and they may get cancer. For that reason, tobacco must be smoked outside. We should say 50 meters from the nearest building, so that at least when you smoke, you are in open air and it goes to the sky, rather than - (Member timed out_)

4.47
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose the motion for reasons that I am going to give. 

One, people are talking about cancer; I grew up when tobacco growing and smoking in public was very common but I do not remember any cancer issues during that time. It is only during this time, because of the way people are living, that this issue has come up. I would like to ask my friends who come from the west, especially the pastoralists; people used to smoke while looking after cows and there was no problem. It was kind of tradition – (Interruption) 

DR BAYIGGA LULUME: Thank you very much, my brother, for giving way. Those days most of the diseases, especially those which caused terminal illnesses such as cancer, would be attributed to witchcraft especially within Buganda here. Thank you. (Applause)

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, he is just talking about witchcraft, which is something unknown to us; you cannot bring it here. I am surprised that some people here, who would not have been in this Parliament if it were not for tobacco, are supporting this motion. I am surprised that even hon. Kajura supports this. I was in Hoima some time back with him and we visited the BAT industry and we saw how the common person was gaining. There are certain areas that had no schools and people have put up schools – (Interruption)

MS KAABULE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Is the honourable member in order to misinform this House that there is a BAT industry in Hoima when we all know very well that BAT shifted its industries out of Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you have the correct information. (Laughter)

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Even from West Nile, some of you would not be here in this Parliament if it was not for tobacco. I have visited West Nile, I have been to Hoima, to Masindi, and I know that when my party was in power in 1961/1962 – (Interruption)

MR OKEYOH: Mr Speaker, I rise with pain to raise a point of order. Is the Member in order to deceive this House that many of us were voted here by tobacco? Is he in order to state that we are here because we are beneficiaries of tobacco and yet we are aware that we came to this House on the people’s mandate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not hear the Member saying that they have registered tobacco as voters anywhere –(Laughter)– for them to be able to vote. 

Honourable members, it is very important to stand up and speak, but it is more important to sit down, shut up and listen. When you do that, then you earn your right of reply. But when you have not listened, you cannot reply. Secondly, one of the principles of Parliamentary procedure is that any matter brought to the House must receive a proper and balanced debate so that we can be guided to take a decision that is fair.

Listening is one of those issues that we should respect. Can we listen to each Member? Give the Member the right to speak and observe that right. If you have a point of disagreement you have an opportunity to give the counter argument but at least you will have listened. Let us have some orderly debate. Honourable member, you must also be conscious of how you present your issues.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the things that I would have loved this House to ban would have been alcohol because alcohol –(Interruption)

MS AURU: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. I am from West Nile and you have rightly said that some of the people who are seated in the Parliament are educated out of money from tobacco. However, I would like to inform you that the consequences of growing tobacco in West Nile are more negative than the school fees, which was paid for us. (Applause) Right now, in the northern region, West Nile is the poorest and it is because of tobacco growing. Thank you.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, honourable member. Can you tell me your - (Member timed out)

4.54
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The School of Public Health at Harvard University recently in a publication said that drinking one to two cans of soft drinks increases the risk for diabetes, gout and heart disease by 26 per cent and for women in particular by 75 per cent. In the same publication, it was said that drinking coffee increases the risk by 75 per cent for both men and women for stroke, heart disease and damaged blood vessels etcetera.

Mr Speaker, we should not be seen to be over legislating. I believe that tobacco smoking is very dangerous but even drinking soda and coffee is dangerous – (Interruption) 

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: Thank you so much, hon. Kasibante. The information I would like to give is about the deadly disease HIV/AIDS. It is even more dangerous but I have not seen anybody debating in the House to ban sex. (Laughter)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much for that good information. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS NANTUME: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To the best of my knowledge, the Tobacco Control Bill is seeking to regulate tobacco smoking and not to ban tobacco. Therefore, when I see people giving examples of banning this and that, it is like they have misunderstood this Bill as one that is seeking to ban tobacco. Is it procedurally right for Members to start diverting us from the intention of the Bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a rule of relevance. Each time you stand up to debate, you must be relevant to the subject. However, the honourable member for Butambala District rose in her debate and said we should move for express banning. Therefore, banning became a matter of debate. That is how we went there.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise and much focused ruling. (Laughter) There is a popular saying that “too much of anything is always bad” including beef, pork and milk. Some doctor told me that even taking an over doze of medicine is a problem. What we need is a way to sensitise people so that they do not consume too much tobacco. We should not make laws that aim at banning a major cash crop. Thank you very much.

4.59
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no doubt that smoking is dangerous to human life. I do appreciate that the Bill we are debating now is about regulating. However, studies have been done and if we do not seek to provide alternative places where smokers can go and smoke and instead totally ban public smoking, smoking goes back into the homes. In the homes, we have children and the effects of passive smoking on the children are even worse than the effects on adults who go out to social places.

Mr Speaker, we should avoid making laws from an emotional point of view. When I was young, they would tell us the cash crops of this country were coffee, cotton and tobacco. These days, we are losing these cash crops and probably that is the reason why we are having a problem with the dollar. This is a country that is competing for tourists and such laws that we make have the capacity to affect our tourism industry. What we should be advocating for as a country is sensitisation of our people about smoking and providing public places where the smokers can turn to.

A survey, which was done in United Kingdom when public smoking was banned in Wales, found that 16 million smokers chose to go and do the smoking at home. It was one of the causes of house fires in the United Kingdom. Mr Speaker, I do beg colleagues to calm down and consider the effects that might not be intended. If we just say, “No more smoking in public places”, we would be sending the smokers back home and we shall even hurt other industries including the tourism industry.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, my plea is that colleagues would consider equipping the Ministry Of Health and other entertainment places – (Interruption)

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, hon. Nambooze, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member’s justification for not controlling public smoking is that we are losing out on tourism and the foreign money that comes in. I know most of the tourists come from Europe and other countries which are popular for homosexuality; should we also gazette public places for homosexuals so that we do not lose the tourists? May I get clarification from the honourable member?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I think the debate about homosexuality will be for another day. I do not want to mix the debate about regulating tobacco smoking and homosexuality because these are two different things – (Member timed out_)

5.04
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I have been constrained here to try and give some information to Members but the rules here are very difficult. However, let me start by giving some information. The disease burden in this country, which I have studied for a very long time, consists of diseases, 90 per cent, that are not related closely or even at any distance to tobacco. They are not. The things that are killing Ugandans have nothing to do with tobacco – (Interjections) - Let me explain.

About 75 per cent of the diseases that kill Ugandans include AIDS, pneumonia, diarrhoea, malaria, low birth weight; it may have other reasons but we need to remember that only five per cent of Ugandans consume tobacco and the people –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate information from the doctor, but is the honourable member in order to insinuate that it is okay for five per cent of Ugandans to die due to causes arising from smoking tobacco because after all 97 per cent of Ugandans die of other causes? Is he in order and yet he is a medical doctor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was thinking you would rise along the lines of secondary smoking, which now goes to the wider population. However, since you have not, I find it difficult to rule on the point of order you have raised.

DR OKUONZI: Thank you very much for that wise ruling. Mr Speaker, in public health you always have to compromise when taking a decision about what you can do for the population. You have to make a compromise and the reality is that you make compromises in a way that you save some people and let others die. That is the truth of public health because we do not have all the answers for everything in this world. When a doctor makes a decision, it may be made to protect the biggest population because we just cannot do much about the others. That is the reality of public health but we shall come to that another day.

Let me also recap for you the biggest causes of cancer in this country; almost 90 per cent of them have nothing to do with tobacco. The biggest cancer - (Member timed out)

5.08
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the movers of this motion. 

Mr Speaker, this debate was morally settled some time back when there was a big debate between people who have medical backgrounds in this House. There was a very long academic article by Dr Okuonzi circulated on our intranet. I read it and it had a bibliography and lots of references, but I was not convinced; and then came Dr Lulume Bayigga with a very well researched presentation on PowerPoint and that one convinced me. (Applause) 

I like keeping records and I will cite just a few words from what he said: “Globally, tobacco use kills more than HIV/AIDS, TB, malaria, road accidents and homicides combined”. That scared me first. He also said that in the last century, tobacco related deaths were about 100 million and in this 21st Century, they are expected to rise to one billion. That scared me even more. Losing one billion people because of tobacco smoking should get us thinking; however useful tobacco is to any community, we should think twice as we debate this motion. 

He also said that tobacco kills half of its users. Hon. Chris Baryomunsi and I attended some conferences on this and I thank him for standing firm. This information was being given to us by academics, those who have studied tobacco consumption globally. For someone to come here and try to convince me otherwise, I will not accept. 

I think this is the most serious point; tobacco consumption and manufacturing is declining in the western world while it is on the rise in Africa. Is this because they want to bring this harmful practise here so that we are the ones to suffer and we only export a few products of tobacco to their countries and they live longer? I would like to propose that those who are coming to debate this should help us to understand the best practises that are elsewhere, which can help us. I do not see anywhere in the world where tobacco is being promoted. (Interruption)

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: Thank you so much, honourable member. The information I would like to give is that China has the largest population but when it comes to smoking, they smoke from anywhere and yet the effects are not similar to what you are telling us right now. So we need to debate when we know what is happening elsewhere. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I would like to inform you that in Beijing, they banned smoking in the city last year. The additional information I would like to give you is that countries in the western world have realised the harmful effects of tobacco and have put in place very stringent policy and legislative measures and have attempted to shift the processing to Africa. When we project what we call the tobacco epidemic, we are going to have a very big problem in Africa, including in Uganda. 

From the Ministry of Health - talking about the disease burden - we still have communicable diseases but we also have a high and rising burden of non-communicable diseases including cancer. I just want to inform my colleague, hon. Okuonzi, that cancer is a very big problem in Uganda. We have carried out studies in Mulago and the majority of the patients at the Cancer Institute and the Uganda Heart Institute have a history of consuming tobacco. This information is available.

MR OBUA-OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we trust our medical people and we would like to see them speaking with one voice on this. On this one I am happy that the majority of our medical people in this House are speaking the same language. (Member timed out)

5.14
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Mr Speaker, I am not a tobacco smoker neither am I a farmer of tobacco but I come from a region which has some reasonable number of tobacco growers, particularly in my constituency, Buhaguzi, in Hoima. I appreciate the concerns members have raised especially to do with health, and I must admittedly say that these are not new issues. We have raised them health science since time immemorial from primary schools. We are just adding knowledge because of the global village and research.

Mr Speaker, let me discuss this from the point of representation. The committee visited my region and we had meetings with the companies, with the farmers and with all the leaders from the region. We looked at both sides, the negative and positive. As a region I can report to this House that there is no doubt tobacco growing has some good reports from the region, especially to do with incomes of those who grow it.

Secondly, when it comes to employment, directly or indirectly, those who grow tobacco earn a living from selling it. However, colleagues, there are also seasonal jobs; right now, I can report to this House that over 2,000 senior six vacationists and university students are employed during the marketing season. So, unless you understand this, you will debate differently. I can also tell you that those people who are doing business with these companies will tell you that they have earned a lot of money through transportation of this crop from the farmers to the market. Also, Government will tell you how much we have been collecting in terms of revenue from taxes. (Applause)

The other issue we have to understand is that 90 per cent of this tobacco is not consumed here in Uganda but abroad. So, we should also look at the export aspect.

Mr Speaker, finally, everyone knows that tobacco growing is a hectic activity. I can assure you that unless you are a serious farmer, you cannot do it; but why is it that some people have remained growing tobacco? Some farmers asked us, “You, Members of Parliament and Ministers have come to tell us this but where is the alternative? We have accepted we are not going to grow tobacco but where is the alternative?” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is need for us to focus this debate. This debate is on the Tobacco Control Bill. Nobody is talking about promoting or banning it; it is about control. Is there need to control tobacco in this country? [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] That is what this Bill is all about. Whether it is grown in your area or not, the consensus from the debate is that there is need for control. That is the principle of the Bill. 

How much is determined by the provisions of the Bill at the committee stage. So, should we go on with the general debate on this matter? I will put the question to the general principles of the Bill. I put the question to this motion that the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the time left will not allow us to process the committee stage of this Bill effectively. My proposal is that we should move to the next item. We had a debate pending on the Public Accounts Committee report. When we come back tomorrow, we shall go to the committee stage of this Bill.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE   PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE ENTITIES WITH DISCLAIMER OF OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember that these two reports under items 7 and 8 were presented and we agreed before we broke off that we would debate them concurrently but separate the decisions when that time came. So, I am proposing the question again for both reports before we debate them and I will put the questions one by one on each of the reports.

On item No. 7, I propose the motion for adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the entities with a disclaimer of the opinion of the Auditor-General. On item No. 8, I propose the motion for adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the votes with qualified opinion by the Auditor-General on the accounts ending June 2012. Those are the two reports and we had agreed we would debate them together. So, you can debate both reports but when it comes to the decisions, I will call one by one. Debate starts now with each member taking three minutes. Let us start.

If there are no debates, I will put the questions. Honourable members, I will now put the question to item No.7, that the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the entities with disclaimer of the opinion of the Auditor-General be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the votes with qualified opinion by the Auditor-General on the accounts ending June 2012 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it looks like there might be a possibility that we can start with the other matter of the Tobacco Control Bill.

Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon we have a delegation from Kibinge Sub County in Bukomansimbi represented by hon. Deogratious Kiyingi and hon. Susan Namaganda, the woman representative. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Can we have some order! The Speaker has the authority to throw you all out of the gallery if you are interfering with the debate. (Laughter) “Absolute silence” is written everywhere there. So, please adhere to that.

Let us see if we can do some clauses in the Bill. We will be rising at exactly 6 o’clock.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2014

Clause 1

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we recommend deletion of the entire provision. The justification is to ensure that the commencement of the Act takes effect on its date of publication as notified in the Gazette rather than having to wait for the minister to issue regulations appointing a date on which the Act is to come into force.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee is to delete clause 1.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, we would like to amend the earlier clause to read as follows: “This Act shall come into force on a date of publication notified in the Gazette and different dates may be appointed for the commencement of different provisions, which will be made by the minister using statutory instruments.”

This Bill provides for a transition period of one year. So, if we delete this, it means that as soon as we pass this Bill the law will take effect there and then and yet it provides for a transition for the different clauses in the Bill to take effect.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Committee chair, can we process this? (Hon. Magyezi rose_) Are you contributing on these particular two proposals? 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chair. We have passed other Bills and 
I thought that in respect to the clause on commencement, we always permit the minister to issue regulations. I do not know why in this particular case the committee, and it seems even the mover of the Bill is siding with the committee, wants something different. I am not convinced with what they are proposing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, that is not exactly the situation. Some Bills do not have commencement dates and when they do not have, the procedure is clear that on publication in the Gazette it is done and they become Acts of Parliament. So, there are different issues because some commence backwards and they are called retrospective and others are forward or phased. So, the way they are proceeding is okay. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, with commencement, we are changing many things. Maybe people have been smoking anyhow and now there are areas that are going to be gazetted in public places like hotels where they may need to construct rooms, like at the airport where there are clear smoking and non-smoking zones. So, if we make the law in such a way that it starts immediately or we do not give a timeframe of maybe one year like it had been suggested in the Bill, then we are going to make a big mistake. 

This involves costs. First, if you are going to create a new area, you will need to construct - even here in town - where you are going to gazette. You have been to Nairobi and there are places that have been gazetted along the road as smoking zones and they are well built with chairs. It is the government that built those areas and not private persons. I do not know if our government has money so that if we pass the law today and it becomes effective the following day, they will be able to construct the areas where people will smoke in public. They will tell us.

So, the one year in the Bill – the original idea in the Bill - is a better period in which the minister can really now come and enforce the law. (Dr Baryomunsi rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not know how to refer to you on this Bill.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much. I now speak for the Ministry of Health.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Well, Minister for Health.  

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, as hon. Nandala-Mafabi put it, once this Bill is passed into law, there are lots of changes that are going to come in. For those who manufacture cigarettes and tobacco products, for example, we are saying that they should put different labels; if we say that upon gazetting it takes effect, then it is going to be a challenge in terms of implementation. 

It was a request by the people in the tobacco industry that for some of the provisions, we should give them time. Therefore, the provisions in the law will not commence on the same day. We have also put a transitional provision in clause 47 which says, “Unless otherwise prescribed by the Minister by statutory instrument, a person, manufacturer, importer, exporter, supplier or retailer shall not later than six months of commencement of this Act, comply with the requirements of this Act.”  We assume that six months will be adequate time for the necessary changes to be done. So, that is the justification for the original formulation – to allow for time to make the necessary changes created by the law.
  
MS NALUBEGA: Mr Chairman, in 2004 the Ministry of Health issued guidelines to the effect that public smoking was banned and all hotel owners, bar owners and the public were warned and given instructions to gazette places for smoking. I am sure this is not new to Ugandans and, therefore, I do not see why we should give another timeframe for this law to be effected. 

We have a problem which we cannot keep sitting on. Let the law commence as soon as possible because the country is aware. Actually, some of us who have been vigilant have been isolating those places where there are no gazetted smoking places. Mr Chairman, this law should be effect as soon as possible because we have a problem. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I have the chairperson on this? Let us have the chairperson.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I thank you very much. As a committee, we are basing on the fact that this has been debated on several occasions and we thought that the Ministry of Health was doing whatever it takes, even before this Bill came into light, to regulate smoking in public places. However, for purposes of compromise and harmony, I think that we can compromise on one year so that it gives ample time for the minister to give – (Interjections) - Honestly speaking, to allow people to start smoking in public for one more year – somebody goes into a hotel, smokes and affects everybody inside there - is too much time. We could compromise and say six months.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think we are making a mistake. We recently passed a budget effective 1st July and part of the taxes will come from tobacco. So, you must be careful on this. The taxes on tobacco are a huge percentage. That is one.

Secondly, in the places that we are targeting, people are no longer allowed to smoke in public. We are only trying to say that in places like public areas or hotels, there should be a designated area for smoking. That is where we are moving to. 

MR SSASAGA: I would like to seek clarification from my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Gazetting a place does not necessarily mean constructing it. It can be a public institution like a school and they can say that smoking will be done under a specific tree, which could be 50 metres away from the buildings. I would like to find out if gazetting necessarily means constructing a place for that purpose. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to thank my young brother from Budadiri East. Smoke is something that moves; if you just allow it then you have not done anything. What we are trying to do is, when you construct a place like this, when you smoke there must be something like a chimney to take the smoke out. My brother, you do not put it like that in the open because there will be no difference.

What we are trying to put up is something that will be practical. In fact, the reason that we are raising this is because when the white man came, he gave each region of Uganda a cash crop. For us in the mountains and Buganda, they gave us coffee; in parts of the east and wherever, they gave cotton; and then there was tea and tobacco. It is true that the farmers could be earning less but this because we have killed cooperatives. When cooperatives were still there, I never saw any farmer from West Nile complaining. 

Mr Chairman, what I am trying to put across is that even if people were saying that those who are growing tobacco are dying, one year will not kill us – (Interjections) - Okay, we are already dead; - (Laughter) - there is breast cancer, cervical cancer. We are trying to say that six months is good but one year would be appropriate so that we are –

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I find it a little difficult to support the position of my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, when he says that one year is not too much. The Global Adult Tobacco Survey was done in this country in 2013 and it revealed that about 62 per cent of Ugandans who go to public places are exposed to second-hand smoke. Within this one year, you can imagine how many people will go to Serena. I was there and I got angry with the management. I actually had to call them. People were smoking all over the place even when we clearly have regulations indicating that people should smoke in gazetted areas. 

People are smoking everywhere. This is why I want to support the proposal by hon. Nyakikongoro. I would suggest that the Bill takes immediate effect but we give power to the minister to vary dates for certain clauses within the Bill. That is the proposal that I want to make.

Meanwhile, for your information, men should also know that tobacco is responsible for poor sperm quality for those who smoke. Within this one year, we shall be having poor sperm quality amongst you men. (Laughter) Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am happy that my sister now has become a doctor and she can talk medical language. However,  what we are trying to raise is not in bad faith. This is to harmonise; when we were passing the law on buvera here we had to give people time to change systems. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The committee itself has told us what they found out in Kenya, and this is to boost what you are saying. Even in Kenya, they said that they had to give the minister some time to enable the farmers to transit to other livelihoods. I think that is important and hon. Mafabi is making a serious point. 

The committee report says that tobacco brings in Shs 105 billion in taxes. If we have put this in our budget for this year, surely, for us now to say that we cut off - I think we need one year to enable these 50,000 farmers to have a livelihood.

MR ALEPER: Mr Chairman, I remember when the House had not gone to committee stage you clearly put right the issue of mixing the banning and the regulation. Here, again, we are beginning to bring fears about this Bill which is about control and you are implying banning. That is why these worries are coming up. 

I thought, Mr Chairman, you had guided very well that this particular Bill is about controlling. We are not talking about banning it so that you bring your worries that it may affect the farmers or it may affect revenue. We are talking about controlling tobacco use. When does control begin? So, is it procedurally right for Members to continue confusing banning and controlling the consumption of tobacco? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any Member who mixing up this debate is doing injustice to the Bill. Honourable members, we are talking about control. If you are talking about the revenue implication of control, you have to be specific. Because we are not talking about the ban of tobacco, would it have revenue implications if you are not banning it? To what extent would regulation or control affect the revenue? It should be scientific so that we can understand where we are coming from. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are aware that it is about control. However, even when we are going to control, the persons who will be dealing in it must put in place either equipment or systems to be able to reduce or control the emissions from smoking. That is basically the reasoning. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, colleague. The control must be gradual; it cannot be sudden. If it is sudden, then you would rather go with a ban. Look at your breaking systems, for some of you who are lucky to own cars. Sudden breaking would most likely cause a danger. I will bring it to the House here that the same would apply with the necessary implications, including financial. 

He said it and I want to buy it, that we have been dying for the last so many years; we cannot say that when we are going to control, then we should be overzealous in our legislation. I think hon. Mafabi, like for a few other times, - I wanted to say for the first time - is correct on this. We should be able to adopt this. The control spirit is about being gradual and gradualism here should give a timeframe. If you are issuing a ban, then let us go for the ban and say we stop.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we hear from the mover of the Bill or his representative?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you very much, Chair. The new amendment actually is in tandem with what the Members are saying because it is giving time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is it?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Let me read it: “This Act shall come into force on a date of publication notified in the Gazette and different dates may be appointed for the commencement of different provisions, which will be made by the minister using statutory instruments.” 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chair, this would be one of those laws which will come into force in piecemeal; one part is coming immediately and gives the discretion to the minister to determine others. If it is a serious provision, what is the problem with agreeing on this commencement and you give a timeframe so that the whole law comes into force in totality? If you are saying it is a control - (Dr Baryomunsi rose_) - I would not refuse information from a World Health Organisation awardee.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that there are provisions in this law that will not require a lot of time; for instance, the establishment of the tobacco control committee by the responsible minister. Would you need one year to establish this committee? 

The wisdom behind this provision was that even the minister responsible would be aware that if you have suggested changes to be done by manufacturers, you do not expect them to be done the following day. Initially, we had said the commencement would be upon regulations being given by the minister but I want to persuade you to agree with hon. Nyakikongoro that we could say that the commencement be upon gazetting so that the responsible minister can appoint a committee. We can then appoint different dates for the different provisions where the changes have been made. 

If you say that the tobacco packaging should change, for example, then you give reasonable time to the manufacturer or the trader to make those changes. We had provided for six months. We had said that within six months, the responsible stakeholders would have complied with the law and made the changes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I was seeking assistance from the hon. Member for West Budama South in terms of the drafting. Are we creating a general rule and giving exceptions to it? If the general rule is that it will commence on publication, then you have to qualify with a proviso to create the exception – except that certain parts will come at different times as approved by the minister; it would be something like that. That is why I was seeking assistance from somebody who can help me with the drafting. You cannot say that it will come into force and different parts will come into force at different times. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think what Dr Baryomunsi has said is important, that most of the clauses in the Bill start immediately, like establishing of a committee and others. However, there are others that will start later and that is why in the Bill, as you can see, there is a transitional clause, clause 47. It spells out those things that we are saying should start later - things to do with manufacturers, suppliers, retailers and importers of tobacco products. It says they shall comply with the requirements of this Act within a certain period. 

Clause 47 is about the transition and I think hon. Oboth, being a good lawyer at drafting, can make it even tighter so that we help. However, to make a law and say that the whole of it starts next year, maybe we can as well wait and make it next year. Thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, the committee thinks about six months would do. Why am I giving six months? Mr Chairperson, the moment you give a minister an open cheque and you do not give him limitations, he might be a smoker - (Interjections) - I am telling you - or the tobacco producing companies can come and compromise him at night when you do not know. People here are very complicated.  So, Mr Chairman, I want us to give the ministry only six months. There must be a timeframe. (Applause) I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How would the drafting be because we have to capture it?

DR LULUME: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I listened very carefully to the honourable minister, Dr Baryomunsi. Although the chairman is talking about six months as if we should wait until six months elapse, there are certain things which should begin immediately. I think the people drafting should take into consideration the fact that we would want this law to begin immediately, taking into consideration certain other things including infrastructural changes, which can be completed within six months. The legal people can draft in accordance with that kind of reasoning. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The agreement, the principle, is that this law will commence immediately but certain parts of this law will be commenced by an instrument issued by the minister. Is that it? Where does the six months come in? Let us capture the whole thing properly.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The six months would come in as an instruction to the minister that within six months those statutory instruments should have been issued by-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that comes in another provision and not in the commencement clause. Is that correct?

MR OBOTH: I am in total agreement to cure the evil and legislate immediately. Any law that takes long is not law in slumber or could be law in slumber. However, Dr Bitekyerezo brought another aspect; we are dealing with multinational companies who are lobbyists. I do not say there is any minister in Uganda who smokes, but the possibility of having - (Interruption)

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. Mr Chairman, I want to give you information that there are very many big people who smoke. We went to BAT to ask them why they manufacture things which cause death to people and they told us, “Do not waste your breath and energy. We even put it on our cigarette packets that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. However much you preach and campaign, we are guaranteed five per cent rebels including medical doctors, ministers, presidents and all people. So, do not waste energy. There are five per cent rebels for whom we manufacture at will and whether you like it or not they will smoke.” So, people do not do what they should but what they understand. I do not know whether you understand that there are likely to be ministers who are smokers. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you for a very informative contribution. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I had a friend who was advised by the doctors to stop smoking and he told the doctors, “You can as well tell me to stop breathing.” (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Now, that tells the other side of the complexity of this matter. Giving an open cheque – this whole Parliament - on a matter that we consider very important, that now the minister will direct or issue a statutory instrument when others would come into force, I have some hesitations and I buy into hon. Bitekyerezo’s proposal. I would go on and propose as follows: “this Act may be cited as the Tobacco Control Act, 2015 and shall come into operation upon the expiration of six months from the date of its publication in the Gazette” so that the whole thing is law at a specific time. 

You do not go in piecemeal because it is subject to abuse. However, if the movers and sponsors of the Bill want it so badly, so be it.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, I concede with the six months’ timeframe.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I put the question to these six months?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, it is good to have a law coming into force on the same day as my brother said. My worry is that I hope there is nothing which we are leaving out, that it commences now and then you say the minister will have to make sure that within six months it is done and he may decide that today this section must be operationalised when he knows it cannot be operationalised -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What has been proposed by hon. Oboth takes care of that concern. Is that okay now? Can I put the question to the amendment as proposed by hon. Oboth? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.55
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.56
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clause 1 of the Bill and has passed it with an amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report is that we have considered the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” and passed clause 1 with amendment. That was the report.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Tobacco Control Bill and passed clause 1 with amendment. I beg to report. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.57
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report of the committee. (Laughter)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: The Committee of the whole House be adopted. (Laughter) You see, in our language-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; this is not your language. (Laughter)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is 6 O’clock. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
