Friday, 15 July 2011

Parliament met at 10.28 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good morning, hon. Members. You are all welcome for this sitting. As an announcement, there is a mobile phone, which was left in the Chamber yesterday. The owner is requested to pick it from the office of the Sergeant-at-Arms. If you forgot your phone in the Chamber yesterday, please it is in safe custody; so, you go to the Sergeant and pick it. 

Secondly, yesterday we had an item on the Order Paper, which was on presentation of papers - Auditor-General’s report. I went and looked at the provisions of the Constitution particularly Article 163(4) and it is to the effect that: “The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause 3 of this Article for the financial year immediately preceding.”   

The implication of this is that those papers do not have to be laid by the minister because the Auditor-General doesn’t report thorough the minister. The Auditor-General’s reports are directly sent to Parliament. So, these papers - I am advised that those papers are in the custody of Parliament but it is up to the Public Accounts Committee to bring them to the attention of Parliament by laying them on the Table, and that will be scheduled for the business to follow in the course of next week. So, hon. Minister, no wonder we could not see you understanding very much what was going on; they had given you the wrong thing, Sir. So, you are excused for today and you don’t have to make any further comments on that. 

In the public gallery today we have pupils and teachers of Bukandula Church of Uganda Primary School, which is represented by hon. Rose Najjemba Muyinda, Member of Parliament, Gomba constituency. They have come to observe proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming these young people. (Applause) You are welcome! Thank you very much

10.32
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I got information from my constituency over calamities that have befallen my people and are making them uncomfortable. As a House and colleagues, we had agreed that disarmament in the Karamoja region would bring peace in the neighbourhood and we had hope because it was so for a while. Unfortunately, as I speak, the Karimojong raids have increased heavily in my constituency. In the month of June alone, about 80 heads of cattle were taken, including unnumbered goats, and the women are being raped, crops in the field are being destroyed and my people who are bordering the Karimojong are already back in the IDP camps, which is very unfortunate.

As we talk right now, the people who are in the IDP camps of Amia-Pachwa, Adilang, Orom and all the surroundings – I understand even in the neighbouring district of Agago although my colleagues are not here but we have that information. So, the problem has now escalated and is worrying our people. We need to make a quick response and arrest the situation otherwise if we just sit here, we shall once again see people going back to the IDP camps. It is a sad situation and I appeal for urgent attention in order to arrest it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have the minister in charge of that area, is there something else?

10.36
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What the hon. Member of Kitgum District has raised is a very serious factor in the history of this country. My constituency has since March – last time I raised this point but we have not yet got a response - been raided by the Karimojong. On a daily basis they kill people and rustle their animals.  

The Etop of this week, which I have unfortunately not moved with, had reports that close to 300 head of cattle have been rustled in the district of Katakwi. My constituency alone has lost more than 150 head of cattle and the people are being pushed back to the camps and yet they were trying to come out of them. A total of 332 head of cattle were rustled in Apello village and around 40 in Omasha parish, both in Magoro sub-county. So, Mr Speaker, the minister in charge of this issue should come out clearly to tell the people of this country what is happening because it is very serious. We don’t have people we are representing; we can’t represent people who are running day and night. One wonders who is going to pay for these animals. Who is going to pay the people who have already lost their lives? People are not settling down for agriculture; so this situation must be arrested with a lot of seriousness. 

This is increasing because - I have been closely monitoring the situation with the officers in charge of those units bordering Karamoja, Teso, Lango and Acholi – and there are two forces: the operational force and non-operational forces that are deployed on the borders of Karamoja and its neighbouring towns. You realise that out of a force of 500 soldiers, you may find 100 are the ones working -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have over informed. You rose on a point of information and the information is taken. Thank you very much.

10.39
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of Mukono know that they don’t operate in isolation of other Ugandans and anything affecting any part of this country directly or indirectly affects my people.

I would like to observe, with due respect, that we have had problems concerning Karamoja for so long. In his wisdom, His Excellency, the President decided to appoint a Minister in charge of Karamoja. In the last five years, this minister was a state minister and in his wisdom, the President elevated that ministry to the level of a full Cabinet minister. Given the detail of the First Lady, the Minister of Karamoja is also the First Lady and given her detail, I wonder if it is really convenient to her and beneficial to us as a nation to have the First Lady in such an important ministry, which requires extensive representation and work in the area itself. The First Lady has other assignments as a First Lady and is also required to be in Karamoja. 

I wonder whether we are getting value for money and whether she is effectively running that office. I served on the Presidential Affairs Committee in the last Parliament and whenever we would have a meeting as a committee to meet these ministers, the First Lady would not be there. She would have gone for other assignments and as a committee we never benefited from her presence because she would be engaged on other assignments. These ministries -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, the matter now is about cattle rustling that has taken place today. Can you be relevant to the subject?

MS NAMBOOZE: I am talking about the Minister in charge of Karamoja. These ministries, which are being set up to look into matters concerning particular regions - we have had these problems. Already in Bunyoro people are saying, “You gave us a minister but we wanted that minister to be from Bunyoro”. So I wonder whether -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, we know very well how ministers are nominated and eventually brought to the Appointments Committee of this House, vetted and either approved or not approved in accordance with our Constitution. We also know that, as hon. Nambooze says, the First Lady’s office is not a constitutional office. We equally know that yes, the First Lady who was the Minister of State for Karamoja is now a full Cabinet Minister and in fact there has been an addition of a Minister of State for Karamoja, who is even in this House showing the importance of Karamoja.

Is it in order for hon. Nambooze to relate the cattle rustling problem that we are discussing and challenge the wisdom of the Appointments Committee who approved after thorough vetting hon. Janet Museveni as the Minister for Karamoja and to continue challenging her capacity to do that job?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I have already guided the hon. Member on this subject. I said, “Be relevant because the subject that has been brought as a matter of urgent public importance is the issue of the rustling that is going on in Kitgum and other places that has been raised by the hon. Member from Toroma”. So if you need to continue, please restrict yourself to that otherwise, you would be violating the rules.

MS NAMBOOZE: I will take your wise guidance, Mr Speaker. My concern was that Government has been trying to do something about this region and its problems and I was wondering whether the ministry is taking full charge of the responsibility as assigned. Now that the assurance has come from the Government Chief Whip, I will take it.

I would add, as I conclude, that when ministries are set up, there should always be accountability. If a ministry was set up to be in charge of Karamoja when we had this problem, they should come here and tell us why the problem still persists.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please resume your seat.

10.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (Ms Barbra Oundo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Members who have said something on the Floor when it comes to the issue of cattle rustling in Karamoja and Katakwi. I would like to inform the Members that we should not continue referring to this issue as one that has not been attended to. 

Taking particular note of Abim, I would like to inform this House that Karamoja as a ministry was informed immediately about what was happening in Katakwi at midnight. I immediately asked the informant who is the Member of Parliament, Abim to get me a telephone contact for the RDC. I called the RDC who told me that he was on leave. I asked him how long he was on leave and he said he had two weeks remaining. I asked whether he had a deputy RDC and he said, “No”. I immediately ordered him to report back to Abim. There were cases, which we handed over to security and security deployment was immediately beefed up along the lines where these people were rustling cattle.

Actually we also have local militia on the ground who are actually relating with other brothers in the Teso region. This issue has been handled. We have the Leader of Government Business here who will throw more light on this but I know that the issue has been fully handled and Karamoja as a ministry is fully in charge. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member has the issue of Kitgum come to your attention or it is just coming to your attention now?

MS OUNDO: Concerning the issue of Kitgum, it has just come to our attention now and yesterday in this House Members were urged by the Leader of Government Business to bring these issues to our attention before they are brought on the Floor such that we take immediate action.

MS ANYWAR: I rose on an issue of national importance and by nature it comes without notice. I made a clear statement on this Floor that I was contacted last night. We expect the ministers to have the mechanisms for a rapid response or researched response. Is the hon. Minister for Karamoja in order to come here and challenge us the victims of circumstances for failure to approach her before we brought this up? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I asked you to say something if you had any information on what has happened in Kitgum. You should have undertaken to follow it up immediately if you did not have the information and that would have solved a lot of problems.

10.45
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Nepak): We feel concerned when we hear such news from Karamoja. I was about to give a good security report situation in the whole country, including Karamoja. After hearing this, I think I can give another proposal, which may help us. What I know is that the UPDF has done a good job in Karamoja and I cannot say that bad people are out of Karamoja. These bad people can still cause a big problem. 

Let us not amplify the situation; the magnitude of the problem is not as bad as we think. Let us combine our efforts to solve this. There is a parliamentary group from Karamoja and another group for all the bordering regions. We should come together and see how we can solve some of the issues. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is in the long term. What the hon. Member is raising is about what will be done today or tomorrow.

10.52
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): I would like to associate myself with the report and feel sorry. I am sorry about what is happening in the areas neighbouring Karamoja. The situation can even change now; after this report, I will go out and talk to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to give us the latest so that we can know what is happening. I want to apologise on behalf of Government for what is happening. I want to say that the situation is coming to an end because we have spent an extensive effort in that direction -

MR AYEPER: I came from Abim yesterday night where I had gone last week to launch the branding exercise, which was conducted by the First Lady. This gives me a lot of hope because the branding exercise helps us to identify the cows. With that technology, you are able to know the name of the cow; the name of the owner and the sex plus many other details. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought a cow has only one sex.

MR AYEPER: No, some are female and others are male. (Laughter) This gives me hope that this cattle rustling will stop because we tested it. This technology was tested in South Africa and it helped to reduce cattle rustling by 80 percent. My appeal is that the technology should be intensified in the districts surrounding Karamoja. They should have started with districts like Abim instead of Kotido. This technology helps to track the cattle and the owners. It is true that the situation is not good. Hon. Terence Achia is saying that the situation is not bad but it is; for example people cannot go to the garden or the nearby market in Abim. 

The price of a kilo of posho is at Shs 5,000 because they cannot go the nearest place to get these things. On the 27th of last month, they killed two of our innocent young boys. I visited a boy who was shot by the Karimojong warriors yesterday. These people keep terrorising us. I know the UPDF is trying because we are supposed to have a security meeting today. These warriors are now everywhere, like Kony, and this is overwhelming the Army. The branding of animals will help us and my only request is that it should be extended to these areas that the Karimojong raid. 

MS ANYWAR: I want to give more information to the Leader of Government Business that as a precautionary measure, we should beef up security in the areas around Karamoja. The Police are so few on the ground that they cannot rescue anybody when there is an attack. The UPDF is deployed in Karamoja but we do not have enough security in Lamwo and I hope he will concur with what I am saying. We don’t have enough security on the ground and this is making it easy for the Karimojong to constantly come and hit us. So, as a solution you also look into that as fast as possible. I really would love to see it done because if women are being raped; now people cannot go to their gardens and children are not attending school –(Interjection)– I don’t want to add that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, can you assure the House on what is going to happen?

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have already said that Government will leave no stone unturned. I also would like to ask the hon. Member raising this issue to thank the Government for efforts so far exhibited in handling this matter. No Government has ever done what we have done this time round. The extent of cattle rustling has extensively reduced. Otherwise, we thank the hon. Member for giving us that information. I would like to promise that we shall follow it up on the ground. 

But one thing that I would like to put across is that I don’t think the cattle rustlers do rape women –(Laughter)– because if somebody comes to carry out cattle rustling –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Cattle rustling is not something that just started this year; it has been on for almost two decades. And the activities that go along with cattle rustling by the Karimojong are: rustling, raping women and killing people. That information is documented.

Secondly, I am talking on the basis of a report from my constituency that women have been raped. Above all, I am talking as a woman who can also suffer that humiliation. Is it in order for the Deputy Leader of Government Business to come here and shamelessly say that when the cattle raiders come to raid, they can’t have time to rape women, when this information has been documented?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, you had said very well that you were going out to consult and confirm this information. It is improper for you to start doubting the information before you have confirmed it. You are, therefore, not in order. (Applause)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry if it is true that cattle rustlers also have time to rape. I am very sorry if that happens. (Laughter) Anyway, let me assure the House that cattle rustling will be stopped by Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, will these actions begin today? Is that your assurance?

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I am new Member of Parliament and I have been following and attending all the debates. I know that the number of state ministers was increased to around 60 after we approved an addition of 27 new state ministers. And for the full ministers, from 21 to 29; we approved an addition of 8 ministers. The times I have been here, we always get the Order Paper, which schedules business, but usually we start with matters of national importance. For example, I have about 25 matters of national concern from my constituency, but none of them has been aired here. When people are appointed ministers, we expect them to perform because they are paid using taxpayers’ money. With your guidance, is it possible for the Government Chief Whip to avail us with the locations of the various ministry offices so that when a matter of concern arises, one first goes there and makes a report; and that those issues only come to the Floor of Parliament after a particular minister has failed to attend to them? I want to think that even with you there must be a line of issues of national concern on your table. Sometimes, a person will raise a matter of concern –(Interjections)– I will get that information later after I have cleared this.

I am doing this because while we are discussing matters of national concern, another Member will take advantage of that to also bring up another matter of national concern arising from their constituency. Mr Speaker, can’t we get some of these issues into the responsible ministers’ offices before coming here?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member. If you have over 20 issues of concern from your constituency, the Rules of Procedure allow you to Table such issues on the Floor of Parliament without having to come under presentation of issues of national importance. You can raise them through question time, motions and other avenues so that they can be dealt with. But matters of urgent public importance are issues that come up so quickly that the mover or the person making the statement does not have the time to even give notice. The issue might have occurred the previous night or this morning. Those are the issues that qualify to be presented in this particular form.

As for the locations of the various ministries, I am sure the Government Chief Whip will yield to that and mention the locations to the honourable members.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the matters that have been articulated from both sides, I think it is important that from now onwards, after the apologies from the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister, no Government minister should underrate a matter of public importance. I am saying this because under Article 79(1) of the Constitution, Parliament has the powers to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance.

Yesterday I was alarmed when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister advised one of the movers of a matter of public importance to go and report it to police. I want to put it to you that by the time I bring a matter of public importance to the Floor of this House, I will have measured all the angles necessitating the matter to be publicly discussed in this House. So, we have every right, as Members of Parliament, to raise matters of public importance provided we can justify their being public. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but the Article you quoted only relates to the making of laws; it is not about general matters. Yes, let us hear from the hon. Member for Manafwa District.

MRS KAYAGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker – 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: In that Article 79, there is the aspect of Parliament having power to make laws on matters of peace, order – where there is need to address order or disorder, a law may become necessary. That should go on record, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let me read the Article for the benefit of the Members who may not have carried copies of the Constitutions now. It reads: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have powers to make laws on any matter, for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” It is about making laws for Uganda. Yes, hon. Sarah Netalisire.

11.08
MRS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Mr Speaker, I rise on two issues of national importance. I represent the people of Manafwa District but I am also the Chairperson of Abamasaba Parliamentary Association. We have a problem of starvation in my region, in Bulambuli District in Bwikonji sub-county and it was shown on TV yesterday. 

My people are starving and I want to use this opportunity to inform this House that the people of Bulambuli are hard working but they are starving because of the landslides and floods. This sub-county was mainly affected by floods and the harvest has not been good. So, I want to call upon the Government and more especially the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to come to our rescue so that my people can have something to feed on. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to report that I have been to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and approached the minister on the critical issues of starvation, hunger, and mudslides. As I speak now, I have a crack of about 42 kilometres in my district and three sub-counties will be affected. 

Last month we had a landslide that killed one person. I went to the ministry, wrote a letter and spoke to the minister twice but I have not received any response. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which minister? 

MRS KAYAGI: Hon. Musa Ecweru, the State Minister for Disaster Preparedness. I want to use this opportunity to appeal to the Leader of Government Business to help us talk to the minister to come to the rescue of my people -(Interruption)

MR WAMAKUYU: The information I want to give to this House and from what I watched on TV yesterday is that it is not the floods but drought, which affected the crops in Bwikonji. As I speak, I have lost 46 acres of maize in the same area but it is not the floods but the drought. 

MRS KAYAGI: Thank you, hon. Mudimi for that information. 

The second issue is that I received calls from Mbale Referral Hospital; we have already lost five people because of lack of blood in that hospital. Yesterday a lady was transferred from Soroti Hospital to Mbale with a child of 15 years and this child died because there was no blood. At one time there were Good Samaritans who wanted to donate blood to this country but the management of the Blood Bank at Nakasero refused this offer and said that they had enough blood that could help our people for some good months. I appeal to the Leader of Government Business to inform the Minister of Health to immediately help Mbale Hospital. I can imagine how many children and mothers are going to die of anaemia because of lack of blood -(Dr Nduhuura rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But why don’t you wait for her to finish and then you can give proper information?

MRS KAYAGI: I hope that the information that the minister is going to give me will be positive because an appalling situation like that needs urgent attention. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, would you like to make a response to the issues, particularly on the Mbale Hospital situation?

11.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving us this information about Mbale Hospital and I am really surprised because Mbale has a regional blood bank. So, the only thing I can undertake to do is to find out what has happened to that blood bank. Mbale is one of the few regional hospitals that have a regional blood bank but if it is not functioning, then it is good that I have this information here; I undertake to go and find out. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I thank the minister for giving way. The information I want to give this House and the minister for that matter is that this problem is not only with Mbale Hospital. It is across the country. About a month ago, two mothers died in Lira Hospital. They had been operated on and they needed blood transfusions but there was no blood. 

In Mukono, I lost a mother two weeks ago because of the same problem and the doctors are saying that there is no blood in all our referral hospitals and the problem is not because there are no blood donors in the country but because of lack of the kit that they use to collect blood from the donors -(Interjection)- maybe you know the technical term - and they said that the whole country is relying on one machine at Mulago Hospital; they cannot collect blood much as there are so many people willing to donate blood at the moment. 

Mr Speaker, the problem is everywhere in the country. Already mothers are dying in labour and I think the minister should come and tell us why. In the first place, there were people from the A4C and they were turned away because they said we had enough blood – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member, the information is received. 

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of blood donation should be explained. Donation of blood is something that you have to prepare for. You do not wake up and say you want to donate blood. Already a colleague is pointing out the fact that a few weeks back, we did not have kits. So, how do you collect blood without kits?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But why don’t you have kits?

DR NDUHUURA: I do recall, Mr Speaker that a few weeks back there was a problem of procurement but that has since been put right and I am sure we now have the kits and there is no reason why we should not be collecting blood. But of course if you give me information, I definitely act on it. So, I am going to take it up with the Nakasero Blood Bank. But I am sure that we have the kits and we should be able to collect blood and distribute it. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That closes that discussion, as the minister has replied. 

MR AKENA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would greatly appreciate if the minister can give us a time line; it can be in three or six months. It would be helpful to the House if by next week the minister, through the ministry and its institutions can give us clear information on the situation about the blood in the blood bank and what is required.

MRS KAYAGI: Mr Speaker, I know the honourable minister is a medical person. He knows -(Interruption)

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you very much for giving way my colleague. I am a veterinary surgeon. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please?

MRS KAYAGI: Mr Speaker, if he is not a medical doctor, still he is in that office. He knows the urgency of blood. He knows how serious this can be. I wanted an assurance from the minister that if he finds out that in Mbale Blood Bank we do not have blood and there is blood in Nakasero; let him assure my people in Mbale even those who are referred to that hospital that he is going to send some blood there to rescue these people. That is the assurance I want. 

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give here is: one, I want to caution Members to desist from politicising professional practice. Blood is a very expensive item for treatment. Nobody in Uganda buys blood.

Two, I also want honourable members to understand that there has never been enough blood at any one point during the times I have been practising. All the regional hospitals in Uganda have got the kits, the technologies and the machines for screening blood. The challenge Uganda has now is because of the advent of HIV/AIDS. Many times, a lot of blood is collected but also a very big volume is discarded because it is contaminated. 

Three, I also want to inform my honourable colleagues that in medical practice, I do not see anywhere where anyone would accept political pressure to donate blood associated with the so-called Walk-to-Work. I think the blood bank was right.

Finally, I want to say that all regional blood banks always coordinate.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My honourable colleague who has given way, I thank you. But is it in order for him, as a medical doctor, to give excuses when lives are at risk? Here, we are representing the people; we are expressing the pain of the people. I would expect us, as responsible leaders, to look for a solution not to defend the responsible offices. Is the colleague in order just to come and make a defence here and politicise the fact that Ugandans were offering to donate blood? There is no FDC blood; there is no NRM blood; blood is blood. [MR AKENA: “All blood is red.”] As far as I know, just a few days after that donation was rejected -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you raised a point of order so that I can rule? Can you then give me an opportunity to rule?

MS OSEGGE: Is it in order for the honourable colleague to come and do that in this august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am unable to find any particular rule that has been violated. Conclude your submission.

DR OMONA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will repeat that no political pressure will interfere with a professional practice that has got etiquette and very well-prescribed rules and guidelines for the profession. 

Finally, I want to say that I join my colleagues for the great concern about the severe lack of blood. However, I want to call upon the honourable members to find an opportune time and promote the spirit of blood donation. Let us set a day or two aside and call upon country men to donate blood. This will go a long way in convincing people and letting them know that blood is very important. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I have restrained myself but allow me to raise this. As a country, we have work ethics. I understand a medical person is not allowed to disclose certain standard information or segregate among his patients. I am seeking clarification and your guidance on this matter. Should the honourable member who ethically is in the know as a medical person go on record on this Floor of Parliament and segregate blood on political lines and we take it as such? Won’t it have an effect on maybe patients who would be having a different ideology on political lines to fear approaching such a mindset of a medical officer having made such a pronouncement? I seek this clarification and your guidance, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us bring this matter to a close. Hon. Minister, can you give a definite response in terms of timeframes on how soon this intervention will take place so that we can move on? Just that aspect and we move on. Of course there is the other issue of the drought that will be handled appropriately on record. So, please give us a good timeframe so that we can move on.

11.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very sure that next week the Minister of Health will be responding to the very many issues that were raised during the debate on the State of the Nation Address.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This one does not require a written response. What actions?

DR NDUHUURA: This is what I am coming to. Next week we will definitely be here to inform the whole country and this House on what the Ministry of Health is doing to solve these issues, challenges and problems. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery this morning we have pupils and teachers of Chadwick Namate Primary School, which is represented by hon. Muhamed Kawuma, Member of Parliament for Entebbe Municipality. (Applause) They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming these young Ugandans. (Applause)

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON WELFARE OF THE GOVERNMENT SPONSORED STUDENTS IN EGYPT AND TANZANIA

11.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Rt Hon. Speaker, hon. Members and colleagues, yesterday an issue was raised about the welfare of our sponsored students in Tanzania and Egypt. I would like to inform this august House that yesterday -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, under our Rules of Procedure, it is elaborately stated that before a statement of the kind the minister is going to read is presented, the Members are entitled to receiving copies. We need guidance on that before he articulates whatever he is going to say. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you have a prepared statement you are going to present? 

DR BATARINGAYA: Mr Speaker, I am making a verbal statement because when my colleagues raised that issue at the time when we received the ceiling from the ministry of finance. And as I talk now, we are processing the allowances of our students, not only in Tanzania and Egypt but also the other seven countries. We are processing money for these students. 

MS ANYWAR: My colleague the shadow minister and I; made this appeal. Our practice is that when an issue is referred to a minister to come and respond to this House, even if the statement is very short or for whatever reason, it should be in written form. First of all, to show how prepared the minister is and to allow that response to be on record. I would like to seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, should we continue to receive the verbal statement from the minister; deviating from the practice and desire of the House that we get a written statement from him? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you have a written statement on this matter because this is what we agreed on yesterday?

DR BATARINGAYA: Mr Speaker, I don’t have a written statement but if Members so wish that the sentence should be in writing, I will bring it on Wednesday.

MR BWAMBALE: I am seeking clarification from my brother, the honourable minister. He has talked of processing but processing in itself is a process. How long will that processing take? Yesterday we were informed that our children have been chased away from the hostels where they stay. They have no food to eat; they are living a squalid life in Dar-es-Salaam and in Cairo. So, when you talk of processing, you are not giving us an assurance that our children are going to get out of that situation soon. So, how long will the process take? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is a pending question that is not answered.

DR BATARINGAYA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform this august House that on Tuesday, I will bring a written statement as requested.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the matter we brought before the House yesterday was very urgent, and it is still very urgent. The House expected some action to be taken. The minister is telling us that on Tuesday he will come with a written statement. These students are getting holydays on the 22nd of this month and they have not received their money. How are they are going to sit their exams? Their exams begin next week. 

You requested me to present it before Parliament and not as a petition because of its urgency. So, I really wonder whether the minister is in order not to tell us his real actions. When are you making the payments? Are you making payments on Monday, so that by the time you come on Tuesday with the statement, you should be telling us that you have already paid? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That’s what I asked you to do hon. Minister.

DR BATARINGAYA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that before Wednesday, all our students in the nine countries will have received their allowances. I want to assure you of that. It is not only in Tanzania and Egypt but we also have students in China, Turkey, Algeria, Czechoslovakia; we are processing their money at once because we received the ceiling from the ministry of finance yesterday. My people are already processing this money. Therefore, the statement I will bring will be a post mortem informing you that students have already received the money. We are pragmatic.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: With due respect to the honourable members present here; with reference to the communication from the Chair on the 8th day of July, allow me to seek guidance on a point of procedure. 

In that communication, the Rt Hon. Speaker reported that His Excellency the President had invited all Members of Parliament to a three-day retreat that would take place from the 16th  to 18th July. In the same communication, it said that Members of Parliament would visit model farmers in Kiruhura District, St Jude Rural Training Institute, in Masaka and State House.

I need guidance on the following: is that invitation optional? Knowing that under Article 155(1) and Article 101(1) and (2) are the basis under which the President may communicate with Parliament; if it is the President initiating that invitation, isn’t that invitation unconstitutional? I need guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Article 155(1) is on the budget and the other one is on presidential addresses. It does not fall in this category; and if you are persuaded that it is not constitutionally right, don’t abuse the Constitution by attending it. So, you will excuse yourself by not coming. But to the best of my information, since you swore to uphold the Constitution, you are better off not coming. 

To the best of my information, and this can also be further information on that invitation, His Excellency the President has invited NRM Members of Parliament to join him in this retreat. I think it was modified; it is not for Members of Parliament in general but NRM Members. Maybe the Chief Whip could guide as on this invitation; and you don’t need to quote the Constitution on this. Just give us the invitation the way it is.

11.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was not going to quote the Constitution but I am beginning to wonder from which Constitution Lukyamuzi, the man, is quoting. I am wondering whether he is using the same Uganda Constitution or another Constitution. I cannot find what he is quoting in my Constitution, which I have here. (Laughter) 

Nevertheless –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member was saying that there are two ways the President can access Parliament: through Article 155(1), which is through the Budget and the other is through Article 101, which is through presidential addresses. And that this invitation does not fall in these categories. That is what he is saying. So, just clarify for us the invitation, please. 

MR NASASIRA: His Excellency the President was not coming to Parliament. All I can say is that the invitation to this - whether you want to call it a retreat – all those who have been invited will get their invitations. If hon. Lukyamuzi has not got his, it means that it is either on the way or he may not be part of the invited guests. (Laughter)       

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this matter is settled. (Hon. Members rose_) Still on this invitation? No, please. Let us have the next item.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 07 JUNE 2011

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members we now have a situation where we have to begin to move towards winding up this debate. Today we will try our best to accommodate as many Members -(Hon. Members rose_)- the Speaker is speaking. (Laughter) Debate will continue on Wednesday afternoon and Thursday and it will be closed towards that time. So, it will continue next week. Today we will go as far as we can to try and do this. 

By this I also want to notify both the Shadow Front Bench and the Government Front Bench that they should begin working out their responses. I think we will begin by Wednesday afternoon or Thursday morning for them to start making the responses. We will start with the shadow cabinet making responses to the specific issues that have been raised and that fall within their docket and then the Government Front Bench will make their responses. 

I would like to propose that the way we will be handling these responses will be that the teams that are going to make these responses from the different Front Benches should sit and agree as to how they are going to handle the responses. I am proposing to give a block time to the Opposition, for example two hours, which the person who is going to lead the Opposition will see how to segment within their framework and then they finish. At the clock of two hours, there will be no more submissions. 

I will also give an equivalent amount of time or more to the Government side to have them manage their own time to see who will speak first and for how long so that the process can be handled properly until the end. That is called the guillotine mechanism. 

In the guillotine mechanism, time is allotted to you and the minute that time arrives, you are stopped. Whether you are in the middle of a sentence or not, that is the end of it. So, you need to see how to organise yourself properly to be able to make these responses quickly and in an organised way. This is how I am proposing we are going to handle the process towards the end. 

11.41
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have followed you and that you are going to give us fixed time. In your communication you have said you will give us the same time or more. However, I would like to propose that since most of these questions were addressed to Government, we need maybe three times the time the Opposition Front Bench will get. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will sit and agree on that. What I am emphasising is that it should be an organised response within a timeframe that is manageable but not to leave it open-ended and people come and talk forever. We want to avoid that kind of situation. We want to accommodate as many Members as possible and also make the end very organised. 

The debate is open and -(Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)- hon. Lukyamuzi you have already spoken so you cannot - 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, on the side of the Opposition, we are ready to debate on that day. Thank you. (Laughter) (Ms Anywar rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, I thought we had agreed that the Front Bench, both Shadow and Government, would make their responses at the end. Do you want to make yours now? I thought we would give time to the Back Bench and then you would respond when the time comes. So, can I have the honourable member who raised the question on Manafwa? Yes, please. This is now on the State of the Nation Address.

11.42
MRS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to my colleagues’ who thanked the President for the State of the Nation Address and I also want to thank my sister, hon. Rosemary Najjemba, for moving the motion.

I want to comment on education. When the President was making the State of the Nation Address, he told us the number of children who have enrolled in school but one thing that is lacking and Government has to address is the quality of the children that we are producing. We have successfully achieved the numbers but the quality of the children that we are producing is very appalling.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you will agree with me, especially some of us who are representing constituencies that are rural, that our children go through automatic promotion from P.1 up to P.6 and then in P.7 they sit for PLE and they are supposed to get 28 aggregates in order to be admitted to senior 1. If they do not score 28 these children are not allowed to repeat P.7. They can repeat but their parents are supposed to pay. You can imagine a parent who cannot afford school fees; a child has not managed to score 28 points and then this child fails to go to senior one! They end up dropping out of school. We have addressed the issue of the numbers but quality and drop-out rates are still an issue.       

The hardship allowances to teachers who are teaching in hard-to-reach areas: my district constitutes 30 sub-counties and out of 30, 15 of these are mountainous and there are rivers that are running through each one of them. You also know that my district has a lot of rainfall. Even as I speak now, Kampala is dry but in Manafwa it is raining. If it rains, these children cannot go to school and neither can the teachers go to teach. I want to appeal to the minister to include the district of Manafwa under the hard-to-reach areas so that that allowance is given to my teachers.

The other issue is about the infrastructure, especially the roads. When the President was giving the State of the Nation Address, he told us that there are roads that are going to be worked on using donor money and then there are roads that are going to be worked on using our own money. He even cited the type of roads that are going to be worked on. I had an opportunity to attend the Heroes’ Day celebrations and I travelled on one of the roads, half of which is being worked on using our money and the other half is being worked on using donor money. But when you compare the quality of work, the donors who are only helping us are doing a substantive job but we the owners of the roads leave a lot to be desired. 

I want to appeal to the minister in charge of infrastructure that let us have little work done but with quality other than hurrying to do a lot of things when it is  not of good quality.

There are roads that were taken over by Government from the districts and local governments. They are in a sorry state. Last week they planted matooke in one of my roads that has been in the budget for the last 15 years and now the road has been thrown out. My people have been living on oxygen. It is like a patient who has been on oxygen expecting to recover very soon but eventually the oxygen machine is taken away from that person. So, I want to appeal to the minister that when money is availed to work on these roads, please bring back the Mbale-Rwakaka Road.

And lastly, about NAADS, we talked of 100 farmers with 100,000 each. Right now the farmers are getting Shs 35,000 which is not 100,000. I want to appeal to the minister of agriculture who is in charge of NAADS to look at it again. (Member timed out_)

11.48
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank His Excellency, the President and the Government for the great achievements contained in the State of the Nation Address. I also thank our medical personnel who have started measuring our weight and blood pressure so that we keep checking ourselves early enough before falling sick. 

I believe in the saying that: “The biggest room in the world is the room for improvement.” A lot of achievements have been out outlined here by the President and I will concentrate my contribution on the issue that is undoing, delaying, disrupting and reversing all those achievements. This is the issue of corruption. On page 46, the President talks of “zero tolerance to corruption”. I wish all the ministers were here because rule 98 of our Rules of Procedure demands that they or their representatives should be present. I do not know whether, Mr Speaker, you are aware of those who have sent their representatives? The Leader of Government Business is supposed to ensure that all ministers are here - both rule 31, when there are questions, and rule 98, demand that ministers be present because the issue of corruption concerns every leader and citizen of this country.

In the 2009 State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President in reference to corruption said, “We have won all the other wars except one – that one of corruption.” When he mentioned “wars” my antenna went up. He also said, “Just as we fought HIV/AIDS as citizens of Uganda, we should fight against corruption the same way.” In this year’s State of the Nation Address, he repeats his commitment to zero tolerance to corruption.

Parliament has passed many laws – I congratulate it – and the spirit of those laws was the hope that we will fight and eradicate corruption. But alas! I look at most of them as only helping to do post mortems because most of them are dealing with the end of the problem. This happens when a person has already been – the few who are caught, tried and sentenced or acquitted. That is a post mortem. The reason I was thanking our clinic is because they are trying to do prevention and close monitoring. I propose that in order to deal with corruption, as the President points out that Government is going to intensify public awareness; at least one percent of every vote should be dedicated for fighting corruption. This is because every Vote of the budget is affected by corruption and 20 to 50 percent is lost, according to reports. So people can be taught, made aware and different organisations and departments of Government and volunteers – like Volunteers Anti-corruption Campaign, which we started - mobilised to monitor and prevent corruption –(Member timed out_) 

11.53
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma County, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those of colleagues who have thanked the President for the State of the Nation Address. Despite the fact that we are thanking him, there are issues that we need to point out. 

On the issue of education, I represent a constituency and a district comprising 52 islands but with only one government secondary school, which started conducting senior four exams last year. So for the last 20 and plus years, the students had to move to the mainland to sit for their exams. At the same time, the Government is proposing to have free A’ Level education but we do not have any A’ Level school in the whole district. I wonder how such a district will benefit from that free offer when it has no structures to handle such an offer. My request is – like it has been done in some districts in hard-to-reach areas – Buvuma should be treated as a special case because students cannot move from one island to another to attend school. This was demonstrated by the fact that during the recent presidential campaigns, the President was able to reach only one island out of the 52. It is very difficult to reach different areas. 

My humble request to the Minister of Education is that we should have a seed school in the islands – a primary school with a boarding section, not a day school. At the same time, the secondary schools should be extended to A’ Level because it is not written anywhere that whoever is in Buvuma should graduate at senior four level.

In terms of health, we have one health centre to the level of a referral hospital but the structures are not commensurate to that level. Until last month, doctors were operating on patients in darkness using candles and lanterns and yet this is a hospital. So, we need to improve on our structures. When the President was addressing us, he asked us not to use our money as MPs to solve problems in the constituency. He asked us not to carry all the burdens but at times we find ourselves in a tricky situation and we have to carry the burdens. For example, we have to provide solar power if the Government cannot provide.

Lastly, I want to talk about fishing. The President is committed to fighting illegal fishing but with very few mechanisms. He mentioned a campaign against illegal fishing but with no tangible efforts. So, I propose that apart from running after the illegal fishermen, we should also have incentives. These illegal fishing nets go through the border posts and are taxed by the Uganda Revenue Authority before they are bought by our people. So, they should instead stop the entry of these fishing nets.

At the same time, we need to help these people because fisheries officers are extorting a lot of money from them. Even the money that they would have used to develop is taken away by these officers. So, we need to ban these illegal nets. 

11.59
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to comment on the State of the Nation Address. One thing that I came to realise in the whole address is that there are some areas that the President touched but have gaps that we identified as lacking in his speech. All Ugandans know that Uganda is facing a population outburst and we feel that in the near future, we shall have a population that the country may not be able to sustain. However, Government has not come up with a very clear policy on how it is going to manage it. 

Government has spoken about women getting engaged in family planning but I am urging Parliament to make the control of Uganda’s population a collective responsibility. I want to appeal to Members that we should not only look at women as the only actors in family planning. Even the male Members of Parliament should be engaged. In fact, we should even have a policy that comes out to demarcate the number of children that each person may deliver and the extra number be taxed as it is done in some countries. 
 
After a man bearing a certain number of children, we can have a method that can be applicable on that man not to proceed to have more children. (Applause) It looks very ridiculous to the House but this is the point; in the next ten years, we are going to have a population outburst. There will be over 50 million Ugandans and where shall we end, because the land is not improving or increasing? This is an idea that the President was very silent about but it is something that Parliament could take up.

There is also an issue on transport. This is something that I will need to raise in form of a question to the Minister of Works and Transport. There is that aspect where some of us who come from constituencies, which are bordering Lake Victoria, have had problems with our fishermen in the licensing of boats and the process through which they have to go through to move on the water. Sometimes people who licence these boats are from the fisheries department. At the same time, we know that the responsible ministry should be that of transport, although working closely with the fisheries department. In such circumstances, fishermen have failed to know the right office. That is why we are getting many complaints on water transport. So, I would like the Minister of Works and Transport or that responsible for fisheries to come out clearly and tell us who is responsible for licensing the means of transport on water bodies. That will enable us guide our constituents on which ministry to approach for that facility. 

Awareness on the use of life jackets should also be emphasised because we are losing many people and yet Government has been very reluctant to avail life jackets that people could easily access, buy and use. 
 
The President also emphasised democracy. I know that Uganda is currently a democratic country and we are exercising elections year after year but why haven’t we held elections of the lower councils at LC I for over ten years? Are we really practicing democracy at the lower levels? There is need to elect people that will be looked at as new leaders. Haven’t we lost many people that were elected in 1996 when we had the first elections? I am asking the Minister of Local Government and the Chairman of the Electoral Commission if they could come and clarify when we are going to carry out elections at the local council level. (Member timed out_)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- maybe some Members are worried but it is because of the points I have normally been giving on the Floor, which are either on order or information to the Members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am advised that you have already contributed. 

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, it was just information. I do not know whether information amounts to a maiden speech. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, the rules are very clear and we cited them yesterday. The hon. Member from Kalungu West - 

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have already cautioned colleagues who have already contributed and I do recall very well that the hon. Ssewungu from Kalungu West contributed. In fact, I did record what he contributed and I have a very beautiful response. So, should we allow him to speak? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please, let us be honourable. If you have contributed, give your colleagues opportunity to speak.  

12.06
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to contribute to the State of the Nation Address. The President talked about a boom in the construction industry where he cited Kampala connecting with Entebbe and Mukono, which is wonderful. However, my complaint is that we have all along been talking about Prosperity-for-All but when you go to the rural areas, you do not see this boom in the construction of houses there. So, I would like to inquire from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development whether there is also a rural housing scheme. We do not want to see a boom only along the roads leaving the rural areas. People in rural areas have stopped constructing because of the high prices of cement. So, I do not know what Government has in mind to really tackle this problem.

Secondly, the President cited Oyam as one of those districts carrying out the simple irrigation scheme. I feel that the use of mineral water bottles is a sign that there is an urgent need for irrigation technology. He went ahead to advise us to ensure that people continue with this simple irrigation scheme. However, I have a problem with the use of mineral water bottles. If we are to encourage our people to use mineral water bottles, I feel that there is an environmental impact as far as the use of these bottles is concerned. Secondly, it will require importation of mineral water bottles. I call upon the relevant minister to come in and give us alternative, simple irrigation techniques instead of the use of mineral water bottles. 

On education, we have very good plans of UPE and USE but to what extent have we benefited from our education in terms of employment and poverty eradication? I recommend an overhaul of our education curriculum, because when you look at our curriculum, you find that it does not rhyme with the needs of our society. We have been depending on the curriculum, which was drawn long ago where students learn through text books, thereby coming out academically sound but practically poor. If we are to benefit from education, we need to do a lot more in our curriculum.

Concerning roads, during the State of the Nation Address, I remember hearing about very beautiful roads but when you go deep in our rural roads, there is a lot to be desired. For example, there is a road being worked on from Aromo to Ngai sub-county. The people who are working there are instead just narrowing the road. I would like the minister in charge of this infrastructure to come up with an explanation as to why instead of getting good service, we are getting something, which is not worthy. The community is complaining about the quality of this road. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, a lot of ground has been covered. I am proposing something and I hope you agree with me on this. We are taking five minutes each and it is now midday. Today we should move as far as we can before we adjourn. Could we agree to shorten the time of making these contributions to three minutes? [HON. MEMBERS: “Five minutes.”] We go to five minutes? You might be the victim in the end.

Hon. Members, this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Kibuwe Parents Primary School, which is represented by hon. Joseph Balikuddembe Mutebi, Member of Parliament, Busiro South. They have come to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

12.12
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be very fast and make comments on land issues in Nakasongola District. As the Government thinks about commercialising agriculture and making production a priority, I wish to state that in Nakasongola, more than 80 percent of the people are farmers and the majority of these people are squatters. There are severe land wrangles in my district. People are killing each other and the office of the RDC is overcrowded with cases concerning land wrangles and killings. Last month, we buried six family members: a husband, wife and four children at a go who were burnt to ashes in a house because of land wrangles.

During the Seventh Parliament, the issues of land wrangles were a big priority for the Government and Kibaale and Nakasongola districts had been placed for a land fund. These days I notice with pleasure that people in Kibaale are quiet, meaning that the land issues there have been handled very well by Government. I will hear from them, maybe, as this is an assumption and I am just making an observation. However, in Nakasongola, we have been on the list to benefit from the land fund and it never comes. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to request that Government puts Nakasongola as a priority on the land fund or else that district will not participate fully in the agriculture programmes that Government is putting up.

Another issue is on education. Many things have been raised. Performance is still wanting in education but one reason that is very eminent nowadays is witchcraft in schools. We are seeing it on the screens of television every day. I have experienced it in my district. (Laughter) It is funny but it is an important issue. What is the Ministry of Education doing? Do we need a Bill to address this issue so that the people who are suspected can be apprehended? 

I went to some schools, which closed for almost three months; Kansila Primary School and Nambajje Primary School in my constituency and I have seen many others on television in other districts. Can the Ministry of Education come and tell us what the problem is? (Member timed out_)

12.15
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join other Members in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address. The statement was very comprehensive as most of the areas were addressed. 

However, I have some concerns. Concerning education, Mbale District appreciates Government’s effort in the schools that have been built. However, they are still few because we have many students who cross two sub-counties to get to a secondary school. There are many sub-counties without schools yet according to Government policy, every sub-county should have a school. This has led to a very high dropout rate especially the girl child and most of these girls have ended up on the streets, many of them as sex workers just because they are not in school.

I would like to appeal to Government that to avert this problem, let vocational schools be introduced in many of these areas so this high dropout level is averted.

I have been a teacher for a long time and given the experience I have had, I find that many teachers have taught for a very long time but they are not promoted or given any headship, even when they apply and do what Government requires. I would like to appeal to Government to look at these teachers. There is one teacher who taught me in senior four and when I qualified as a teacher, I found that teacher still a teacher. Ten years later, that teacher was promoted when she had grown weak. I appeal to Government to promote teachers who have taught for a very long time.

In addition, the remuneration of teachers is still wanting because many teachers are crying out there. In addition, Government has encouraged teachers to go for further studies but when these teachers qualify, they still remain at the level where they began from. When I upgraded to degree level, I still earned a diploma salary. There are many teachers with degrees but they are still earning diploma salaries. 

12.18
MS SARA LANYERO (NRM, Woman representative, Lwamwo): Mr Speaker, my colleagues have talked about most of the issues that I wanted to say. The President talked about counseling in schools. We do not have counseling and psycho-social support. My request is that Government should come up with a policy such that we can have counselors in all the schools just like we have head teachers. This is so important because counselors would help teachers and pupils to cope especially when lightning was striking schools.

I heard one hon. Member talk about witchcraft. If we had good counselors in schools, they would deal with that problem of witchcraft. I request the Government to come up with a policy where all the schools in Uganda have school counselors just like they have head teachers. This has helped us in Northern Uganda because after the war, people were hysterical and many of them thought they were seeing ghosts. When you counsel them, you find that ghost-seeing was hysteria and then you help them to cope with their inner wounds. 

I would like to talk about water in Lamwo District. I thank Government because districts of Kit gum and Pader are getting water. There is a World Bank project that is extending water in all the places in Kit gum and Pader. My request is: can our new district of Lamwo also benefit from this? We do not have water and people spend much time looking around for water. 

We have electricity in Lamwo but people cannot afford it. Getting the electricity from the pole to your home costs Shs 500,000 and people cannot afford this. Since February this year, we have been having electricity but only three homes have fixed that electricity because of poverty. Let Government help us to elevate agriculture so that people are able to sell their goods and use better means of farming. This will help them to afford these basic necessities of life. 

I thank Government for reconstructing the Aswa Bridge around Gulu-Kitugum road. They are constructing the bridge but what about the road? The road between Gulu and Pader is really terrible and there are many accidents on this road. I was also a culprit. I request Government to improve that road, even if it is a murram road -(Member timed out_)

MR JOHN OKOT: In the past three years the President has been talking about upgrading the road from Panariyo via Gulu to Kitgum but in this last one, it did not feature. It is our appeal that if that road is upgraded to tarmac, it will benefit Lamwo, Kitgum and Southern Sudan.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, when I got in, I found you talking to Members whether we should reduce the time from five to three minutes. I understand you adopted the view that we continue with the five. I have been timing the submissions, hon. Komuhangi talked for three minutes and the next Member also talked for three minutes that is from 12.16 to 12.19. Those intervals are three minutes and I think the people in charge of this automated system are not adhering to your directive. Personally, I have been rehearsing my speech for the last three weeks to fit in the five minutes, now you can imagine if it has to fit in the three. I pray that you direct the people who manage the system -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not know about that; let us continue with the five minutes. I will give you more time during the budget debate, so, do not worry. 

12.26
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Since it is my maiden speech, let me use this opportunity to congratulate all of us. Let me congratulate those who got added responsibilities, including the Speaker.

I first went to the Speaker and told her about the people in the LRA affected areas. We still have LRA in the Central African Republic, DRC and the South Sudan equatorial region. I met women who came from these areas; they were under the reconciliation resources. I met them and they also proceeded to Gulu. Very many of them are disgusted with our UPDF activities especially in areas. At one time, we requested that we should always be updated on the activities of the UPDF and the LRA in those neighbouring countries. Those are our neighbours; we cannot settle when they are in pain. I demand that the Minister of Defence briefs this House about UPDF intervention in the Central African Republic. 

In 2008/2009, we had a big fight on the Gulu-Juba road where even my people who were in Lacor Hospital were tear-gassed. People were fighting to have the tarmac from Gulu town to Lacor Hospital. We had been briefed that Gulu-Juba road was to be worked upon. I travelled to Obongi about three weeks ago but my travel from Gulu to Adjumani via Atiak was on a terribly bad –(Col Mwesigye rose_) this is a maiden speech, Sir. I think the Minister of Works and Transport should tell when the Gulu-Juba will be worked on. 

Some two to three weeks ago, traffic would move through certain areas like Keyo. When UNRA worked on that small bridge in Keyo area, hardly after 30 minutes, everything got broken. I keep wondering whether these engineers know their work or not. If they do, why do they really misuse public resources, when people are living in poverty?

Let me now get to my response to the State of the Nation Address. I would like to thank the President, but when I looked at the previous State of the Nation Address, I realised that everything about politics is very good, but in reality, we spend a lot of money working against the interests of the people of Uganda.

Article 1 of the Constitution is very clear: power belongs to the people, but are we really working towards that? For example, Government recruited people called crime preventers, but who are these people? Why do we spend a lot of money during elections working against the interests of the people of Uganda? We know that we are almost under dictatorship, which thrives under forces, corruption and oppression. But let us not oppress our people; we should work for the people.

Mr Speaker, let me say something about what I heard from what was quoted of the President at the victory party for the Rt Hon. Speaker. In what I heard, the President tried to reduce the institution of Parliament; and that was not the first time. I do not know, those of you who head this institution, how you feel when the President says that decisions are done in the caucus and that Parliament is just there for formality, just even –(Member timed out_)

12.31
MR FAISAL KIKULUKUNYU (NRM, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I rise to register my appreciation for the President’s delivery of the State of the Nation Address. I also extend my appreciation to the Leader of the Opposition for giving a well researched response to the President’s State of the Nation Address.

Many Members have said a lot about education and so, I will not go into the details of what was said. I just want to say that they are right when they say there is need to increase teachers’ salaries. They are also right to say that there is need to increase –(Power black-out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you will not be seen on the camera. For that reason, the House is suspended for 30 minutes. You could also take advantage of this break to have lunch.

(The House was suspended at 12.33 p.m.)

(On resumption at 1.50 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, welcome back from the break. The problem turned out a little bigger than what we had anticipated and could not be rectified within 30 minutes; that is why it took longer than agreed but we are ready to proceed. There was a Member holding the Floor. Please, start from where you were when you were interrupted. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Parliament was in the middle of a serious debate and this is one of the high institutions of the country. I am amazed that the institution of Parliament can be disrupted in the middle of a debate and we do not have a standby generator to immediately rectify the situation as it were, and you had to suspend the House! 

Is it not prudent that the concerned commissioners ensure that we have a permanent solution to this? We cannot continue being disrupted without an alternative, even if there is general load shedding. I do not want to speculate that we are arm twisted, but couldn’t there be a standby generator in case of such a crisis? I need your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, there is a standby generator and it started running immediately there was a power flip. The problem was with the relay switch, which got burnt. So, they were just fixing it. Those of you who went the other side could tell that the generator was running but power could not be relayed to the system and the problem was with the switch. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to inform hon. Anywar that the Speaker is also a commissioner and he is the Chairperson of the Commission. So, there was no need of addressing the issue to other commissioners. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I responded immediately. 

MR KIKULUKUNYU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I was interrupted by power failure, I had indicated my concern on education. I pointed out that teachers’ salaries need to be increased if we are to have good standards in our schools. I also said that teachers’ houses and classrooms need to be constructed to house teachers and pupils. 

There is also need to address the issue of feeding of our students in our schools. You cannot have a hungry pupil learn. Today, we have a situation where a teacher goes without food and the pupil goes without food and you can imagine the kind of quality you anticipate out of a hungry teacher and a hungry pupil! So, we need to handle these issues so as to improve on the standard of our students. 

Mr Speaker, Members have also observed that the money extended as capitation grant to schools in UPE is too little. I want further echo the same; that more money needs to be allocated under the UPE programme, because without increasing this money, you cannot have items like extra-curricular activities being conducted in our schools. There is no way you will have monthly tests if this money is not increased. There is no way you will maintain the school, because all this is lacking and the state of our schools is not the best. Therefore, I propose that the local governments be given some powers to make by-laws regarding the feeding of our pupils in the schools because we can no longer stand this crisis of our pupils going without lunch. 

We shall never have the quality of students that we wish to have tomorrow if this matter is not addressed. I suggest that Government redresses this matter and passes it over to the local governments’ administration to handle in matters of by-laws to address the issue of the feeding of our students. 

I also want to add that like we have agricultural loan facilities, why can’t we have the same for our teachers in education? These teachers are heavily indebted. They have loans across all the banks of this country; they get money from moneylenders like any other person working with Government. Since we can extend a loan scheme to agriculturalists, I propose that the same be put in place to benefit our teachers. 

During his campaigns, the President promised that we shall be assisting our university-going students with some money to handle their education requirements. Universities and institutions are opening in September; when is this beginning? Many students are calling to ask how far Government has gone on the matter of loans to students. 

I would like to talk about some aspects in local governments. We know very well that Graduated Tax was abolished because the economic status of our people was not good. We are now faced with a situation where we have a narrow tax base in our country. Why can’t we revive the issue of Graduated Tax? Our local governments can no longer handle their businesses. Sub-county councils are no longer sitting because they cannot afford allowances to give to their councilors. We should go back to the old system –(Member timed out_)

2.00
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating you upon attaining that high office and congratulating His Excellency the President upon the State of the Nation Address, which was elaborate. I insisted on contributing to the State of the Nation Address first of all as a former chairperson and current Chairperson of the Equal Opportunities Committee. 

I rise on the issue of gender and equity and I would have loved to hear how Government is going to address the issues of gender inequality and equity in the 2011/2012 Financial Year.

I am saying this after realising that the Budget Call Circular provides a detailed guide to sectors to apply the concept of gender equity. 

Most issues have been raised, especially on different sectors like health. I have been in this House for some time and the issue of requesting the Ministry of Health to come up with a maternal health roadmap has not been achieved up to today. Also, due to public demand, Members of this House, especially women Members and friendly colleagues stood up and said, “There is no budget, which is going to be passed unless matters concerning maternal health are addressed.” But today, there is no maternal health report; to date, there is no maternal audit report; to date, the issues of maternal health have just remained in the minds of a few people and have not been implemented. 

It is my call and the call of everybody connected to this sector that the Ministry of Health ensures that they put in place systems that are gender-responsive and implemented to ensure that all the problems that have been raised on the floor of this House are addressed. There might be some responsiveness but still, they have remained on paper and have not been implemented. 

Even when you see the current health care course; when you see problems that have been raised in the media - for example, when you hear the services – the medical personnel have said the issue of wages should be addressed. That is one of the priorities of the committee. The mothers who are dying during delivery, the way they are mistreated, the conditions - today, they were saying there is no blood. This means death of some people. It is my call that the Minister of Health should endeavour to put in place functional, accessible, efficient health systems if the health sector is to realise its hope and the hope of every citizen that we should also be proud of. 

On education, regarding the issue of gender and equity - child labour in schools, for example, there is a school near my constituency; every morning these small children of between primary one and primary three who are eight years, seven to 10 years; wake up to go and fetch water. It is about five kilometres from the school. One day, I had to intervene. They were about 100. These children at times sleep on empty stomachs. In the morning by 7.00 a.m., they are in the classroom. Then they go and fetch water. They return to school at 11.00 a.m. When I intervened, the teachers told me, “Our salary is not enough to put housemaids in place to cater for all these.” 

It was a big issue. I am going to address it with Members of the committee, research and come here with a report. That is the discrepancy between rural and urban schools. You cannot find children in urban schools fetching water. You cannot find children in urban schools doing that hard labour. They are digging under the pretext of gardening. I am happy there are pupils here of primary school age. What those in rural schools go through needs to be addressed by the education ministry!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Bombo Barracks Primary School represented by hon. Khiddu Makubuya, Member of Parliament for Katikamu South. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

We also have pupils and teachers of Katovu Highway Primary School, who are represented by hon. Aboud Kitatta, Member of Parliament for Bukoto West in Lwengo District. They have also come to watch the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

2.06
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the President for the address. I want to limit my presentation to a few issues.

The President talked of inflation as a result of low exports. In Uganda, exports are low. Most of the revenue the country gets is from imports. Our budget is heavily-funded by customs from collections of Uganda Revenue Authority. But now, the dollar versus shilling rate – of course, the President was saying it is good for the exporters since they earn more. What about the importers? How many are they employing? It is petty traders, the “batembeyi”; many people in town are earning a living through that. Many people doing business in town are suffering and sooner or later; we are going to experience another strike over rent. People charge rent in dollars and these are companies which are incorporated in Uganda in local currency. 

As a country, we have to look forward and see how we can save Ugandans. This issue of paying rent in dollars is disturbing. Recently, I went to South Africa but I nearly got stuck because I reached the airport at night and I was supposed to travel up to Sandton. I had dollars and they said, “No, you have to get Rand,” for the taxis to take me. Let us own our currency. I urge Members of Parliament to change the policy for rent to be collected in Ugandan shillings. We have to own our currency. 

The President mentioned that inflation was a result of low production of food. You even watched on TV yesterday when they said people in my constituency are starving. Bulambuli is the food basket of the region. Once we have failed to produce from that side, how are we going to manage inflation? We are not. Inflation is continuing. There is no production at all. 

Issues which Government has to address are: first of all, irrigation. We have plenty of water from Kapchorwa, that Elgon region but it is wasted. Instead, it is disturbing our neighbours in Teso. Why can’t we harvest that water and people use it for production? These are the issues we need to address. Recently, I went to Kamwenge. I was with the hon. Member for Kamwenge. I saw people carrying dirty water and I asked what they were going to use it for. They said they were going to use it at home. The Government should bring up a loan and we approve it - for bulk water supply, water for production, once and for all in the whole country. In all these areas where you move, you find people crying over water.

Page 14 talks about agricultural financing and I have mentioned that money was advanced to banks. We have tried to get access to this facility but we do not see it. I went to DFCU, I went to Stanbic; they said, “No, we do not have such money.” I want the minister of finance or the Executive first to account for the money we gave them, which banks and which contact people?             

When we talk about electricity – Mr Speaker, you saw what happened: a Member was contributing when the electricity went off. In Mt Elgon we have huge falls but nobody is talking about it. This Parliament passed money to extend electricity from Kapchorwa to Bukwo at US $2 million. Why don’t they construct a dam nearby? It would be a saving (Member timed out_) 

2.11
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much. I rise to support the motion that a vote of thanks be extended to the President for an elaborate State of the Nation Address. I have a few pertinent issues to raise and I promise I will be very brief. 

There is a general concern about the state of our education sector. We have crawled for far too long. We must now walk. In my culture, if a child takes a long period crawling and does not learn to walk, you see a doctor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which culture is this?

MR ODOI: Mr Speaker, I am Luo, from the Sudan. Our education sector has crawled for far too long. I have been looking at the statistics from my constituency. In the last three years, we have registered as the worst performing schools in Uganda. In the last financial year, the fifth worst performing school in the whole country was from my constituency, Paya Secondary School. We had No.142, Peta Community College. All these are Universal Secondly Education schools. 

The constituents have been asking me; there is free primary school education being given to students but what is the quality of this education? What is the quality of the education we are giving our children and of what relevance is it to them? Do we want them to go to school and pass time and fail at the end of the day? The answer, ultimately, is in the negative. That’s why we demand that we start walking.

Mr Speaker, you will appreciate that this Government earns a lot of money from foreign remittances from Ugandans living abroad but ask yourself: what kind of labour do we export? I am reliably informed that if you went to Iraq today, three out of every five askaris are Ugandan. If you went to South Africa today, every witchdoctor is a Ugandan. So, this is a country that exports witchdoctors and askaris. Of course, I hasten to add that we also export some good quality doctors but what is the number? Insignificant! And the problem is in the quality of education we give the people of Uganda. It is no longer acceptable that we keep giving them poor quality education.

Water is a very vital component for a human being. I am reliably informed that 70 percent of the human body is made of water. We have a very big challenge in Tororo when it comes to clean water. I want to put it very crudely; the people in Tororo do not drink water. They drink some liquid whose chemical composition I will describe to you. I know from my very rudimentary studies of science that water is a combination of hydrogen and oxygen. The people in my constituency drink a residue of fecal matter, cow dung, urine and water. 

For too long, we have been telling them that there will be clean water coverage extended to everybody. They have waited for too long to drink water. We also now say that time is up; we need to give them clean drinking water.

Mr Speaker, the question of unemployment is of utmost urgency –(Interruption)   

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I had to stand because I am the Shadow Minister of Water and Environment and the matter alluded to by the Member is very important. Knowing that Uganda subscribes internationally to UN organisations which make sure that the human race accesses good water, under the cover of a slogan, “Water is Life”, it is important that Government responds to what hon. Fox Odoi has alluded to because from time to time Government -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, you sought clarification.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I am seeking clarification. The clarification I am seeking is noting that a good number of areas in Uganda generally access good water, as we have been told by Government, is it not appropriate for the hon. Member to seek a special explanation as to why his area has been isolated?

MR FOX ODOI: Mr Speaker, I do not think I am on the Front Bench of this House. I am unable to give any clarification to hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. Probably, I will only record that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is also known for degrading the environment and he may be one of the problems of this country. (Laughter)

I was addressing this august House on the question of unemployment. In many constituencies in this country, you have young graduates who spend many years on street looking for jobs. (Member timed out_)

2.19
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the State of the Nation Address, the book that the President took time to compile and which has very good information. 

I would also wish to appreciate Government programmes, for example, the NAADS programme that has now spread to over 100 families per parish. When we talk about NAADS, we also find some challenges. In the NAADS programme, we find that seeds are delivered late; at times they are already infected even when they are still in the stores. Therefore, I would call upon the Government, legislators and every concerned citizen to work hand in hand so that we can properly implement the NAADS programme. 

The NAADS programme cannot operate in isolation of the environment. The environment has a big contribution in crop production. If we do not work hard to improve the environment, then we shall be hit by drought and drought will affect crop production and farming at large. 

Therefore, I hereby call upon everyone, including Members of Parliament and other leaders, to work hard, such that we can play an oversight role towards increased production and improving NAADS. 

I would also wish to talk about education. The education programme, UPE and USE, are very good because most Ugandans upcountry could not pay school fees for their children. Therefore, I thank Government for having come up with such a good programme. However, I also wish to say that we have some gaps in the education sector and we cannot only say that Government has been doing well. True, it has been doing well but there are also gaps that we need to highlight. It is not only the top leadership to do this; it is all of us, the legislators and the citizens concerned.

I would also request that we increase the supervision in schools and not leave it to the inspectors of schools alone because they can be overwhelmed by the tasks at the schools. So, I request that we do the supervision right from the ground if we are to have upright Ugandans.

Still on the education sector, we need to implement the policies effectively because I know we have very good policies but they end on paper. And if we start on the policies right from the time the policy is put in place and we go to implement it in the field, maybe we can have good results at the end. 

I also want to talk about health. I appreciate what the President said about health in the State of the Nation Address because he talks about re-equipping the health centers which are in existence. I wish we would speed up this activity so that in the next few years we do not have increased deaths due to Malaria and other diseases upcountry especially in sub-counties, which are too wide. Every parish at least is supposed to have a health centre. I request that we speed up the re-equipping exercise such that we can have citizens treated, mothers being delivered safely and not dying in the labour suites - the children die when they are not yet born. I beg that we speed up the action such that in the next few years we do not have anything like criticism but words that appreciate what is taking place. (Member timed out_)

2.24
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the work of Government and I appreciate the President’s State of the Nation Address. 

My concern is about the health facilities that we have in the nation. The president talked about extending Health Centre IVs in each constituency and I do appreciate but my concern is about equipping the health facilities that we already have. Right now, we are upgrading from Health Centre III to Health Centre IV in each constituency but the Health Centre IIIs which we have are not equipped. They lack doctors and the necessary facilities. A Health Centre III is supposed to have a mini maternity ward and a theatre but these are lacking. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to bring it to your attention that Government is endorsing drugs but that is not good enough. The drugs which are being endorsed in the villages or in the health centers where they go are being smashed. They are smashed and their identity which is endorsed is hidden. So, I think the Ministry of Health should put this into consideration that only endorsing the drugs is not good enough. 

In addition to that, I think the Ministry of Health should supervise the health centers because the supervision is very poor. You find that the health centre is supposed to have a clinical officer but most of those clinical officers who are there no longer do clinical work. They prefer doing administrative work. So, it is my humble request that the Ministry of Health wakes up and starts supervising these health centers seriously. 

With that, I beg to stop here. Thank you.

2.27
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to contribute to the State of the Nation Address. I will address myself to three things. One is health. Most colleagues have contributed on this subject. Government is doing a lot in extending health services to our people but still a lot is still wanting. As you are aware, the wealth of a nation is the health of its people. You cannot talk about an economy that is self sustaining when its people are not given the health services. 

In my constituency, there are various health centers but they do not have drugs and equipment. Members have also contributed on this matter. I think the budget allocation to this sector since ten years ago has been wanting. I would like to request honourable members to support this ministry when it comes to demanding for the increase in its budget so that services can be extended to our people. We have private facilities in our constituencies but there is a lot of pressure on these private facilities because of the available services. Government renovated various health centers but for more than ten years, drugs and equipment have been non-existent.

I will also tackle the issue of the payment of the health workers. The payment of health workers is still very low and that is why they are looking for greener pastures. That is why they also abandon Government health centers to go to their private clinics. There is also the issue of the management of these facilities. Government allocates Shs 20,000 to Health Centre IIs for the whole month. You can imagine what Shs 20,000 can do for a health centre, to look after people for the whole month. That is why these people go away from these facilities. So, I would like to appeal to hon. Members that when it comes to the budget of Ministry of Health, something serious should be done. 

Still on the issue of education, it is true the government is trying to do a lot but there are some gaps as some Members have pointed out. Government continues to hire services of teachers but because of the pay, they still go to private institutions to do part-time work. There are various teachers, mostly science teachers, who are sent to various Government schools but you find a teacher appears in his school for one or two hours in a week and spends most of the other time in private schools. So, we can do all the supervision, we can put stringent measures to stop these people from going but if their payment is not increased, we shall still have a problem. And as the hon. Member has said, if we do not look seriously into that matter, we shall continue exporting security guards and witchdoctors.

On the issue of vocational institutions, Government has set most of them but they lack equipment and instructors. I request Members to support the Ministry of Education to have their budget increased to close that gap because education is the foundation of the country. We are talking of people being unemployed but it could be because of a poor curriculum. But even those institutions which have been set up by Government and lack equipment cannot benefit our children. 

The third issue I want to raise is that of water. When I do that I touch the heart of hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi as he says he handles environmental issues. It is true that Government is trying its best but water coverage for its citizens is still very low -(Member timed out_)

2.32
MS JOY ARINAITWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address, which addressed the critical issues of the people we represent. It also aims at service delivery and poverty eradication.

I appreciate what Government has done so far in my district and others. In my district, for example, Government has come up with a tea factory, and three percent of the people of Buhweju are tea growers. For this, I give credit to the Government.

Secondly, on rural electrification, I appreciate the Government for the areas that have so far received power. However, I call upon the ministry concerned to further extend power as it was stipulated in the address.

The other thing concerns infrastructure. Buhweju is a hard-to-reach area. For those who have been there, you can bear witness. The roads are so disappointing that some contracts were last year given to different contractors but some have not even started work at all. There is a road that connects Nsiika-Bihanga-Katerera, which is also a district. I am sure if this road was worked on as was prescribed in the contract, there would be a greater market for both the people of Buhweju and Rubirizi districts. I call upon the Ministry of Works and Transport to come up with a policy such that companies which fail to accomplish what they are supposed to do are blacklisted. It is disappointing that after money is given to such companies, no work is done even after a full year. The concerned authorities should follow up on that.

Regarding health, some work has been done in other areas but my district does not have a hospital. We only have a health centre IV which does not have a theatre. It is very disappointing because our expectant mothers have to move for very long distances and some have died on their way to Bushenyi or Mbarara. I call upon the Ministry of Health to come up and work on the new districts without hospitals.

Mr Speaker, as my other colleagues have contributed on the salaries of the doctors and other medical workers, I think we should motivate them. This should be done, not only in salaries but in accommodation as well. In Buhweju, there are no houses for rent for such people. This should be solved. 

On the economy, I wish Government could come up with a policy whereby every sub county or parish is required to have a silo. I am sure this will help us secure food.

We have all witnessed what has been happening in our country; the issues of strikes and corruption have been too much. I believe this is because some of us do not have Uganda at heart. Government should come up with a policy where every Ugandan has to undergo training. Take the example of Israel; every Israeli undergoes military training and this has resulted in their love for their country. (Member timed out_)

2.38
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting the motion to give a vote of thanks to the President on his State of the Nation Address. The President’s speech is a message of hope. Going by Aristotle’s definition of hope as a “waking dream”, the President gave a waking dream to this country for the next one year. He highlighted the plans and strategies of this Government for the next one year. These cover a variety of activities including the phenomenon of oil production. The President also commits himself and his Government to fight corruption. Unfortunately, I was disappointed by the conduct of some Members of Parliament at the President’s mention of his commitment to fight corruption. I wish to move a motion in the near future to condemn that action which, to me, was an attempt to embarrass the fountain of honour of this country. It was also an indictment to the spirit of tolerance and coexistence of groups of different political thinking in a multiparty dispensation.

My comment on the President’s State of the Nation Address is not in any way a vote of no confidence but just my role, as a legislator in helping the President to achieve these dreams in the next one year. I call upon the Members of this House to help him so that we end up with a stable, productive and secure country, free from corruption. 

Every Member of Parliament who has contributed to this debate has lamented on the issue of healthcare. Like most of them have said, the health of a nation is its wealth. There is no way we can talk about the wealth of this country without taking keen interest in the health of its people. There is no greater resource for any country than its human resource and any nation that is not able to take care of the health of her people is a nation that is not concerned about her people’s health. I would like to propose, as the President put it in his speech, that he should commit himself and Government to improve the health service delivery especially through the implementation of the five year strategic and investment plan with emphasis on delivering on the minimum health care.  

I would like honourable members present to know that this country has very many health workers ranging from doctors to nurses. We have only failed to attract and retain them because of the poor environment in which they work and poor remuneration. How can a doctor, who spends five to six years training, take home less than Shs 500,000? Let us look at the procurement plan for health centre IVs for this year – only Shs 6 million to cater for the health services including supplies and essentials for the whole year, which a Member of Parliament can give in one month. I, therefore, want to call upon this country to invest in the health of our people especially in improving the pay of health workers.

Finally, I would like to tell and call upon the members of this Parliament that our country is more important. Our differences are there, yes, but our values and interests are very strong and we must be united for the good of the people of this country. Let us work together. Let us forget about political affiliations; let us forget about our skin colour and work very hard to ensure that this becomes a country that will make us happy to stay in it. 

2.43
MRS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I stand to support the motion and I would like to add my voice to those who have already thanked His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. I have some few concerns that I would like to talk about. 

First, there is the issue about the salaries of the workers of Uganda. I really want to appreciate all those who have recognised the need for the workers to be taken as part and parcel of the production and growth of Uganda’s economy. This has been echoed by one MP after another speaking about the President’s address. 

It is true that workers are really suffering at the hands of their employers just because the laws that were made in this august House have not been implemented. There is that problem. Why is it that the laws that are made here are not enforced? Why are the officials of the department responsible for labour not following them up? Who are the people not implementing labour laws? Is it the investors and employers, be it local or foreign?  This puts the workers in the hands of unscrupulous employers who treat them inhumanly. 

I hope the Government is going to take it upon itself to ensure that workers are treated properly and more so with these ever escalating prices of food and fuel. If you consider a worker earning Shs 100,000 a month, from which PAYE and NSSF have to be deducted and he has to pay for his medication, for his extended family and feed them, transport himself to and from work, you find that he remains with almost nothing. So, he is always revolving in debt throughout the year.  

It is not right for workers to be tortured. It is a right for any Ugandan to be protected and for work to be promoted in a proper manner. I would think that the laws which we passed in this House should have been properly implemented and monitored by the Government, but it is not done. 

Secondly, the issue of the industrial court has been on and on for years. I remember very well that it was passed as a resolution on this Floor in the Seventh Parliament, to let the money for the operationalisation of this court to be deducted from the Consolidated Fund. I wonder what the minister of finance is doing in this regard.

I asked the Governor of Bank of Uganda as to why he was not giving this money to the Ministry of Labour for the functionality of this court. He told me that he had seen the resolution but had not yet got any instructions whatsoever. So, the weakness is coming from the ministry of finance. I would like the minister of finance to come here and give us an answer to this effect. 

When you look at inflation, on page 9 they claim it is driven by the food and fuel prices. Uganda is known to be an agricultural country and it is known all over the world as the food basket for the region. It is shameful to us because we are responsible for the destruction of the environment which has resulted into poor rainfall patterns and drought. We have examples of Namutumba where the children are starving because of poor nourishment. Why is this happening? I am calling upon the government to at least reconstruct or re-establish national silos where we can store food that is produced during the bumper season to be a fallback when we have drought.

I would also like to talk about unemployment. In the olden days, we had a very strong co-operative movement in this country but as liberalisation was ushered in our economy, the competitiveness was so high for them. I think if the Government came in and helped these cooperative unions, they would be a source of employment for the youth and others right from the villages. This unemployment phenomenon would slowly be done away with. (Member timed out)

2.48
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking my colleagues who have all contributed and spoken very profoundly as regards the State of the Nation Address. I especially want to thank colleagues in the ruling party. We all know that we have just come out of an election and many of the issues we are now crying about were some of the things we were trying to articulate during the campaigns. Because it was politics then, some of us dismissed them. We were talking about food silos, we were talking about co-operatives and we were talking about poor health systems. However, I would like to appreciate you for finally acknowledging that this is the situation in Uganda -(Applause)- and I want to urge you, the situation notwithstanding, to stand your ground and stand for Uganda. I thank you so much from the bottom of my heart. 

There are two issues that concern me that I would like to raise here. Many of us have raised concerns about corruption in Uganda, and indeed corruption has eroded many things that we would have benefitted as Ugandans. Corruption has diverted a lot of services, has made many people lose their lives, has made the unborn and the yet to be born to lose the future that they deserve to have. When you look at corruption, many times you tend to think about financial mismanagement but corruption is multifaceted. 

In Uganda today, apart from the stealing of monies and abuse of office, the biggest form of corruption that I notice is nepotism. This is because the kinds of appointments that are made are nepotistic in nature. When you look at the people in high offices, we all know this and I am not ashamed to say it, the President of Uganda, even as the fountain of honour, was not afraid to appoint his wife, conflict of interest not withstanding and not being considered, a minister. In other offices, you will find the first son has a responsibility as far as the Presidential Guard Brigade (PGB) is concerned. As you go down, and when you go to parastatals, you will find the first family somewhere. It is about relatives, friends and in-laws. 

In this kind of situation, you cannot reprimand your child, wife, in-law or brother. You cannot talk about corruption when you have your brother stealing money. How are you going to handle your brother? Are you going to send him to prison? So if we are going to succeed in fighting corruption in this nation, we better be nationalistic. Let us begin with nepotism. Let us put people in offices by virtue of their qualification and there we shall be talking as Ugandans.

Today when you look at many high offices in this country - brethren and colleagues from the western region you will forgive me for this - out of every five you will find one is a westerner. How many tribes are in Uganda? Are the rest not educated? You can do your own research on this and it is very painful, and the situation it is creating in Ugandans today is that of hatred and bitterness. People are looking for an opportunity to seize power and revenge. We do not want that; we want to be nationalistic. So, I am urging Government to look into this very seriously. We will not hide our heads in the sand and pretend that things are okay.

The other thing I want to comment on, still on nepotism and patronage, is that today we have a lot of Government organs that are supposed to be doing work for Government but what I realise is that State House is like a different government on its own. There are state scholarships run there, there are security organs and sometimes they override the other ones that are known to the public. We are destroying the very organs that we have set up to manage society and I think this is not a very good situation. (Member timed out)

2.54
MR KIYINGI BBOSA (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): First and foremost, Mr Speaker, I extend my sincere gratitude to His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address. I also extend sincere appreciation to the Government for its role in transforming the agricultural sector from subsistence to commercial agriculture. However, I believe that to benefit the people of Uganda, this ought to be reflected clearly in the budget.

I was with the people of Mawokota South and they were happy with the tax scrap on hand hoes. However, they kindly requested me to reach out to the people responsible to also extend this to tractors and agro processing machines. This would help them undertake production for market instead of production for household consumption.

In combating unemployment in this nation, I believe it would be very good and prudent of the government to equip and empower the vocational institutions in this country so as to enable the youth to get education and skills in job creation. I believe in equipping the youth. If they are equipped, they shall be able to acquire the necessary skills to start up their own jobs and get away from the struggle of searching for jobs, which are very scarce in this nation.

I humbly appeal to Government to also support mission hospitals. In Mawokota South, off Masaka-Kampala Road, most of the accidents that occur on this road result in many people being sent to Nkozi Hospital. This is to the disadvantage of the people who get there and they find that there is no blood bank in the hospital and they are transferred to either Kitovu or Gombe. That time lapse can take someone’s life. So, my humble appeal to Government is to equip even the mission hospitals so that they can be able to handle the various cases that may arise so as to save the lives of our people.

As I conclude, I kindly call upon all the legislators in the Ninth Parliament to work with Government in combating the number of problems that are arising so that we can get a lasting solution that would help our nation move forward. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.57
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am the custodian of Mabira Forest. I want to add my voice to my fellow honourable Members of Parliament to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. I want to tell you that by the time Hs Excellency the President was writing or delivering his speech, he was not happy because of the way things were moving in this country. I know that what is happening today is not what he anticipated to be happening in this country.

Yesterday, at around 8.00 p.m. at Lugazi Hospital, a mother of three went to hospital to deliver. She was expecting triplets. Unfortunately as she was about to deliver, she got some complications. They were about to transfer her to a referral hospital, that is, Jinja Referral Hospital but she sort of delivered and the children died. They were premature because they were seven months old. One of them was 900 grams and the second one was 800 grams. 

The reason the triplets died was because the doctor there was the only doctor we have in that hospital, which is supposed to have four doctors. As they were fumbling with looking for a driver to drive the ambulance and still fumbling to get some money for fuel to fuel the ambulance, in that process a mother in this country lost her triplets. The mother is still alive but she is in great pain; I do not know whether she will survive. Unfortunately, there was no power on the day the doctor entered the ward. We have a very big generator there but there was no fuel. 

I have heard everything Members of Parliament have said. All of us represent our people here and we have similar problems everywhere. Corruption is one of the problems. Government has tried everything possible to assist our people to move from one place to another but corruption is killing us. We need to “starve” some departments and reserve money for other ministries like agriculture and education. (Member timed out)

3.03
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman representative, Serere): I am not very sure of where my contribution lies. I have sulked for four years in this House because I never contribute to the State of the Nation Address. I do not know whether my contribution is agreeing or disagreeing; let it just be somewhere. 

I am also privileged to be speaking at the end of this debate. I want to tell myself that all the problems that have been talked about apply to my constituency, so I am not going to talk about them. Everything that you heard about everywhere applies to Serere. The only shocking thing is that I thought things were better elsewhere. Now I know that the situation is the same and this is why I do not agree with the wording of the motion. 

We suffer from a crisis in the health sector, a crisis in our education system, a crisis of governance and a leadership crisis. I think that I will not go into those matters. I had thought that I will be talking much about them but I will find an occasion on another day. Let me talk about agriculture and oil. To me these are the twin challenges Uganda is confronted with. 

The first is that President Museveni, in every State of Nation Address, has reduced the issue of agriculture to mere rhetoric. As the finance minister of this nation, he does not vote any money for Ministry of Agriculture. Over the years, agriculture has never got a budgetary allocation beyond five percent but this year it has dropped to 4.5 percent, and yet 77 percent or more of our people derive their living directly from agriculture. 

Our own Government is a signatory to the Maputo Protocol. This issue of famine is because we are not paying attention to agriculture. The issues of urban migration, massive food insecurity, unemployment, malnutrition and inflation come because we have ignored what should be the backbone of this country. I think I do not want to join the President of Uganda in paying rhetoric to the Ministry of Agriculture. If the Ministry of Agriculture died, the farmers would not know that ministry has died. They will continue normally as if there was nothing called “ministry of agriculture”. 

The argument for industrialisation, in my view, is unsustainable because the pace at which we are industrialising in this country cannot take care of the demands of the 77 or 80 percent of our population. Agriculture needs a deliberate intervention. Recently, the Government of Kenya voted US $10 million as a one-off big intervention to revise their agriculture. Kenya is industrialising at a better pace than Uganda but Uganda is behaving as though they do not know the value of agriculture. 

I talked about oil as the other twin challenge. I do not know why government does not want to face the reality - oil is going to be the most immediate crisis Uganda is ever going to face. First of all, oil has the capacity to crowd out all other sectors in the economy. We will stop paying attention to agriculture, to industry and tourism, and we will think the money flowing from the petrol dollars is going to keep us going and we will starve. 

This is why my immediate concern is to ask the Leader of Government Business what resettlement plan he has for the Banyoro. The Banyoro will be displaced. They will starve as soon as the first oil rigs get into action to bring out the oil from underground. 

Most importantly, is it because of the secretive nature of the oil industry that Government has persistently refused to come to this House to bring the legal framework? The recent example of Ghana is something to learn from. Ghana is trying to do what most of the oil countries do not do, and that is being transparent with the oil industry. They have come up with very good laws and they are open about it. Why do you want to behave like Gabon or Angola? What is Government hiding by refusing to bring to this House the legal framework? 

Do not take it for granted, countrymen; we are in real trouble if President Museveni and the Government of Uganda do not give us the legal framework for managing oil revenue. (Member timed out_)

3.09
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I just have a few comments to make. As usual, I am disturbed by brother, Museveni, when he addresses the nation because he misses the hot issues. If you ask any illiterate person on the street about what they expect the President to address in the State of the Nation Address, they will tell you. 

People are dissatisfied because of what is happening in the economy and they feel things are not right with their security. There are so many things that the President ought to have addressed. All the same, I would advise his ministers to always keep an eye on his moves so that we as Ugandans feel that we have a leader who can address issues that affect us. So, that is my disappointment. 

I want to address the issue of lack of discipline in the management of public funds. Mr Speaker, you are aware that Uganda is wealthy; we have a big basket of our national resources but the sharing of those resources is what has been failing us. The expenditure is what has been failing us. What can Parliament do? Every year we keep talking about these issues but we have not come up with solutions. Today, Government is not ashamed to say that the debt situation of Uganda is at US $4.7 billion. The Ugandan economy is donor-driven! It is like a sick person who is being fed on pig fats, so they look fat when they are very unhealthy. These are facts. 

How can we be a donor-driven economy and they keep telling us that the Uganda economy is growing at the rate of five percent, six percent, even seven percent - much higher than that of highly developed countries? That is a falsehood. Why is it that after being told of these rates, the welfare of the people of Uganda remains poor? Can we have somebody tell us the truth? If it is true that Uganda is growing, then we need to know who is getting rich and who is getting this money. I am saying this because the population, like you and I who come from the North, do not feel that growth in our homesteads. So, where is the money going? We want to know that. This is important.

Mr Speaker, we have failed to curtail the expenditure of Government on non-productive sectors. Look at our budget; State House gets the highest portion and then also the President’s Office gets as much. Non-productive sectors are getting huge budgets; what for? In the process, they ignore the productive sectors. So, how can the economy grow? How can we grow in tangible terms? These are the issues that we, as Members of Parliament who are the representatives of the people, should concern themselves with. Unfortunately, some people think that it is just politics. Many think that when I talk like this, it is my intention to attack them ideologically; no. This poverty is shared by all of us.

Those who think that the Walk-to-Work campaign is responsible for the down trend in tourism are really wrong. For the last two years, this country recorded several disastrous events. From the burning of the Kasubi Tombs to the September riots that caused so many deaths and much destruction to property, to the terrorists attack on 11 July 2010; how can one think none of these affected tourism? Now you are heaping blame on the peaceful Walk-to-Work campaign. I think something is wrong –(Ms Nebanda rose_)– please, do not order me when you do not know what you are ordering me on. (Laughter)

Thirdly, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS NEBANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that a most respected honourable member thinks I do not know what I am doing. It is not like that, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I would like to put you to order by saying that the Walk-to-Work campaign was not peaceful as you are putting it because people lost lives and property. So, it is not in order. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was more of information than a point of order. Hon. Member, please proceed.

MRS OGWAL: Can I continue, Mr Speaker? Yes, thank you. Next time, hon. Member, please consult. Anyway, as I was saying, I do agree with the President that agriculture is the backbone. However, as a commercial farmer, I am very suspicious about the amount of money being allocated to the agriculture sector in the name of boosting agricultural production. 

I have sighted a figure of Shs 70 billion under something called agricultural credit facilities. When the government comes – for those of you who are members of the agriculture committee - can the ministry tell us those people who benefit from this fund and whether they are farmers too? Can we know them? From your district, for example, who has ever benefitted from this fund? I am saying this because Shs 70 billion is a lot of money. I think we need to know who the beneficiaries –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we hear from the honourable member from Abim, I would like to say that in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of the Church on the Rock Primary School. They are represented by hon. Edward William Sempala Mbuga, MP Nakaseke South. They are here to watch the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

3.17
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Lamwo County, Abim): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address. However, I have the following issues to comment on.

The President has very good plans for the health sector though all the plans need money. As I talk, in some districts money for the fourth quarter to the health service sector has not reached. In those circumstances, how do you expect such districts to provide better health services when the monies keep delaying either at the centre or at the district? In Abim District, for example, there are health centers that have not received their money for the fourth quarter yet we are already in the first quarter of this new financial year.

In a place like Abim Hospital, there is no power and it has only one doctor. Two days ago, an expectant mother lost her baby - the baby died in the womb - but for 24 hours, there was no doctor. I do not know now whether they have removed the dead baby from the mother or it is still there; nobody bothers. 

Mr Speaker, about corruption, I would like to say that there is no will to fight corruption -(Applause)– especially in my district, Abim. This could be a problem all over the country but when I went to my district, I discovered that all the contracts are taken by civil servants. They award themselves these contracts. So, how can you fight corruption with this kind of situation? In the NAADS programme also, these people are very smart. You cannot arrest them because they use companies; they hide behind those companies. 

Is there any way we can lift the veil of incorporation? I am sure this is not only happening at the district level but also at the ministry level there are some people who are getting contracts and hiding behind companies. It is very difficult to trace these people. What can we do, as Parliament, to lift the veil of incorporation and identify the people who are hiding behind these companies, who worse of all do very shoddy work? 

In Abim, there is a road that is 5kms and the budget was Shs 48 million but only 1.7kms was worked on. This work was done by civil servants, but we cannot do anything about it. When you talk about it with the authorities that are supposed to handle them, no answer is given. They are part of the team that is killing our country. I am happy that I had the opportunity to talk about this issue; otherwise, nobody is going to rescue that district.

About NAADS, I would like to say that this programme is going to fail in some districts, especially those that lie in the cattle corridor, because of cattle rustling as we have just heard from members in this House. I am saying this because after you have given cattle and goats to the farmers, the rustlers will come and raid them. When you give them seeds to go and plant, they will not go to their gardens because they fear raiders. That is what I found on the ground. So, what do we do? The NAADS programme is not going to succeed in such districts unless cattle rustling is fought to the end. (Applause)

On Internally Displaced People’s Camps (IDPs); our people of Abim have stayed in these IDP camps for 56 years and nobody was bothered. They were killed in the camps by the Karimojong warriors and not even people from the human rights groups came to say sorry or to sympathise with those who had lost their people, but when lightning kills somebody, everybody rushes there. These people are also Ugandans. There is a lot of discrimination in this country. My people are suffering and nobody seems to care. When I went home, my people wanted to match from there to Kampala on foot because the Karimojong warriors keep killing them. When I talk about it, they say we are politicising or exaggerating. This is terrible!

On education, there is a school in Abim where teachers are paid Shs 30,000 per month. It is a school that was started by the poor communities. The President said that every sub county must have a secondary school but we have waited for this and we could not wait anymore. So, the people in one of the sub counties of the hard-to-reach areas started a secondary school but their teachers are only paid Shs 30,000 per month by the community. I expect the Minister of Education to support this school as soon as possible. 

They say that electricity has reached Abim District but Abim has six sub-counties and electricity is only in one sub-county; what about the other five sub-counties? Statistically, can you say electricity has reached Abim? (Interjection) I have not moved to other places but I think it should be the same in other districts. I think ministers should stop coming to the House to present unserious statements. They should look at Uganda as a country for everybody. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.23
MR VINCENT BAGIIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to take the opportunity to thank His Excellency the President for performing his constitutional obligation of presenting the State of the Nation Address. I would like to comment on two issues and that is food security and ICT. 

The entire Busoga sub-region is facing a problem arising from the plantation of sugarcanes. We have three sugar factories that have embarked on a deliberate move to ensure that the entire sub-region is used for sugarcane plantation. As it is today, all the land that was used in the past for planting food has been taken over by sugarcane plantations. I envisage a situation where in the short run, we are going to have serious starvation in the entire sub region. In Mayuge, Luuka, parts of Iganga, Namutumba and others, you will find sugarcane plantations. 

The sad thing about it is that whereas it is okay to plant sugarcane, the farmers and land owners are totally exploited. A land owner is paid Shs 300,000 for a period of six years and they earn less than Shs 5,000 per month. I think it is important that the Ministry of Agriculture or Government embarks on a deliberate policy or move to create serious awareness about the dangers of planting sugarcane in the area. 

To plant sugarcane, one needs to cut all the trees in the area so that it is flat. So, there is serious deforestation going on in the Busoga sub-region. People do not have food as we speak, and they do not have money to buy food. So, I think it is something that our Government needs to look at and find a solution to. Otherwise, the famine that is coming to the sub region will be more severe than ever if the situation is not addressed. 

The second issue is ICT. As we all know, ICT can enable development. Unfortunately for us, Government itself has not been a leader as far as online services are concerned. Last year, the government websites that I visited still had Members of Parliament and ministers that had passed away. This is an indication that content is not regularly updated. 

As it is today, the Government of Uganda has sunk in a lot of money. I think by way of a loan from the Chinese EXIM Bank, they sunk US $127 million in construction of a national backbone infrastructure. This national backbone infrastructure is like a road. If you build a road and it has no cars to move on it, then it is irrelevant. The national backbone infrastructure can only be relevant to the Government of Uganda if we have sufficient content in all forms, such as local content in local languages which can be used for the locals to get access to information. 

There is a lot of information. To date, for you to get a form to apply for a passport, you have to walk to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs yet I think that is something that can be put on a website and you could just fill and return the form from your office.

The other issue, as far as ICT is concerned, is telecommunications. We have so many dropped calls at the moment but much as the Communications Act of 1997 stipulated that there will be a communications tribunal to take care of complaints of customers of telecom services, that tribunal has never been established. I stand to be corrected if it does exist, but I think one of the reasons the telecom companies have been so arrogant to the extent that calls are dropped and they take their time in fixing the anomalies is because such a tribunal does not exist. (Member timed out_)

3.29
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address but I have some comments to make and I will begin with education. 

Many colleagues have commented on education because there is need to improve that sector. I will comment on the stage in education that is quiet but very important, and that is pre-primary education. I thank the government for putting in place the pre-primary curriculum, the caregivers guide, a commissioner in charge of pre-primary, and according to the State of the Nation Address there is a curriculum in Kiswahili that is ready. 

Mr Speaker, pre-primary education is mainly private because there is a certain class that can afford to educate their children through that level. As a specialist in early child education, pre-primary education is the foundation and we need to set a strong foundation for our education system in Uganda.  That is why people are complaining of pre-primary education because the parents who take their children to those schools cannot afford pre-primary education. 

To build a strong house, we need a strong foundation. So, I believe we need to emphasize pre-primary education so that it may be enjoyed by all children in Uganda and not a certain group of those who are rich, or those who have the money to support their children. I want to propose that if possible, the Government should take over pre-primary education so that all the children may enjoy equal opportunities. 

I would like to comment on primary education, especially UPE. There are many innovations that the government has put in place and these innovations task the teachers. Teachers are poorly paid, especially primary teachers, but they are piled with a lot of work; for example, we received an innovation called Presidential Initiative on AIDS Strategy for Communication to Youth (PIASCY). We started teaching children by making a talking compound and delivering messages during assemblies. As we were doing that, we were advised to integrate PIASCY into the curriculum and we started. 

As we were integrating PIASCY into the curriculum, they introduced the thematic curriculum. Within a short time, they introduced local languages. We were supposed to translate the curriculum, the content, the textbooks and all instructional materials into the local languages. As the thematic curriculum was going on, they introduced continuous assessment. Teachers started struggling with PIASCY, integration of PIASCY, thematic, local language and continuous assessment. 

In the State of the Nation Address, there is the primary four to primary five thematic curriculum. The curriculum will be thematic but will be in the English language. Again, I have seen that the Kiswahili curriculum is ready for primary education. These teachers are being piled with a lot of work – the thematic curriculum for primary four, primary five and then the Kiswahili curriculum. I appeal to the government, or propose, that before we implement Kiswahili and primary four and primary five curriculum, the ministry should put in place the instructional materials - readers in Kiswahili, the charts - so that the work of the teachers is made easy.

I appreciate the Government for coming up with hardship allowances for teachers who are serving in hard-to-reach areas. However, I want to caution the team that carried out the survey. It did not reach all the parts of the country. Hoima District has some hard-to-reach areas; we have the Albertine Basin. There is an escarpment there because that lake is in the rift valley. It is very hard to reach those areas and even the conditions are harsh. I request the government to put Hoima District on the programme so that we can also convince teachers to serve in those areas.

I also appreciate the Government for extending free education to A’ Level but in my constituency in Hoima, we have few A’ Level schools. I therefore propose, if possible, that some secondary schools be upgraded, since A’ Level is going to be automatic - every student will be promoted to A’ Level - to curb that problem. (Member timed out_)

3.34 
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking His Excellency the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address and congratulate him upon being re-elected. 

Mr Speaker, I also congratulate you upon being elevated to that position. I congratulate my colleagues upon being elected to this august House. Allow me to comment on issues which the President touched on in his State of the Nation Address.

I want to thank the people of Sheema South for returning me to this Parliament and remind the government of the pledges that have been made to my constituency of Sheema South. These include: a water station that is supposed to be built in Kitagata to serve Bushenyi Municipality and Sheema District; power lines from Kabwohe to Kitagata, Kasana and Bulalo; rehabilitation of Kitagata Hospital; tarmacking of Ishaka-Kagamba Road which has been on the books since I was a child. We hope that in this budget, as they have indicated, the work will start in December this year.

One of the most important issues the President touched on in his address was homestead income. One of the programmes to achieve that, NAADS, has so many issues as raised by members. Even on the ground, in terms of implementation, we need to revise the law that set up NAADS. We need to look at the Act, completely review it and have a new start. It is a good programme but we have got big issues with it. There are issues of value for money, there are issues of procurement and those need urgent attention. 

This also touches on the food prices. In the next 50 years, countries will be fighting over food security. Right now, there are Bangladeshis here, there are Koreans here, there are people from Zimbabwe, people from South Africa buying land in millions of acres. These people are focusing on the future, to grow food for their people from our land. I wish the Minister of Lands could take this up. There are people buying land here. Before you wake up, we shall have no land to grow food for our people.

I want to touch on issues of social services, education and health. Any organisation cannot be better than the people in it. If we do not attend to human resource, we are just pretending that we are managing our social services. Of course, there is an issue of touching on doctors, on teachers but I think that piecemeal solution of payment structure in this country should stop. Let us review the whole payment structure. Piecemeal solutions, touching this area and that area, will not help us.

My son is a doctor. He is a medical superintendent of Butaleja Hospital. I have subsidised his living in order for him to do that work. He is one doctor doing all the surgeries and administration for Shs 600,000, which is taxed. He went to school for five years and had two years of internship, a total of seven years. The receptionist at National Water and Sewerage Corporation does not even get that. He gets more than that. We are just pretending that we are paying these people and they also keep pretending that they are working. Those who are able fly out as soon as they graduate. We have to look at the payment structure seriously.

The issue of education; those who have the relevant skills will be here to develop this country. We have to go back to the basics. In China, children at a level equivalent to P.2 here can make cloth from thread. We need to start from the beginning. Do the curriculum right from the beginning and train people to be able to do something and create jobs at the end of their education. To start when they have graduated from university is certainly too late. (Member timed out_)

3.46
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join the rest in thanking His Excellency the President –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, just let me do this because they might be going back. Let me use your time briefly. In the public gallery this afternoon, we also have pupils and teachers of Hosanna Primary School which is represented by hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda, Member of Parliament Kyadondo East. They have come to watch the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. 

Hon. Member, proceed. I apologise.  

MR OKELLO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to comment on agriculture. According to the State of the Nation Address, agriculture continues to contribute greatly to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). To this end, a commendable job has been done by Government in the transformation and commercialisation of agriculture. This we witnessed in the second phase revision of NAADS where currently, we have all districts in the country, all sub-counties in the country, all urban councils and the five divisions of Kampala benefiting or implementing activities that are related to NAADS programme. Government has gone an extra mile to provide Shs 90 billion as an agricultural credit facility. This money can be accessed at an interest of 12 percent and is payable within a period of eight years. 

The people of Kioga have asked me to come and ask Government to try and spread the agricultural credit facility to other micro finance institutions for ease of accessibility by the rural community. You will agree with me that the funds for agriculture that are put in commercial banks cannot easily be accessed by rural people and yet they also need to benefit from this facility. 

I also noted with concern that the annual income from fish exports has reduced from US $140 million to US $80 million and this has been attributed to bad fishing methods. The Government put in place the Beach Management Units (BMUs) at every landing site to manage fisheries resources. I would like to bring it to your attention that the capacity of the BMUs to plan and manage the fish and water resources leaves a lot to be desired. Most of them are non-functional. Currently, they engage in extortion of funds from fishermen. For your information, these people are unable to sanction the illegal activity of fishing. 

In spite of the fact that the Fish Act empowers police officers from the rank of corporal and above to enforce this Act, I wish to bring it to your attention that the officers of the marine unit have used this provision for their personal benefit, hence perpetuating the illegal activities of fishing. If I invite you to my constituency, Mr Speaker, you will discover that the illegal fishing nets are being picked from landing site A and sold to landing site B. You will realise that the BMUs are currently making monthly contributions to the marine police to avert these issues of operations. You will realise that arrests have been made but after paying something small, these people are never produced in courts of law. 

To this end, you realise that the problem of bad fishing is actually not on the fishermen’s side alone but the failure of the officers of the police marine unit to enforce the Act. Probably this calls for us, at some future time, to try and revisit this Act so that we see how we can make sustainable interventions as far as fishing is concerned. 

The development object of NAADS was to enhance the rural capacity of our people by increasing agricultural productivity and profitability in a more sustainable, effective and efficient manner. In relation to the fish sub-sector, apart from fish farming, very little is being talked about. I want to propose that Government considers incorporating and consolidating the fish sub-sector into the NAADS programme so that funds from NAADS can be used for the purchase of the right fishing gear and training and sensitisation of fishermen on issues related to sustainable fishing. 

Mr Speaker, allow me draw your attention to education. In primary education, the interventions made by Government are quite commendable. This has led to continuous increase in enrolment in schools. In my district, Amolatar, in the year 2010 our enrolment was standing at 41,957 but this year, 2011, our enrolment has gone up to 46,416. By all standards, you realise that the literacy levels in the district will go up and people will be able to read and write. 

However, the biggest problems we have in primary education are the basic infrastructure that can bring about a conducive learning environment. If I may tell you, currently, one class is shared by 174 pupils. If you take the teacher to house ratio, one house is supposed to be shared by 34 teachers. We have only 19 houses in the district. Teachers ride to school and some of them live in mud and wattle houses. It is very terrible. Seven pupils share one desk. Ninety-two pupils line up during break time to go and share one latrine. The situation is appalling. 

I think what Government needs to do at this moment is to try and improve the basic services that can help us realise the benefits of primary education. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member. Your time has expired. Hon. Members, we have only a few people whom we can accommodate because they have sat with us all through. I have two honourable members who will make their contributions. I will be making personal recognition of members of the Frontbench who have persevered with us. I will be giving a Speaker’s award this evening. So, anybody who leaves might miss out on this one. 

3.48
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice in thanking the President on the State of the Nation Address. I would also like to add my voice to my honourable colleagues in relation to the health sector. We need to make sure that we build the capacity of our doctors and keep them here in our country. More so, when you try to analyse it you find that even nurses, though most of them remain here, they too need to be motivated. 

In relation to agriculture, the honourable member said that if it died today, people would not realise it. I am sorry to say that for us in Kanungu - maybe we are a bit lucky for we are an exception because NAADS is going to give us tea seedlings which will cost Shs 11 billion. So, if agriculture died today, Kanungu would mourn it. Other districts are also going to get seedlings, for example, Bushenyi, Kabale for apples, Mbarara for wine made from matooke; so, agriculture is not doing badly in some of these areas, but I do not know how it is doing in other areas. Maybe we need to add more effort in monitoring to ensure that what is there is put to good use. 

My greatest concern is on human rights. When I read through the State of the Nation Address, I realised that Police have improved greatly but our people are still suffering so much. Somebody dies and lives a wife behind but you find that their property is taken away by relatives. So, the children and wife suffer so much.

In my district, I have experienced this many times. So, I would urge the relevant ministry to help us. If they could extend the human rights offices to hard-to-reach areas like Kanungu District, it would be good so that these people are always guided to where they should go. You find a woman like that one, she has a right but she does not know where she should go for redress. You find those children would have continued studying using their father’s property but the fact that they are young and they do not even know their rights, they miss out like that. So, if the ministry in charge would help us, especially in those hard-to-reach areas, especially Kanungu, we would be grateful.

I would also like to say something about electricity. You realise that the electricity coverage, according to the State of the Nation Address and actually in reality, is improving compared to those years. However, in my district we have some sub-counties which also need electricity especially Kambuga sub-county. There are some areas where we see just the poles passing but there is no power. So we need to make sure that - I do not know how we shall co-operate - these other areas also get electricity so that the people get -(Interjections)- Garuga is not the one giving us electricity. (Laughter) 

The other issue which I have seen, and actually it is almost a general issue in Uganda, is that under our Constitution people have the right to join any kind of religion they want but in some areas there are some religions which are coming with funny habits. You find they say, “Our children are not supposed to go to school.” So, I urge the ministry which is in charge - I do not know whether it is the Ministry of Internal Affairs - to look into that because it is very dangerous. (Member timed out_)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the Member for Kanungu has made a very serious statement. You know, some of us are really religious people and we are even beginning to look at our backs wondering whether it is the group we go to on Sunday that is against education and is stopping children from going to school. 

I pray, Mr Speaker, that the honourable member be very specific. I am not speaking for the minister but I doubt that the minister even knows all the religions and where they operate in this country. How about her telling us which religion and where so that we all know that this is not the type of religion - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you negotiating for more time for the honourable member?

MS ALASO: Not quite, Mr Speaker; just a bit of clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Member, you can give that information and then resume your seat.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much. I said this because one time, although I was still a bit young, I heard the Kibwetere -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give the information and then -

MS KARUNGI: So, there is a religion called Bakanwa Bushera. They stop their children from going to school.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where are they? 

MS KARUNGI: There is a small group in Kayonza sub-county in my district but when I was trying to investigate they said there is another group in Bushenyi. I do not know exactly which part of Bushenyi they are. There is another clique in Kisoro District. It is better to investigate early before we lose out because I believe after many years, you will find that we have lost those children who would be MPs tomorrow maybe.

3.55
MR JOHN BOSCO MUBITO (NRM, Budiope County West, Buyende): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to thank His Excellency for delivering the State of the Nation Address but I have my concern. His Excellency is a good planner and when you go through the State of the Nation Address, you pick a lot of interest but my worry is about the implementation. It is not the fault of the President but I want us to look into - (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is a maiden speech. (Laughter)

MR MUBITO: The problem we have in Uganda today is that we have a lot of people, especially in the offices of ministries in Kampala, who are not in touch with reality. They see Uganda on TV and when you tell them there is famine somewhere, they do not see it. These people cause a lot of problems because whatever is planned does not get implemented to the full. Their major interest is picking out what is in the budget and using it for their personal interest. 

I have seen it happen and now the only liberator is the local government. Actually, when you carry out a study, it is these districts that are helping give basic services to the people yet their budget is very small. The biggest budget goes to the centre but getting something out of the centre is very hard. I suggest that local governments get more funding because I have lost hope in getting money from these offices in Kampala. Actually, corruption and its effects are mainly in Kampala. Our people just want to take out what is in the budget and use it; they have no concern for the people and yet the President thinks what he has planned can help the common man. 

My interest, hon. Members, is that let us look at increasing the budget or funding for the local governments because they are the main service providers for our people. The funding that goes to the centre remains at the centre and does not help the people. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That concludes today’s - (Mr Wangolo rose_) is that hon. Kirunda? [MR WANGOLO: “Wangolo Jacob.”] Hon. Wangolo, you have not been sitting here with us. You went away and now you have just come back. I was giving this credit to these people who have persisted here. So, for you it will be next week. For those who went away and came back, no. Those who persisted with us, I have allowed all of them. 

Hon. Members, I take this great honour to make a great recognition to the Front Bench people who have enabled us - because without both sides of the Front Bench being here it would have been difficult for us from the Back Bench to proceed - may I, therefore, take this opportunity to recognise the hon. Beatrice Anywar, shadow minister; hon. Philip Wafula Oguttu, shadow minister; the hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man, shadow minister -(Laughter)- and the hon. Betty Aol Ochan, Deputy Chief Whip for the Opposition. 

On the Government side, let me take this opportunity to recognise my sister, the minister in charge of land in the Ministry of Lands, hon. Achieng Opendi Sarah. Finally, the greatest honour will go to the honourable General, the one and only, Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali, Deputy Leader of Government Business. (Applause) He has been with us here all this time. Thank you very much for the effort you have put in to enable us come this far. 

To all the hon. Members who are still here, for persevering up to this time on a Friday afternoon – we started in the morning - I am touched by the sentiment you have shown today. The commitment you have demonstrated is what will uplift this country. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned to Wednesday at 2.00 p.m. for further proceedings. 

(The House rose at 4.01 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 July 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

