

Thursday, 14 July 2016

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Mr Speaker, you may recall that on 6 June 2016, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda appointed a new Cabinet; among those newly appointed were non-Members of Parliament who were duly approved by the Parliamentary Appointments Committee.

In order for hon. Lt Gen. Henry Tumukunde to discharge his duties as ex-officio Member of Parliament by virtue of Article 78(1)(d) of the Constitution, he is required under Article 81(4) of the Constitution to take and subscribe the Oath of Allegiance and the Oath of Member of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, the said Member is in the precincts of Parliament ready to take and subscribe to the oaths. May I, therefore, request your permission to invite him to access the Chamber for the aforementioned purpose?
                                                       
The oaths were administered to:

Lt Gen. Henry Tumukunde.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lt Gen. Tumukunde, I welcome you to this Parliament. This Parliament is not your first one; you have been in it before and you know the rules of the game in this House. This may be your first time to be in the Cabinet but you will learn as we go along with the business of the House.

You are coming at a time when your issues are hot and even today, you might be required to make some explanations on some of the issues that are going on currently. Therefore, you are going to hit the ground running. Welcome. I will give you a copy of our Rules of Procedure. Since you left Parliament, a few of the things have changed and you will acquaint yourself with them to facilitate the process. I also give you a copy of the Constitution to facilitate your work. Congratulations and welcome again. (Applause) 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I would like to inform you of a sad event that has occurred. Death has occurred of the hon. Ruth Tuma. She was in the Seventh Parliament serving the people of Jinja District. We got information yesterday that she succumbed to some illness. We should have been making arrangements to do some things in this Parliament but we were informed that the body has already been taken towards Jinja and there will be activities leading to burial in the course of today and tomorrow.

We will find time when we can do a commemoration motion to speak about her participation in the development of this country and her role in this Parliament when she represented the people of Jinja. May we rise for a moment in memory of that?

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, yesterday we constituted the committees and as you may recall, we did not complete the process because there were some aspects of our rules that could not accommodate everything. May I now ask the committee responsible for our rules to work on those specific aspects of the rules that could not make us finish the process yesterday so that by next week, we should be able to come here and finish the process?

Honourable members, the committees have already been constituted. That means that Parliament is fully functional and I got information from the Prime Minister today that the legislative programme for this House will be submitted today. This means that this House will be ready to move and House can only move through its committees. 

Honourable members, we have been assigned to these committees. Let us make this year count by doing the work in time so that we do not have any backlog. Now that the committees are in place, petitions are going to start pouring in;laws are going to start coming in; motions will come in and they can only be processed through the committees. You are all Members of these committees. When this work is assigned to you, you have a limited number of 45 days within which to handle those matters in the committees and return to Parliament. 

Please do the needful in the committees and come back to the House so that this House can be remembered for what it truly is; a representative House of the people of this country facilitating only their interests and that we can do by finishing our work in time.

Therefore, I encourage you to look at the rules again and acquaint yourself with the procedures in your committees and the aspects of Government work that you are going to handle so that when the work comes, you are fully informed of the issues at hand.

Also, make good use of the staff that are assigned to those committees because they are the institutional memory of what happened before these new committees were formed. You will have a lot of information from the committee staff, especially the clerks to the committees; use them effectively so that the work can be done faster. I thank you.

2.21
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. In November 2015, His Excellency the President of Uganda suspended Fisheries Law Enforcement Officers countrywide after receiving complaints about harassment of fishermen and extortion. In what can be construed as disobedience to this order, the then Minister of State for Fisheries reappointed Fisheries Law Enforcement Officers, including officers who were suspended, implying that he had learnt nothing and forgotten nothing by reappointing the suspended officers.

Mr Speaker, there is one notorious officer called Musisi and his friend called Ssenyango who come from Ninja landing site in Kalungu sub-county, Nakasongola District. These two people traverse the entire Lake Kyoga deliberately to harass people, grab fish, money and nets.

I have always wondered about the legal authority that is used to get these people on board. The mandate of these people includes training, educating and disseminating information concerning conservation of our lakes in the country. However, what leaves a lot to be desired is their capacity, education background and professional experience in this sector.

Mr Speaker, it is also true that for now, this team is moving in the waters without the Police. I am wondering about the level of coordination between this team and the Police – (Interruption) 

MR OUMA: Mr Speaker, the matter that my colleague is raising here is not only in his region. Bearing in mind that I come from Sigulu Islands constituency that borders Kenya, the same order was given by His Excellency but some notorious men have been moving on the lakes harassing and extorting money from the fisher folk. 

We would like to get clarification on whether that order by His Excellency to suspend those activities, including extortion of money, still continues. It is very serious, especially along the borders, where some officers meet with their Kenyan counterparts and demand money from them so that illegal fishing continues. 

Therefore, this is very serious and we need the attention of this Parliament. If His Excellency the President stopped it, I think that another programme should be put in place so that fishing can continue in the normal way. I thank you.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you so much, my brother, for that very useful information. What this country requires is a sustainable strategy that is corrupt-free to enable us address the issue of conservation of lakes in this country and the sooner it comes, the better for our country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Any comment on this issue from the Government? 

2.26
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Anthony Okello, for having raised this important issue.

Since the declaration of the ban by His Excellency the President late last year, a lot is happening on all our major lakes because as I speak, there is no regulation. The bad boys have decided to take it upon themselves to harass the people. 

I am standing here to inform this august House that as soon as the Minister of State for Fisheries is declared, this is going to be one of the first assignments that he or she is going to handle because fish has been identified as one of the eleven key strategic commodities in agriculture. 

I spoke with hon. Okello and informed him that I know the person he is talking about and he is notorious for plying from Nakasongola to Apac. In the meantime, what we have to do is to liaise with the Marine Police that is supposed to man our waters. I took it upon myself, in the meantime, to pursue that so that we reduce the harassment. Otherwise, the acts of those people are regrettable. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a brief communication to make. Members of the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas and all Members of Parliament are invited to attend the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas orientation workshop on Monday, 18 July 2016 at the Parliamentary Conference Hall. This meeting will start at 8.00 a.m. and end at 4.00 p.m. 

Initially, it was supposed to be held at Ridar Hotel but take note that the venue has now changed to the Parliamentary Conference Hall. Please keep time so that you can understand what goes on in this sector. 

I have also just been informed, sadly, of the death of hon. Hafsa Mossi, the former Minister for Foreign Affairs in Burundi and until her demise, a member of the East African Legislative Assembly. She was killed yesterday as she left her home. This information has just come in. We convey our condolences to the family and to the people of Burundi for this loss. In that same vein, let us rise to observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

2.29
MR SILAS AOGON: (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance. This matter was raised before in this Parliament but I am re-emphasising it because of what is happening. Teso and various parts of the country have been hit by food shortage. Katakwi is reported to be the worst hit but Serere, Soroti, Amuria, Kumi, Bukedea and Ngora are all not doing well.

Because of hunger caused by shortage of food, school children have been affected as they cannot study normally. It is very difficult for us to expect a pupil or a student to go to school with an empty stomach – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, usually the Member who rises to raise his urgent matter has all the information. It would be better if you allowed the Member to raise the information in full then we see if we can supplement. Let him finish.

MR AOGON: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This issue was raised on this Floor but there was no action reported. There is no way we can know what Government is doing but I also believe that this is because we have been in the process of settling down to get ready to work. I now want to believe that we are ready for action. I am happy that so many of us have expressed that they are going to work this time around and stop making speeches. It is very important for us to remember the people who gave us power to come to this House -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what action do you seek?  

MR AOGON: I have prayers to lay before this House: 

    1. That the concerned ministries take action immediately and assess the situation on the ground. 
    2. We should consider providing food as a temporary measure to the worst hit areas.
    3. This House should consider supporting the relevant ministries in whatever they need so that they can do their work.

If it means creating the necessary budget then so be it because these are the people who voted for us. If we do not take action, what happened in the Ninth Parliament may catch up with us and the leadership mortality rate may climb up.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, the issue raised by the Member from Kumi Municipality demands urgent attention by this Parliament. As you are aware, the matter is not limited to his constituency but is widespread throughout the country because of the delay of the rainy season and Government is aware of this. The other day, a Member of Parliament asked the Prime Minister a question concerning this but the Prime Minister meandered in answering and I did not get the correct answer. 

Therefore, I think it would be wise that the minister concerned brings a statement to this Parliament clearly stating how Government is going to take action, because we do not want Members to keep asking the same thing and yet it is widespread throughout the country. Would it be wise, Mr Speaker, if the minister concerned brings a clear statement to this Parliament? If the statement is not clear, we can invoke Article 118, because if the minister cannot rise to the occasion, Parliament can remove him or her. Mr Speaker, I request that the minister makes a clear statement about this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal from the honourable member for Dokolo South is that this matter is widespread and instead of us citing cases, we should receive a full statement on the status of this matter in the whole country. We can then debate the minister’s statement. Would that be proper? Okay, let us handle it that way.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have guided very well. The country is faced with food shortages because of the failed season we have gone through. I think it would be proper that as the honourable colleague from Kumi has proposed, we fast track the assessment because that would form a basis for the demands and requirements needed, be  budgetary or otherwise.

An assessment has to be done and the onus is on the Government. I am, therefore, making an undertaking to make sure that I whip the concerned ministers because this is a multi-sectoral area and a statement will be produced in two weeks’ time. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In two weeks’ time? Can we have a preliminary statement next week on Wednesday after your Cabinet? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Sure, we can have a preliminary statement, Sir. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have a statement on Wednesday afternoon and a short debate thereafter.

2.38
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I observe that today  we have sworn in one of the last Cabinet members. We have over 80 members of Cabinet and I realise, with sadness, that none of the Ministers of Agriculture, Water and Environment or Finance are here to attend to the issues raised by Members. We have just started this Parliament. If this trend goes on, it will be dangerous because the Chief Whip will always be coming here to make commitments on behalf of her colleagues who are not here and this will slow us down. 

To that extent, Mr Speaker, isn’t it procedurally proper that the Chief Whip undertakes to ensure that each ministry is represented? This is because some ministries have more than three ministers but when you look for them to answer questions, they are not here. As Parliament, we start robustly. Can we be assured by the Front Bench that, that trend, which has started as we begin, does not continue? 

Members of Parliament are attending with all their energy after the orientation but where are the members of Cabinet to answer to the issues that we raise? Is it procedurally right for Members of Parliament to continue talking to themselves when the people who are supposed to answer such matters of urgent public importance are not in the House? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The responsibility of a Member of Parliament is to speak for the people in this House whether anybody is listening or not. I am also noting with concern that the responsible ministers are not here and I am not the right person to deal with that issue. Can the Government Chief Whip explain the absence of these ministers, please?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, what is happening now is that the chief executive has drawn a programme -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is chief executive?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The President of the country, because he heads Cabinet, and we are talking about ministers. I thought that I should give this information, which in the end makes accountability for the ministers who are not here. The President drew a programme to meet each sector and go through the strategic areas that he has come up with. Unfortunately, his programme collides with that of Parliament. 

As you are all aware, the President is part of us and at the same time he is busy. Today is the turn of the Ministers of Agriculture to interact with the President before we begin embarking on serious business. 

I would like to say that I will try to talk to my President to make sure that we harmonise these programmess and reserve Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday afternoons for plenary so that parliamentary work does not suffer. I pledge to pursue that, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Meanwhile, let us take note of the food security statement that is going to be presented. In the interim, there should be some action on how to deal with the people who are already in distress. Please ensure that that happens.

2.43
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you because I had already drafted a letter and I was about to transmit this letter to your Office declining my salary for July 2016 because I thought that it would not have been proper for me to continue receiving a salary without really doing what brought me here. 

Therefore, I am happy that - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still bringing the letter? I can acknowledge and instruct the necessary - (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, the draft is already here but now that we have started tackling pressing issues affecting our country, I am glad we are here. 

I rise on a point of national importance concerning the human resource that we have at Makerere University. Mr Speaker, I would like to bring it to the attention of this country that it is now close to two and a half months since professors at Makerere University last received their salaries. It is also five months since they received their allowances. 

Given the fact that as a country we have a small resource envelope, Makerere staff pay is somewhat small. It is causing a lot of pain to Makerere employees, who are working so hard to serve this country but are going without salary. Some of these people are being threatened by banks or court bailiffs because there is no money to deduct from their salaries.

Mr Speaker, my request is, can we please encourage the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to do everything that it takes to ensure that Makerere staff and other people elsewhere, who are working so hard to serve this country, receive their pay? As I speak, no admissions of students will occur and external supervisors, both at graduate and undergraduate levels, cannot be paid. This is paralysing the work and systems of the university –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that it is not only Makerere University staff that are suffering from lack of payment of salaries. The staff of Kabale University, which university was taken over by Government last financial year, are also suffering. They have not received salaries since the year began and the situation is so dire that a strike is in the offing. 

Can we get confirmation from Government as to when staff in all universities, who are yet to receive their salaries, are going to be paid? This is in order that our children, sisters and brothers can receive the services that they are entitled to from the university. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Had you finished? 

MR KATUSABE: I am concluding, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving that valuable information. Makerere University contributes 40 per cent towards the salary or wage bill and that 40 per cent originates from the fees collected. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that the students are in their homes and, therefore, university business is paralysed. However, I am one person who does not just stop at talking but I provide solutions.

My request is that the Government takes over the entire wage bill of Makerere University so that the 40 per cent that only comes from the students’ collection or fees can originate from the Consolidated Fund. That 40 per cent would also be in position to off-set or pay off the Shs 100 billion debt that is drowning the university. That is my request, Mr Speaker, and I thank you for the opportunity. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I request that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is given an opportunity on Tuesday, when Parliament resumes, to give a statement regarding what the honourable member has raised about payment of salaries for the universities - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Public universities. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, public universities. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, take note. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Ordinarily, I would have moved this matter as a matter of national importance or a question for the Prime Minister’s Question Time. However, due to the gravity of the issues at hand, I am constrained to move under Rule 48 of our Rules of Procedure to give oral notice that I intend to bring a motion to this Parliament to debate and make resolutions towards the conduct of police behaviour and brutality that we are seeing on television and other media. 

Mr Speaker, the behaviour of police yesterday and the other day is not a one off. It has been on-going, we have complained and made statements before this Parliament and it is high time that the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda makes bold statements, as to how the police in Uganda goes about business.

Otherwise, it is our cardinal role under Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; Parliament is an organ that is mandated to defend the Constitution and to ensure that there is democratic and good governance of the Republic of Uganda. Mr Speaker, I intend to bring a solid motion to debate this brutality, with your permission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Notice has been given of a motion. I think you have chosen a very dramatic way of bringing it up. (Laughter) However, notice is duly received; at an appropriate time when you are ready with this motion, we will see how to schedule it and then the debate can ensue on this matter.

Honourable members, I do not know whether the Minister of Security will have something to say. There is a similar matter that was raised this week on the issue. 

2.52
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like the honourable members to appreciate that I am just too new to say something on this matter and maybe for the other reason that, the substantive minister is Gen. J. J Odongo who is the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

I could also say that this matter is being discussed in other fora and at an appropriate time, the relevant minister will lay a case to Parliament about what I presume will be investigations into these matters and finding out the actual culprits or the actual cause of this kind of behaviour. I seek that I be allowed to say this much. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for allowing me to present this point of procedure. Under Rule 48(1)(c), you have the discretion to determine when this motion can be placed on the Order Paper.

The motion is ready and readily available and it is of such urgency that the public would need to know what Parliament says about the occurring brutality from the police. Would it be procedurally right for you to order that this motion be placed on today’s Order Paper? Can Parliament debate it today and make pronouncement on it? I invoke you, Mr Speaker, to invoke Rule 48(1)(c) and order that it be placed on today’s Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Today, we already have an Order Paper which is fairly lengthy and the issues are involving and I have a list of Members who had indicated they would like to raise matters of urgent public importance and they are many.

Since the honourable member has opted to seek notice other than move without notice, I will honour the notice aspect and I have already accepted that at an appropriate time, I will schedule that. Whether that should be today or another day, I will be looking at the way business is proceeding and then, I will take an appropriate decision. Is that okay? Thank you.

2.56
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Robert Centenary): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter relating to the tourism sector in Uganda which has declined due to numerous reasons that I am yet to cite here. First of all, we know that Rwenzori region – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just to guide, you have to show me that it is urgent. Can you, therefore, start by showing that the case is urgent?

MR CENTENARY: The urgency is that in the tourism sector right now, we are entering the peak season. Yet historically, the region has suffered a challenge of insecurity, which affected the sector. I can give some statistics. Last season, in the same period like this, last year, we received an inflow of 5,538 foreign non-resident tourists coming into Uganda. We have since registered a decline in the inflow of the tourists. 
I think that we have issues that need to be addressed to improve the image of those tourism destinations, especially Queen Elizabeth and other conservation areas that are in the Rwenzori region. This was because of the negative publicity that had been given about the region, especially on the website of the diplomatic missions, which had raised some red flag, regarding those tourism destinations.

I, therefore, rise here to request that some negotiation be done between our Government and the diplomatic missions, those that still have those destinations as red flags to remove them and also Government should give a statement about the current security situation, to re-affirm to the visitors that actually these destinations are now safe to be visited.

This will re-boost our tourism sector which had projected to receive about 1.9 million visitors by 2017, translating into 21 percent growth rate, aware that tourism is a sector that will create one out of 13 jobs in this country. 

I think it is very important that Government comes up with a good image building statement to the world and assure our visitors that Uganda and Rwenzori region in particular, is a safe place to visit. This will enable us to prepare ourselves for the peak season and also the subsequent seasons that will be coming.

Secondly, this was also as a result of the negative press reporting that arises from reckless statements that some of our colleagues in the security organs make about what takes place. I think that it is high time that we started filtering the information we put to the public domain, especially on sensitive issues that are likely to affect our economy, specifically tourism.

3.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Centenary for raising this very important request. I thank him very much because he talked about the decline in tourism and the cause he mentioned is negative publicity. I think it has always been Government really crying out for people to take caution about this publicity and alarmist statements that normally come up.

Therefore, when it comes from hon. Centenary, I feel energised as a Government representative. I would like to say that after the insecurity that happened in the Rwenzori region - and I want to thank the Members of the Ninth Parliament who put it to Government, consequently making the head of state go up to the mountains. I was interacting with hon. Nzoghu three days ago, and asked him about the security situation and he told me that the region is now calm and that tourism is picking and people have settled. I pray that we go like that. 

Tourism industry is very elusive; anything small that happens especially regarding peace, this industry will respond spontaneously in the negative direction.

However, when peace comes back and we talk about it, the tourists will come because they always want to go out. Therefore, I will carry forward what you have requested for and inform hon. Kamuntu who is now the Minister of Tourism, Wild Life and Antiquities to do double work and make sure that everybody gets to know about the security situation in Uganda so that we regain our achievements in the tourism industry. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will do the matters of urgent public importance for another 30 minutes so that we can go back to the Order Paper.

3.03
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. There is illegal cutting of trees in Zoka forest, which has persisted for over seven months.

This issue is so serious because it is attributed to the RDC, DPC and UWA staff in Adjumani District. On 29 April 2016, the district council debated it and cautioned these officers, but even two days ago, there was an impoundment and these same officers are part of the racket.

Mr Speaker, the effect caused by this illegal activity is so profound. One, it is tainting the image of the appointing authority especially on the issue of the RDC.  The chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs can bear me witness. When we went to Adjumani in 2014, it was very embarrassing. We have kept following these issues but given a deaf ear. 

Therefore, my prayer is that the Minister for the Presidency should look into reviewing the deployment of these people in Adjumani; the RDC, DPC and UWA staff because the relationship between the council and these officers is so bad that people do not even benefit from their services.

Secondly, the situation needs a healing process. Therefore, I would propose that the Minister for Presidency and these other Ministers responsible for these other staff visit Adjumani and have a meeting with the district council. Thank you very much.

3.05
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I think this kind of indiscipline should not be tolerated. We are losing forest cover because of indiscipline and lack of seriousness of the people who are supposed to enforce regulations.

Therefore, what hon. Ababiku has raised has touched me as a tree grower and as a lover of environment- (Interjections). It is on record. 

Therefore, I will discuss with the Minister in charge of the Presidency where the RDC resides to make sure that she goes on the ground and finds out what is happening and then, the culprits must be brought to book; it needs investigation. 

I do not know whether I can attach a time frame on this but it needs somebody to go down there and do investigations and then handle the culprits. This House will be informed of the outcome.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am informed that a number of issues have been raised about the security of this country. At an appropriate time, when you give us notice, we intend to come here and give a full brief to this House about the security situation.

However, before I give that detailed report, it is important that we make it clear to this House that there is a new set of people handling security and I happen to be one of them. In cases especially where an RDC – and in this case I can speak on behalf of the Minister for Presidency because I serve in the same general docket, that this is not something we are going to give a lot of space.

However, it is important because security does not have any shade; it affects all of us. It would be better for Members to inform these offices particularly mine and we move on these people and if there is no sufficient action according to them, then it can be brought here for discussion. I am not saying that the Members cannot raise matters before contacting us. I am just proposing a procedure that would be more effective.

Mr Speaker, the other point I wanted to make is that we may need to work together. For example, I have met some Members of Parliament from Kasese, we have discussed; I have met the Leader of Opposition who officially contacted me to discuss Kasese security. That gives me a better start; you operate from an informed point of view having heard from everybody.

Therefore, I give assurance to this august House that we shall tackle security without winking and you should be rest assured that you will see a difference in the shortest possible time. (Applause) Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is not up to the Speaker to give you the time. The arrangement is that when you are ready, you alert the Speaker and you give your report because if it were up to me, you would have had to do it this afternoon. However, it is not possible. Therefore, when you are ready, alert the Speaker and we put you on the Order Paper.

LT GEN. (RTD) TUMUKUNDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We will prepare ourselves and inform you accordingly and it would not take very long; a day or two are enough for us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, next week we would be expecting a statement from the Minister for Security to deal with those matters that were raised on Tuesday and even yesterday.

3.10
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representatives): Mr Speaker, I stand here on a matter of national importance and it concerns our children in this country.

We have some international schools under the Bridge International Academies, who are recruiting senior four drop outs as teachers and they have given them iPads with lessons prepared from the United States. They are teaching our children from pre-primary, primary and secondary. 

The curriculum they are following is not very clear because they registered as international schools. But their curriculum does not even give the teachers the right to prepare lessons; everything is pre-prepared and these people have no qualifications.

It is a concern because our Constitution is very clear; Article 30 talks about the right to education. But also the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are clear about governments ensuring that there is inclusive quality education that promotes long learning opportunities for all. 

Now we have a problem because if the school dropouts are the ones teaching our learners, then I do not know where we are heading. If the Government does not come in to intervene, then I do not know what will happen. Two years ago, they were given a license for one school; today, two years down the road, they have 66 schools. I do not know how many schools they will have by close of this year.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Sports that has the mandate to promote quality education should investigate thoroughly, and if these schools are found wanting, they should either revoke the licence that was given to them or they even close the schools so that we know that all the children in this country have a regulator. This will help us to have equitable education. That is my prayer. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, do we have any statement on this matter.

3.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, whether private or public schools there is a Government agency, which is a regulator. If you get a licence, it must be given by an authority. I think what is lacking here is information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they have a licence. The concern is they are recruiting people who are not qualified to teach. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The licence is given to you upon confirming that you have well laid down guidelines. Right from recruitment, premises, teachers’ qualification; a licence is upon fulfilment of certain procedures. Either there are people who did not guide them well or we do not have the information.

This afternoon, I instruct the Minister of Education and Sports to make sure that the correct information is laid before us in this House because it has even touched curriculum yet we have a whole Government body that handles curriculum. The Minister of Education and Sports will inform this House and from her statement, probably more clarification may arise. I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of the education of our children and the future of Uganda are very important. The honourable colleague has raised a pertinent concern and as people representatives, we have all taken concern and we have this happening with our own knowledge. 

This is the only opportunity that we can comprehensively debate the details of the education of our children. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to instruct the minister not only to bring a piecemeal of this issue - we have schools which are established in houses without caring about the children’s play area.

We do not know the details of what these children are being taught. We do not know how compatible it is with our own job market in the country. 

My prayer is that we would love the minister to come with a comprehensive report. Give us time to debate that detail and probably, bring in more information for Government to act on. Otherwise, as it is, many of these schools are not even supervised. They are in homes and there is a lot, which needs to be done very urgently. We need this report next week to enable us internalise. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter that has been raised is a matter of an international school that was given a license for one school last year and now has a license to operate 66 schools. It is recruiting teachers who do not qualify to teach and they are teaching children under a curriculum that we do not understand.

The matter that has been supplied from Kitgum Municipality is that additionally, the whole thing should be reviewed and the minister should come here and give us a clear statement. The issues are separate but now, they are trying to combine that even other schools and other licenses could be reviewed. Are you in a position to extract this from the ministry and get a commitment that we get a statement?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I have no choice but to do as you have guided. There are two issues that have come up; the one that was raised by hon. Rwabushaija and hon. Anywar. The instructions will be clear so that the debate will ensue from that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have a timeframe so that these issues are resolved. In the meantime, I think you need to get more information from the honourable member to see what actually is happening so that some remedial measures can be taken. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of St Theresa Bujuni Primary School, Kibale represented in Parliament by hon. Matia Kasaija and hon. Robinah Nabbanja. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

3.20
MR LAWRENCE AKUGIZIBWE (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of public concern regarding the terms and conditions of employment in lower local governments, especially town councils. The issue is that town clerks in some town councils take long without being transferred. This has affected service delivery. 

Even when a town clerk is found to be not a non-performer or has issues, they spend a lot of time in offices at the same town council without being transferred. A case in point is Butunduzi Town Council where the town clerk presided over the swearing-in ceremony of some LC III candidate who had lost an election. It had to take the intervention of the Chairman LC V that the right person was later sworn-in.

The second issue is of an accountant in a town council, who had no qualifications. But when the district service commission asked him to present his papers, he did not turn up. This forced the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of Kyenjojo District to terminate his contract. 

The accountant, however, went to court and got an order to be reinstated to his job at the town council. The court also awarded him Shs 29 million in costs. So far, court has already taken Shs 24 million from the district accounts and they are waiting for more money to compensate this accountant.

My prayer is that we need to review the policy and the employment terms and conditions in town councils so that employees become transferable from one town council to another to enhance service delivery. Thank you very much and I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Some of these issues might have to be picked up by the committees that have just been formed so that they can look at the issue of whether town clerks can serve in one place until they retire or there should be transfers from place to place. 

Honourable minister, you may want to say something, but the committees also have to be pick interests in these matters.

3.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for raising the issue of town clerks. However, I would like to state that the longest the town clerks or CAOs stay in a district is three years. They are transferable and we are transferring them as a ministry. It is not true that they are staying beyond that, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we might need this one to be followed up.

3. 24
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Right now, Nyabushozi County is facing two challenges that are life-threatening. The first is that we have Hepatitis B in our region.
 
As we speak, the regional blood bank in western region – based in Mbarara – has suspended collection of safe blood because it has exceeded the 70 per cent of the prevalence rate. Hepatitis B is even in schools yet that is where most of the blood is normally collected. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, on this matter of Hepatitis B, I pray that the Ministry of Health urgently goes to the area and carries out the necessary tests so that people who are not yet infected are vaccinated. I also pray that the ministry maybe sets up treatment centres for those people who are infected.

The second challenge is about the tick-borne diseases that are finishing our cows. The tick-borne diseases -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you are raising two issues?

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: I said “Two challenges that are life-threatening,” Mr Speaker. The tick-borne diseases are threatening our livelihood. The cows are dying.

Mr Speaker, without taking a lot of time, my prayer is that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should quickly intervene in this matter by carrying out a mass vaccination because these tick-borne diseases are vaccinatable. 

The other prayer I have is that the ministry should urgently set up laboratories and animal clinics in these areas to alleviate this situation that is threatening people’s livelihood. Thank you.

3.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, the Minister of Health was here on Tuesday and elaborated very much on the issue of Hepatitis B. Hon. Aceng Jane Ruth told us about the supplementary budget and that when the whole amount is released, they will swing in action to reach everywhere. 

However, what hon. Fred Mwesigye is raising under this particular item needs urgent attention. I am going to draw the attention of the minister to this particular issue. 
I will do the same regarding the tick-borne diseases so that the Minister of State for Animal Industry can respond to what the honourable member representing Nyabushozi has raised.

I do not know whether setting up laboratories is in the plan for the ministry, but I will raise it with the minister and we will inform this august House, Sir.

3.27
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the failure of Government to conduct village council elections in the last 20 years. Delay by the Government to conduct these village council elections has brought a lot of insecurity in this country. For the last 20 years, we have tried to appeal to the Government to ensure that these local council elections are conducted, but nothing has yielded yet. 

In addition to that, Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Local Government recently indicated that the LC V chairpersons and their councillors plus the LC III chairpersons and their councillors would not get induction, as has been the case before. These are people supposed to supervise billions of shillings sent to the grassroots. I wonder how these people will conduct their work - even us, Members of Parliament plus ministers received our orientation. How will these LC III and LC V chairpersons and their councilors perform their work of supervision without orientation? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the councils operate without orientation? That is the issue.

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Luttamaguzi for raising these two key issues. The first is about election of LCIs and LC IIs. As a ministry, we are concerned. 
Initially, using the ballot papers, we required Shs 500 billion. However, you are aware that Parliament revised the law to the lining method of electing these LC I officials. Therefore, with that, we now require Shs 37 billion, which we do not have. However, we would like to revise it downwards. 
I would like to inform Members that on Monday, 18 July 2016, the Ministry of Local Government will meet with Electoral Commission officials to come up with modalities as to how we can have these elections conducted. It is also our interest to have them because, as you are aware, these are the first courts.  As Government, we are in the process to have these organised and put them in place.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Aringa North.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, LC Is are the roots of the NRM revolution. Therefore, we take the elections of LC I very seriously - and I am speaking as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. (Laughter)
We wanted to carry out those elections but as my colleague has said, I would like to give the true perspective on changing the mode of voting. Some very knowledgeable Ugandans went to court and said “No” if you line behind people, it is unconstitutional and court did uphold – (Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of order. Is it in order for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning, to tell the House about a court case, which is not really the case, especially immediately after the elections of Members of Parliament and the councilors at district, municipal and at sub county level?

Again, is it in order for the minister to say that village councils are the root of NRM, when NRM is the one killing the village councils? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the second point as to whether, by stating that the village councils are the roots of the NRM revolution and also being the minister in charge of finance  failed  to finance  village council elections, thereby killing it. I think that is information to you, honourable minister; you have been given information - just hold on. That was the second one because if they were really the roots, then you should have found money to repair the roots. That is what the Member is saying as a point of clarification.

However, on the first part, as to whether it is in order for you to talk about a court case when elections have just been carried out or not, I think the nature of the court was like this. We passed a law here that permitted Government to conduct village council elections by having voters line up behind candidates. 

However, before these elections were carried out, people went to court and challenged the whole process of lining up to conduct an election. They said it was unconstitutional and the court agreed with them. That is where the minister is coming from. He was actually stating what is factual. I cannot rule him out of order.

MR KASIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was just trying to give the background so that we all understand the delay. My colleague has mentioned a figure of Shs 500 billion, if we had to conduct these village elections using the traditional way of the secret ballot.

However, as you have heard, the law has been amended and we are now negotiating with Electoral Commission to see how this can be done in an affordable way. I would like to state before this House that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Government in general, is ready to conduct these elections once we have agreed on a figure that can fit within our means. That means  these elections, in my view, should be held before the end of this financial year. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have a ministerial statement on South Sudan. I had said we will stop these matters of urgent importance. However, I have only three left. Can I take quickly those matters before we go back to the Order Paper to allow the minister to make his statement? 

3.37
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning security and arms trafficking. 

I am aware that the Minister for Security has said that he is going to table a report to this House concerning the issue of security in this county. However, now that the issue is not being tabled, I would like to raise the following concerns.

As I talk, the issue of robbery in West Nile Region has increased. This robbery is majorly affecting the boda-boda cyclists. When people board these boda-bodas to take them to a specific destination, on reaching there armed men ambush them together with the cyclist. The armed men put the cyclist at gun point before ordering him to either surrender the motorcycle or lose his life; most of them end up surrendering their motorcycles. This seems this is arranged robbery.

One of the recent cases involved a lady. This lady boarded a boda-boda cyclist but when she reached her destination, the armed men grabbed the motorcycle from the cyclist. 

The good thing is that in this particular case, the lady was known and when the issue was investigated, some of the thugs were netted. Through investigations, the thugs revealed that they had got the guns from South Sudan. 

Mr Speaker, the issue I am raising is that with the confusion in South Sudan, if we do not take our own measures, areas along West Nile may have a lot of problems.
 
As we talk, I would like to inform this House that the problems in South Sudan may not be only South Sudan problems. There is no organised Government in South Sudan we can talk to. You find different groups of people recruiting their own rebels. There is a man called Ladugoro. This man operates in the areas bordering my constituency. Places like Kerwa, Kochi and the recruitment – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have a substantive matter on South Sudan.  I would like to –

MR ONZIMA: Okay, Mr Speaker. Some time back, there was an issue pushed by the local government on the need of a security road supposed to run from Goboro, which is close to Moyo, through Kerwa up to Koboko. This road was started. The thinking was that army detaches could be established along this road to do patrols to stop arms trafficking. I should have gone to the details, but since there is no time let me stop at that.

Secondly, I would also like to request that the army deployment in that area be reinforced. There are only two areas where the army has been deployed - Goboro and Kerwa. However, other areas like kilaji, Matu and Aliodraanyosi are being left open. If we do not do that, more arms will come to Uganda and we will have problems. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister for Security, you can build this up in your report so that we can have a debate on it.

THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Lt Gen. Henry Tumukunde): Mr Speaker, I would allow the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs say something about South Sudan; I will only make a few comments concerning the security along the borders thereafter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Let me have Erute County North and Kassanda County North and then, we will conclude and go to the statement.

3.42
MR GUTOMOI ABACANON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a very urgent matter of national importance. It is about crime preventers; in my constituency, we call them crime “promoters”. 

Mr Speaker, I was in my constituency on the 8th of this month after being summoned by a community of ten villages at Imat Moo-iwii Trading Centre where 27 crime preventers from Agweng Police Post invaded a place at about 7.30p.m. They arrested several people, tied them up and some were handcuffed. In the struggle to escape, four rounds of bullets were shot and many people were assaulted. When I met about 500 community members, they resolved they can now do without crime preventers.

If there is need for crime preventers at all, why don’t we recruit an officer in every village and call him or her a crime preventer officer? It is because these ones have failed and people have lost confidence in them. A letter was written to the chairperson of that village by the Officer in Charge (OC) of Agweng Police Post demanding Ocen Angello and Ocen Pacokwer to go to his office to discuss the tragedy that had occurred when they attacked the village on the 3rd of this month.

Therefore, my prayer is that since the crime preventers have succeeded in their operations of campaigning and we have already concluded the general elections, why can’t we dispose of them now? It is because what has followed now is havoc and we can no longer tolerate their actions. If need be, why can’t we recruit police officers in every village. There are many people who want employment. 

Worse still, we have been demanding to know how these people live since they are not paid. We have been told they work voluntarily. In this century, people are still working voluntarily at night! What do you expect when they work at night? The community complained that they have lost their phones, hoes, bicycles because of the acts of these crime preventers.

Mr Speaker, can a policy be derived by the responsible docket to delete crime preventers from the history of Uganda? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Any comments on the matter of crime preventers from the Government side?

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, the idea behind the recruitment of crime preventers is contained in the policy of community policing. In other words, instead of the police remaining at the headquarters, the principle, which is internationally adopted, is that the police should involve the community. Generally, those who come from a community are the people who know the characters of the people there and so they can identify criminals and report them.

I must say right from the beginning, the idea of recruiting crime preventers is and was not intended for elections. There is a policy being developed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which will soon be tabled in Parliament, so that activities of crime preventers are regulated by the Police Act. Therefore, I would like to assure Members that crime preventers were not recruited for elections. 

Secondly, some crime preventers, like any other human beings, may be making mistakes at individual level. There is no reason a crime preventer or even a policeman should go to a village and work at night without the presence of the local councillors. Yes, I know that at the moment the terms of our local councils has expired; nevertheless, the communities have  accepted, in practice, those who have been their LCIs and they are still, in a voluntary way, working. So, I would like to assure this House that a policy is coming and this Parliament will make a law to guide the activities of the crime preventers. The law and the thinking behind the crime preventers –(Interruption)

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I thank you especially for the pledge to bring a policy to regulate the activities of crime preventers. However, I am also interested in knowing whether this policy will stretch towards their recruitment. 

From what has been said, it is a problem all over but there are also places where hard-core criminals were the first preference for recruitment; is that what it entails to bring in people who understand the community? (Laughter) Some of these communities are not communities of mainly criminals; so, why would someone pick criminals to be recruited as crime preventers? Can you clarify whether that policy will delve into the recruitment? Thank you very much.

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, I seek further clarification in just one minute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has to allow you. You have already gone to the microphone.

MR KASIBANTE: Honourable minister, I am just supplementing very briefly and giving my constituency - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has not allowed you, honourable member.

MR OBIGA: Let me make this clarification and if there is time and the Speaker allows, I will let you know.

The procedure we are developing in the policy for the identification of crime preventers, which will be included in the law this Parliament will pass, is that these people must be identified by the community because they know the characters of their people. They know a wrong and a good character. Therefore, there is no deliberate policy or even a procedure that we must identify criminals. However, if at the moment there are mistakes which were made without identification, we will correct them.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are serious issues of national concern and as we discuss the issue of crime preventers, I am sure all Members of this House have issues in their various constituencies. When the minister attempts to respond to just a piece of these issues, it does not give a broad picture. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to request the minister to come well prepared with a full statement? 

We have issues of how these crime preventers were recruited, how they are being motivated, who they are answerable to and what their role in the community is since the election period.  We would like all these answers. Wouldn’t it be right that we have the minister come to this House with a full report to give Members an opportunity to submit on the menace of the crime preventers and if any, come up with a remedy on how they can be incorporated in good works in the community? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, this matter came as an urgent matter of public importance and in the course of the response, the minister has made a commitment that there is a policy coming up. Let us wait for that policy and move on that basis.

3.52
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Article 211 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda establishes the Uganda Police Force, but I am interested in Article 212 before I can mention the matter of urgent public importance from Kassanda North. Article 212 states the functions of the Uganda Police and it says shall include- 

“(a) to protect life and property;
 (b) to preserve law and order;
 (c) to prevent and detect crime; and
 (d) to cooperate with the civilian authority and other security organs established under this Constitution and with the population generally.”

Mr Speaker, there is a situation in Kassanda North where the police are not working according to their constitutional mandate. They are arbitrarily arresting my people from Nsololo village. The Constitution states clearly that they are supposed to work with the civilian authority and the population. However, the chairperson of Nsololo LCI village in Kassanda North was invited to the police for consultation but on his way to the police, he was arrested and he has been imprisoned for the last three weeks. When the people of Nsololo told me about -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has he been taken to court? 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Mr Speaker, when the chairperson was due to be presented to court, I called a village meeting and we selected people who would stand surety for him but these people were also arrested. From that incident, the people of Nsololo village are now living in fear. 

The person responsible for this is a lady called Nambi, a land owner. She wants to chase away all the people of that village from the land. The unfortunate and annoying bit is that she is working with the police - not the police of Kassanda but the regional police of Mityana. I contacted the regional police of Mityana and they told me that they shall arrest all those people because they have a list.

Mr Speaker, the police have ceased to be pro-people and are now for the powerful. I am very sure that many Members of Parliament here have issues related to land, and the land problem has been around for quite a long time. Today, we want to become a middle-income country but how are we going to achieve this when our people are not participating in production. This is my prayer, Mr Speaker. We need to come up with a serious –(Interruption) 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable member from Kassanda has raised the issue of police brutality in his constituency. He also added that the police are being used by powerful people and that he is sure many of the Members of Parliament here have issues concerning land. 

Is it procedurally correct for him to proceed without clarifying on the issues that Members of Parliament have? I do not want them to appear to be the powerful people using the police. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member was just concerned and he had a feeling that his concern was shared by the Members and that his experience was also the experience of the Members. However, if that does not come from Pallisa, I am sure he would not have made a general statement to that.

However, honourable member, specifically, there is this motion coming up, whose notice has already been given, on the conduct of the police. Don’t you think this will be properly housed and a decision properly taken when that motion comes up? I would allow you to speak substantially on those issues and they are captured and when we take the decisions, it takes care of all those situations. Would that not be a proper way to handle your case?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Mr Speaker, one of the rules that I read when I had just -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked you whether that would be a proper housing for your concerns so that a decision is taken by the House.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Mr Speaker, I am going to respond to that, but one of the rules I read was that in my maiden speech, I am supposed to be given time to speak without interruption.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are qualifications to that. Where there is violation of order or procedure, you have no immunity. Therefore, avoid issues of procedure and order. You have no immunity even when you are making a maiden speech and you violate orders; a point of order will be raised.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Will you allow me –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am proposing is that I allow you to debate when a motion on the conduct of the police is brought. I will allow a full debate on that and then a decision will be taken by the House on those issues. Would that not be proper?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, can we now go to the Order Paper?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT  

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Oryem Okello): Mr Speaker, I am here to make a statement on the situation in South Sudan.

As you are aware, on 7 July 2016 fighting erupted in Juba between the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army-in Opposition (SPLA-IO), which has resulted in the loss of life and casualties as well as destruction of property. While the situation appears to be getting calm following appeals made by President Salva Kiir Mayardit and the First Vice-President, Dr Riek Machar, to their military leaders to stop the fighting, the situation remains tense with limited movement by the population. Elsewhere outside Juba and especially in Wau and Toorit, there are reports of the SPLA-IO having an upper hand in terms of control. Reports also indicate that Yei may fall into rebel control any time.

Reports from our Embassy in Juba indicate that five Ugandans were killed at a checkpoint on the first day of the fighting. All the bodies of the victims were repatriated back home. Six Ugandans were killed in Jebel Kujur when SPLA-IO tanks run over them. For now, all these bodies have not been retrieved yet as they are lying in SPLA-IO controlled zones of Juba. As soon as the situation permits, every effort will be made to identify the remains and return them home. Government conveys heartfelt condolences to all the bereaved families and friends.

Mr Speaker, Government is taking every measure possible to ensure the safety of Ugandans living in Juba and their properties. Government has drawn up an evacuation plan to get our people home. As of this morning, over 3,000 Ugandans were assembled in Gumbo Market in Juba waiting to be evacuated home. Arrangements for the repatriation are underway as I speak, and this exercise should be completed in the next few days.

For Ugandans in other parts of South Sudan and particularly Wau and Toorit, Government has advised them to limit their movements and where the situation warrants, to move into UN compounds for their safety as arrangements to evacuate them are finalised. They are further urged to remain in touch with our embassy in Juba for any necessary information regarding their safety. 
  
Mr Speaker, at the region’s diplomatic level, an extraordinary meeting of the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD) Council of Ministers was held in Nairobi on 11 July 2016 to discuss the situation in South Sudan. The ministers adopted a communiqué condemning the resumption of fighting among the South Sudan belligerents and the targeted attack on the UN compound where the civilian population had taken refuge. The council urged President Salva Kiir Mayardit and the First Vice-President, Dr Riek Machar, to prevail over their forces to immediately stop the fighting. 

The council demanded –
(a) 	an immediate ceasefire;
(b) 	reopening of the Juba International Airport under the protection of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS);
(c) 	immediate return of all armed forces and weapons to their barracks; 
(d) 	opening up of humanitarian corridors;
(e) 	urgent revision of UNMISS mandate to establish an intervention brigade and increase the number of troops from the region to, inter alia, secure Juba;
(f) 	accountability from all those responsible for the breakdown of law and order;
(g) 	an immediate implementation of the security arrangements as enshrined in the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan (ARCISS). 

Mr Speaker, the African Union Peace and Security Council met in Kigali on 11 July 2016 to review the situation in South Sudan. It endorsed the communiqué by IGAD Council of Ministers, particularly the recommendation therein for the revision of the mandate of UNMISS in order to enable the establishment of an intervention brigade, and to increase the number of troops from the region to inter alia provide protection to civilians and security in Juba and the rest of the country.

Urgent consultations are also ongoing for the convening of an extraordinary IGAD Summit on 16 July 2016 in Kigali at the side lines of the AU Summit. The summit is expected to consider the security situation in South Sudan, taking into account the outcome of the IGAD foreign ministers’ meeting and that of the AU Peace and Security Council. The outcome of the summit will form a basis for calling on the UN Security Council to endorse the proposal for the establishment of the intervening brigade. Ethiopia, as chair of IGAD, will spearhead the process of mobilising the UN Security Council on this matter.

In conclusion, let me underscore the fact that Uganda is actively involved in these ongoing diplomatic processes within the framework of the IGAD region. Government fully endorses and subscribes to a regional approach to address the situation of South Sudan. Government will continue to closely monitor the situation in South Sudan, particularly the situation of Ugandans living there. Any measures or actions Government may need to take will be done in full consultation with the region. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, honourable minister. The Minister of Security wants to supplement and then we open the debate.

4.08
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For the information of the House, as soon as the situation in South Sudan occurred, the National Security Council, which is composed of the UPDF, Ministry of Security and the components under the Ministry of Security, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the forces under them, assessed the situation especially following two important targets. One target is the population of Ugandans in South Sudan and then making sure that the situation in South Sudan does not spill over into Uganda, including the issues that are being raised here by some Members of Parliament regarding the flow of weapons.

I wish to give assurance to this House that one, we are in close touch with Ugandans outside, except those who lost lives - may their souls rest in peace. Two, we have screened the border and we have a sufficient standby force in case of any eventualities.

Mr Speaker, you have been informed that the UPDF is working with the rest of the other forces in the region to put up a standby force which will take care of the situation in South Sudan. Without going into too many details, let this House be assured that our security antennae are high regarding what is likely to be security risks concerning what is happening in South Sudan.

4.11
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the ministers for the statements that they have given this afternoon on the status of the war in South Sudan, and the status of our peoples there. 

This is the second or third time that such a matter has occurred. The issue I would like to raise is that, how does the Government of South Sudan compensate our people for these losses? This is not the first time that our people have lost lives across the border as much as we contributed a lot to the liberation of South Sudan and to her attaining independence. Every single life of a Ugandan counts and matters; every single property that they lose outside is a loss of livelihood back here at home. 

There are very many people from Uganda who trade in the markets of Juba and Wau and other states of South Sudan. Thank you for repatriating the bodies but with our own taxpayers’ money! How does South Sudan take responsibility and pay for these losses? If you can tell us the answer to that question, we would be very happy and glad to participate in the creation of peace in the region as we have always done. 

A lot of taxpayers’ money in Uganda has been spent. Even in the recent scuffles that happened in South Sudan, Uganda sent her troops. Uganda financed the entire budget of our troops and in return, we see loss of lives and property of our own people. We would, therefore, like to advise Government and demand that the Ambassador of South Sudan to Uganda be called immediately to the offices of the Minister of Foreign Affairs to give a statement on account of our people’s lives and their security. Not only that, the ambassador should also tell us how they are going to compensate their property and lives. In so doing, we shall know that our foreign office and our Government account for the loss of lives of its individuals, and those who will damage property and lives of Ugandans outside there must know that they will be held accountable at all costs. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It is going to be three minutes for each Member. 

4.14
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement and I also share deep sympathies with the families of our people, of Ugandans, who have lost their people in South Sudan. 

Mr Speaker, I am particularly concerned with the number of Ugandans who are living in South Sudan. We have had issues of Ugandans living abroad and when you ask Government how many people are living in these countries, say in the Middle East or South Sudan, our Government is not aware and yet these people pass through the borders. When you ask Ugandans how much coffee we export, they shall give you the tonnage; when you ask Government how much maize we export to Kenya, they will tell you how many tonnes we export. However, when you ask them how many Ugandans are living in South Sudan, Government will say, “We do not know”.

I have heard the minister talk about efforts to establish the number of people living in South Sudan, but that is after the eruption of this war which is taking place. We cannot be so sure how many people are living there and I think this should not continue. We lost a young doctor the other day and we have many professionals who are living and working in South Sudan but we cannot explain their whereabouts.

Finally, recently the East African Community brought on board South Sudan to be part of the community. If I had the opportunity to oppose this, I would have opposed it. However, I have the opportunity to make my views known here, so let me register them now. I think it was the most inappropriate action of the EAC to accept South Sudan to become part of the community. How can a country without any track record on human rights come on board? How can a country which has failed to work with her neighbours to guarantee the security of the people from the neighbouring countries and failed to work with Ugandans who liberated their country, be brought on board? I think this is the problem that the leaders are causing. That is why sometimes people reach a point and say, “We want to break away; we do not want to be part of this.”

Finally, in the previous Parliament, I had the opportunity to go to Juba following the number of Ugandans who lost their property in South Sudan. Our people for years and years had been trying as much as possible to recover what was lost in South Sudan and they could not. Like hon. Nsereko said, South Sudan is not committed or does not want to show that they appreciate the efforts that Ugandans have put in liberating their country. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. 

4.17
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity that you have given me to make my maiden speech. The conflict in South Sudan is of national and international interest. I would like to commend the minister for the report he has given to the House with regard to the efforts that the Government is doing to evacuate our people from South Sudan. 

Mr Speaker, Lamwo District, where I come from, has the largest border expanse with South Sudan and this border is porous. Compared to districts such as Adjumani, Moyo and other districts that are bordering Sudan that have manned border points, Lamwo does not have manned border points and we have refugees coming from Sudan unchecked. We do not know the number of refugees but they settle in the community and this raises health issues and security issues and also puts pressure on our service delivery to the people of Lamwo.

Concerning security, two months ago we lost two people. We believe as these people come in, they come with arms. So, two people were gunned down in their homes. Secondly, security officers at the borderline with Lamwo are few and this calls for Government to increase the number of security personnel at the border.

On the issue of health, these refugees coming in through Lamwo are not immunised and they come in with all kinds of diseases. This poses a threat not only for Lamwo but for the whole nation. Mr Speaker, our people are also currently facing famine. There has been a lot of sunshine, which has led to drought and people have no food. Therefore, these refugees coming into Lamwo put more pressure on food security and health. There is an influx in the hospitals and they are not provided for.

I would like to commend the Government for the effort that they are making in supporting the evacuation of Ugandans. I also applaud the Government for the excellent refugee policy it has put in place. The Government has always ensured the resettlement of refugees - (Member timed out.) 

4.21
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say something concerning Sudan. 

First of all, I would like to thank the minister for the statement he has made on South Sudan. It is very important that we understand that peace in South Sudan is as good as peace in Kampala here. South Sudan hosts so many of our people and with those people coming back home here, we face a big threat of stiff competition that will lead to problems that might aid theft and so much more. I am, therefore, calling upon the Government and all those who are interested in pushing South Sudan, to work round the clock to ensure that we also have peace there. 

I also would like to remind you, honourable members, that two days ago, a General – I think he was an army commander of South Sudan - was on television making a statement about the situation there. I remember in his speech, he said that Uganda will not wait for the situation in South Sudan to deteriorate. He meant that we should help them restore peace. I think that was seen by many people –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on procedural point. The minister’s statement is about South Sudan and that is what we are discussing. However, I have heard many Members talking about “Southern” Sudan. Is it procedurally right for Members to discuss a country which is not in question? “Southern” Sudan is quite different from South Sudan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I think the records have also got to be made right. Before South Sudan became an independent country, it was under an arrangement of a joint government in the whole of Sudan and it was referred to as the “Government of Southern Sudan”. To make the distinction between that government and the new state of South Sudan, South Sudan came to be known as South Sudan and not “Southern Sudan”. Therefore, the distinction is there and we need to recognise it. I do not know whether they mean that the fighting is in southern South Sudan – (Laughter) - but for purposes of the record, let us be clear that we are talking about a country called South Sudan. 

Secondly, let me take this opportunity to advise on the content of our debate on this matter. This is because the matters are ongoing and they are of a security nature. We might need to regulate how we debate it so that we do not stray into areas that can make other people angrier than they should be or make situations a lot worse than they already are. Let us take responsibility in governing what we say ourselves without anybody calling us to order or anything like that. I think let us just have a responsible debate about what is going on right now. Thank you. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise guidance. South Sudan, as you may want to refer to it, is actually very important to Uganda. Now that the ministers are meeting in relation to the South Sudan matter, to bring peace and sanity there, I also want to urge the negotiators on the table to observe certain interests of the people of South Sudan. 

You may also realise that President Salva Kiir made a statement on TV the other day. He said that the kind of agreement that was drawn had so many challenges and he was asked not even to put a comma, a question mark or full stop somewhere. It means -(Member timed out.)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister about his statement. However, before I seek that clarification, I would like to ask for clarification from the Minister of Security. 

There has been a lot of concern raised in this House by our brothers and sisters from northern Uganda, who live along the border of South Sudan. Even before this current situation in South Sudan erupted, there were a lot of problems with the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) crossing over, abusing our people and looting properties. With this kind of scenario now, where there is total confusion, are our people safe? What measures has Government put in place to protect them?

The clarification I seek, however, is from the minister’s first paragraph. If one reads the last sentence, it appears as if there is outright war in South Sudan because the minister says, “Elsewhere outside Juba, and especially in Wau and Toorit, there are reports of the SPLA-IO having the upper hand in terms of control. Yei is also expected to fall.” It paints a picture of the entire South Sudan at war.  

Our concern here has been Juba. Some of us have been talking to our colleagues there on phone to find out what is going on and we did not know that elsewhere, things are also falling apart. The minister can probably clarify. 

My deepest concern is basically about Yei falling. I thought Riek Machar and Salva Kiir are in Government; so who is the rebel? Both these people had an agreement and they have formed a government and they are both in Cabinet. The other day they were addressing a press conference together and I am told Riek Machar was actually escorted by the presidential guard back to his base. Therefore, who are the rebels? Is there a third force that is fighting? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You guided well that we should not debate in a way that could have us called to order. However, the last sentence of the first paragraph of the minister’s statement says that Yei is also expected to fall into rebel control any time. 

What is happening in South Sudan is that there is a Government of two people, who have agreed to work together after fighting each other, and that is Riek Machar and Salva Kiir. The Government of Uganda has among them a rebel. That is an assumption and I believe we would not be proceeding well if we maintained that out of the two parties forming a government, one is a rebel. So are we proceeding well to make such assumptions?

Secondly, how would the Government of Uganda know that some parts of another country are soon falling to another side –(Interjections)- My point of procedure is: Are we proceeding well before Government makes corrections to these statements? Otherwise, as you guided, we may be called to order. Why do we assume that one of the two peoples forming a unity government are rebels and yet at the same time, we are aware that there is some part of the country that is falling to one of them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we proceeding properly? Yes, we are. This is a ministerial statement on the situation of Ugandans in South Sudan. That is information to the honourable member for Aswa County; it is not from Juba only but it is South Sudan.

The minister will be able to own up to his statement. It is not the Speaker’s statement. I am sure he has good information, which has made the content of his statement. I will, therefore, not comment on it. The minister will, at an appropriate time, make clarification on that. However, my advice is that let us keep within reasonable language to avoid crossing over to incitement. 

4.33
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two speakers have peeked into my notes. However, I would like to thank the minister for briefing this House. 

I was also reading the statement with some suspicion because one realises that there are some inconsistencies. If you say that it appears that the situation is getting calm and then you say that there is a place falling very soon, then you show a lot of inconsistency in the statement and we fail to follow you.

You then said that arrangements for evacuating Ugandans are underway and will be completed in the next few days. Mr Speaker, evacuation should be very urgent. This is a matter of life and death. Yesterday, I was watching a Kenyan television station and I saw that China was evacuating over 100 of its people. Why is it that us, who are just in the neighbourhood, are still arranging and we are not even sure when we are supposed to evacuate our brothers and sisters? I look at this as not being serious. 

We need to be exact. It is now almost a week since the fighting started; if by now we are not sure when we will evacuate our brothers and sisters and yet countries overseas have evacuated their own, I do not see our country as being serious. I, therefore, would like the minister to be exact and give us the dates when our people will be evacuated in order to save their lives. I thank you.

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our primary concern now is our Ugandans in South Sudan. Security considered the option of airlifting them as risky. This is so because they could shoot at any aircraft coming out of there.

We have sent in our troops and they have already secured some of our people. Mr Speaker, why don’t we stay this debate until the operation is over and then we can debate conclusively? Discussing compensation and means is really putting the whole exercise at risk. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Mr Mukitale rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you want to pass a ruling on that issue? (Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can only give an additional procedural point. 

Our concern, when we demanded for this report, was safety of our people; it was a concern about evacuating and securing our people. As neighbours to the latest member of the East African Community, we can only urge for a ceasefire and urge member countries of IGAD and UNAMISS to do all that is possible within their means because Uganda has already done her part in terms of capacity building.

Therefore, in line with hon. Rwamirama’s submission, – apart from the details on how they intend to bring back Ugandans which security may not want to divulge to us – we are aware that our borders are porous and we do not have a strict refugee policy. We have an aliens’ policy where people cannot be restricted in camps, like in other countries. Therefore, pressure on the neighbouring districts - those along the border - is high on our schools, health centres and social services. 

Wouldn’t it be proper for the minister concerned and Leader of Government Business to help us with those details? I have not heard anything to do with relief on the borders. How do you deal with disaster and water issues on the border? There are people from Koboko up to the Karamoja border; how are we intervening in terms of human disaster, especially for those who have already crossed over to the Ugandan side?

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think hon. Rwamirama has brought back the debate where it is supposed to be. 

My concern is, is this compulsory evacuation? For most countries, evacuating is compulsory and if you do not comply, it becomes a voluntary assumption of risk. In view of the fact that we do not have proper data on who is where, has Government made it clear to all those concerned that all must leave, and have they been given the plan and the routes, or is it that whoever they find available, they will take? If so, then it raises a problem. 

I am very sure that so many Ugandans are in touch with their family members who are stuck. When it becomes compulsory, then it means that Government must mount more pressure on Ugandans to leave South Sudan. This is because nobody at the moment is able to explain as to when the situation is likely to return to normal. The statement actually includes a possibility of another fall. We have already seen parts “falling” on Ugandans. We are therefore not sure about what is going to happen next. So, is this compulsory evacuation? 

Three thousand Ugandans are apparently assembled; what means of evacuation are we talking about? Are they going to use lorries? Is the Minister of Security lending us his famous chopper? What are we using? We need Ugandans back as fast as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to make a distinction. The point raised by the member for Masaka Municipality is certainly not a procedural point and you should have taken it back. He raises a matter for clarification from the minister, but it is certainly not procedural. However, the point I had allowed to have was procedural basing on what the Member for Isingiro South, hon. Bright Rwamirama, has rasied.

The matter that we have before us is a ministerial statement on the situation of Ugandans in South Sudan. However, there are statements from the minister that have gone beyond what we should be debating. I think that is what has attracted this debate. 

Therefore, let me guide this way: The statement is based on a matter that rose as a matter of urgent public importance from Rubaga North concerning our people in South Sudan - some were killed and property destroyed - and about what Government was doing to bring our people back home. That should have been the substance of this report. However, of course being a minister, he took the latitude to give us some information that is additional but which we do not have to debate.

Our primary concern should be our people and what steps are being taken to bring them back home - Are there gaps? How can this Parliament help in covering the gaps and helping the people to come home? I think let us restrict ourselves to that and when we do that, we will be proceeding well.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Listening to the statement from the Minister - and I thank him for it- it has a constitutional dimension because it involves the deployment of troops across the border, which has been admitted to. Mr Speaker, as you realise, it is a constitutional command under Article 210 of the Constitution for Parliament to regulate the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, and (d)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please guide me so that I can rule properly. Where in the statement is the issue of Ugandan troops in South Sudan mentioned?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, during the course of the debate, it has emerged that there is a plan of moving in to evacuate Ugandans. The procedural point I am raising is whether it would not be better that Government brings a proposal to this House, in an appropriate manner, to move in to secure the extent of our engagement. Is the extent of our engagement only to secure our strategic assets or secure and repatriate Ugandans? Even then, the moment you move across the border, it takes on an international dimension and, therefore, as Parliament we are enjoined to regulate such a deployment. 

Therefore, would it not be procedurally right to beef up a request and bring a motion to this House requesting Parliament’s blessings to allow Government after telling us that this is the situation, before talking about the regional brigade that the minister is talking about? If there is need to evacuate Ugandans and their property - It is now seven days and Government seems not to have any intention to have a specific mission to come to this Parliament and say, “Dear Ugandans, we intend to move like this or we have done this” and as we have been doing, we give them our blessings.

As a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I know that we were briefed and told that Uganda finalised its withdrawal from South Sudan. Therefore, any new engagement must be properly regulated by this Parliament, Mr Speaker. Is Government procedurally right to sidestep a constitutional matter and engage us on matters that do concern us but which have a constitutional obligation that we must address ourselves to as Parliament? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what we need to understand first whether it is a question of deployment of our troops in South Sudan, or a Ugandan military operation, or some arrangement whose details we still do not understand, that has been taken by the Government of Uganda to go and bring our people out without any military connotations or any aspect of foreign deployment of our troops. This is because we might be jumping into beyond what we should be debating if we begin talking about deployment of the UPDF, which is not the issue now, and I do not think anybody has mentioned that.

4.47
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde): Mr Speaker, I just want to inform the House. Maybe we should discern these issues and separate them. What we are doing now is rescuing Ugandans; it is a rescue mission incorporating many other countries like China, India, Kenya and Uganda. We are not deploying any guns. In any case, in the circumstances you cannot attempt to apply any military, otherwise you will become incredibly suspicious.

Mr Speaker, all this is being done under clear international arrangements - East African Community, IGAD, AU and its security council. I would advise that Members restrain themselves on rushing into this situation and causing even possible suspicion in circumstances when our most important mission is to pull out Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, to clear the views of the honourable members, it is not true that we do not know how many Ugandans are in South Sudan. At least even those who go there mysteriously without following the law, whenever there is a crisis they tend to assemble and we count them. Therefore, Mr Speaker, we know how many Ugandans are there and they are assembled at certain points. Our President is also speaking with the leaders of the different groups there.

I would wish to inform the august House that in Sudan, it is not necessarily state players that are in action. You notice, Mr Speaker, especially in your own personal capacity in your neighbourhood, that there are other players and they are in big numbers and they are organised, like the Equatorial forces. 

Therefore, going too deep in this matter knowing very well that all we discuss here is public business, I would advise that we restrict this debate to some spectrum so that we can also avoid endangering Ugandans in these rather complicated circumstances. I believe that solves the issue of hon. Ssekikubo of Lwemiyaga. When it is necessary to deploy forces, we shall have to come here and seek authority. The honourable member should also know that there are other arrangements like the AU force. You know very well, Mr Speaker, that it is a regional force and where the Ugandan component will have to be involved, where necessary, we shall come and seek your authority.

In this capacity, I am speaking on behalf of Ministry of Defence by virtue of being a member of the National Security Council where these matters are discussed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I do not know where to house your clarifications, honourable members, because the Member who was speaking has left the Floor. He has to accept the clarification because the Speaker does not accept clarification. Since he is not in a position to accept or deny clarifications, let us wait for when he comes up and then we can take points of clarification. 

Honourable members, I think the issues have been disaggregated for us properly. Let us restrict ourselves to talking about the situation of our people in South Sudan. If the nature of the debate is such that we are going back to what has already been disaggregated, then I will exercise my discretion to hold this debate for now and then we move forward. So, let us see if we can debate what we must debate.

4.52
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, as we speak, there are implications of what is going on in Juba to Gulu. This afternoon, 15 people have been admitted to Lacor Hospital arising from what is going on in Juba. Therefore, as we speak here, the conditions continue to worsen. That is why sometimes it is very important; much as we have to be restrictive on issues pertaining to what is going on in South Sudan, it is also imperative to touch a bit on this regardless of the sensitivity of the matter.

If you look at what has gone on in South Sudan, and this relates to what the minister has said, I think Uganda should take a very firm position with regard to its discussion in IGAD on issues of Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration (DDR)  in South Sudan because these are the conflict triggers. If we do not deal with them seriously, we shall continue receiving these challenges. 

Through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I think it is very important to coordinate with the Office of the Prime Minister to do a rapid assessment on the implications of the refugee influx to northern Uganda. We have already started experiencing this in Gulu area; how about those in Elegu and West Nile? It would be very important to know how humanitarian assistance can be fairly supported by development partners as regards the influx of refugees into Uganda.

To the ministry, I think it is high time we talked seriously about taking full records of Ugandans who go abroad. I know there are a lot of fears when you travel. However, when you go out, at least the embassy should take note that you are around. Otherwise, we have no data on how many Ugandans are in South Sudan

Mr Speaker, because of the challenge that we have today, we should agree on some issues while evacuations are taking place. There was a very big scare from what we read this morning in the newspapers - “The guns are out; we are approaching Juba.” That statement was not very good to us - (Member timed out.)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a statement from Government and it is entitled, “Statement on the Situation in South Sudan”. What is being asked of this Parliament is to restrict itself to the fate of Ugandans in South Sudan, but that statement is not before this House. Therefore, my humble request to Government is, in order to avoid a tricky situation, withdraw this statement and promise to bring a proper statement. The moment we have a broad statement as pertains to the situation in South Sudan then the Speaker will not be constrained to restrict Members on the borders of the debate.

Therefore, my humble request, and to save the situation - If I were to go into the detail of this statement, it can be so terrible because there are terrible mistakes here; for example, the minister-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to leave it like that now –(Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: My humble request to Government is to withdraw this statement and promise at an appropriate time to brief this Parliament on the fate of Ugandans in South Sudan. As of now, the statement is quite misleading. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Order Paper is very clear; it is a ministerial statement on the situation of Ugandans in South Sudan and the statement is talking about the situation in South Sudan. Here, we are trying to see if we can separate the issues. I think it can only be better organised if we redo this and come back in a more systematic way. This is because it is going to be very difficult for me to say: “Do not go there” Or “Do not go here” when the minister has gone everywhere. 

Can we, therefore, pause this matter? I see the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs would like to speak on this matter, but as of now, there is nothing substantial before the House for us to speak about because the statement is not what is on our Order Paper. I ask the minister to go back and re-organise so that we can streamline the issues which we are going to debate. Maybe by that time, we will even have better information on how we are going to proceed with this matter.

Honourable members, you are aware that this House has suffered numbers a bit, and that was because most of the Members were participating in an election to get the leadership for the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association (UWOPA). The House might want to know what happened there. I would like to announce only one of the people whom I have been requested to bring to the knowledge of the House. The elections have just been conducted and hon. Monica Amoding was elected the chairperson. (Applause) 

For me to be quoted properly, this request was made to the Speaker by hon. Jalia Bintu of the Electoral Commission of UWOPA. (Laughter) Just in case there are any variations in future on  what I have just announced, the responsible person will be liable.

Honourable members, given what is going on, we will not be able to proceed with this debate, but we will urgently need some re-organisation in the state so that by Tuesday, we are ready to proceed with it properly. Also, we will be expecting a statement from the Minister of Security and I do not know whether the minister would want to withdraw this statement formally.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We shall seek your guidance on how we really need to proceed because under the Commonwealth arrangement, when a statement originates from the mainstream minister, the shadow minister is supposed to evaluate or respond immediately. We shall seek your wise guidance, Mr Speaker.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, as we await your verdict, the matter that came on the Floor pertains to human life. Tomorrow, this House will not be able to assemble here. What follows is a weekend and on Monday we will not be here. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance in regards to allowing or creating room, especially now that we have been informed that 3,000 Ugandans have assembled in one place called Gumbo. Do we have some emergency medical intervention provided for those precious souls? I also seek to be guided on whether the evacuation roadmap has been constructed and well defined. This is because human life is very important. We have already lost eleven precious lives and we cannot afford to lose more. Mr Speaker, I beg to be guided on that procedural matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, as you can see from your own statement, there are more questions than answers. 

In addition, the procedure in the House of Commons is not necessarily the procedure in the Commonwealth. Uganda is a member of the Commonwealth but certainly not a member of the British Parliament. In the British Parliament, the arrangement is separate – the responses are there and then. If you look at our Rules of Procedure, all it says is that a ministerial statement attracts a debate. That is it and that is what we were doing. Therefore, we are proceeding by our Rules of Procedure as an independent Parliament – independent from Britain since 1962. We do not want to go back there and start behaving like them when we are very different now. (Laughter) Anyway, that is for another day. 

However, where you would need to respond is if it was a policy issue because you would have had an alternative position on the issue. What alternative position would you have on an issue of emergency of this nature where the whole House is just seeking out information from the persons concerned? What alternative policy matter would you have to articulate? Therefore, we are just being pragmatic about what is before us instead of importing things without modifying them to suit our circumstances for now.

Therefore, honourable members, in the circumstances, we will not be able to proceed now. This House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.04 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 July 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 
