Thursday, 31 July 2014

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, we have now received all the ministerial policy statements and by the end of today, we would have received all the alternative policy statements from the Opposition and therefore, the committees will have all the documents they need to begin processing their work. So, by close of the sitting today, we will be suspending this plenary to allow the committees to continue with their work and I will be making the announcement towards the end.

I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate - One, the laying of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee. Usually, we only have them laid from the Auditor-General but this time, we have our own report from our committee of the public accounts being laid. I think it is a step in the right direction.

Secondly, we will be altering the Order Paper at the appropriate place to lay the alternative policy statement from the Shadow Minister of Defence and Internal Affairs. So, the Order Paper is accordingly amended in those two aspects. I thank you. 

2.11
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance under our Rule 46(a). On 28th of this month at around 4.00 p.m., heavy rains with a lot of hailstorm and wind affected part of my district – that is, Mayoro Sub-County - which left many houses blown off by wind, very many acres of banana plantations, cassava and many other crops down including 18 houses and two churches.

It is true that we have the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness but for us who come from rural areas, it is not easy for such a situation to be heard and the ministry comes for rescue within the 24 hours that is being given.

We have tried our best but it is not always possible. On this note, therefore, I am seeking the support of Members of Parliament that whenever we have such catastrophes in our districts, especially we from rural areas and are not being assisted within the 24 hours that are provided, we normally follow the right procedures given by the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness by writing through our district CAO who is the chair of disasters at the district level to the PS of the ministry. 

But when we write, it takes a long time to get relief and at the same time, we are not given timely response and in some certain circumstances, nothing is given to our people when they are affected with such catastrophes. 

So, I request that Members should discuss and forge a way forward for such areas that are not given quick response within the 24 hours and when they write, they are not given a response. 

At the same time, as I conclude this issue, I request the inter-ministerial intervention so that as the Ministry of Disaster comes in to give the small relief, which is always two kilogrammes of posho and maybe one and a half kilogrammes of maize, which is not enough, I request the Ministry of Agriculture to intervene by giving such people planting materials like seeds and cassava so that these people are assisted to come out of such a catastrophe. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Disaster has struck the people of Kamwenge; houses and crops have been destroyed. 

2.15
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I sympathise with the people who have been affected by the catastrophe but as usual, the Ministry of Agriculture is always responding to provision of seed or planting materials generally within the limits of the available resources.

So, I would advise her to give us her estimates so that we can consider her request. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the hon. Member for Kamwenge, is that clear? 

MS NSHAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister of Agriculture and say that if it is like that, I am going to engage my district officials to make a request and as they submit it to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, they also give a copy to the Minister of Agriculture so that we are given planting materials. 

I thank you.   

2.16
MR DENIS HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your permission, I rise on a matter of urgent public importance that needs a response from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

In Alebtong District and some district local governments in Northern Uganda, the veterinary team in partnership with their respective district local governments have confirmed the outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease. Specifically, in Alebtong District, a quarantine has already been declared.

This Parliament is aware that starting in the last financial year, the Government of Uganda started on the long march to restock Northern Uganda with a budgetary provision of Shs 20 billion going to the four sub regions of West Nile, Lango, Acholi and Teso.

We are worried as leaders from the sub regions that the outbreak of this Foot and Mouth Disease will most likely jeopardise the ongoing restocking programme. 

May I, therefore, seek for an explanation highlighting the key action points that will be taken by the ministry in charge of this sub-sector to avert this crisis? I would also like to appeal to you that may the minister brief this temple of justice on what the ministry will do in order to save the lives of our people including those that were given under the government programme of restocking. 

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the distinguished Member that the Ministry of Agriculture has already procured vaccines to vaccinate animals against this disease. But once it occurs, it is necessary to have quarantine and I want to assure him that a quarantine is not a matter of punishing the farmers. It is a mandatory move within the control of those kinds of diseases. So, he must not see it as punitive but rather a necessary measure to control the spread of the disease. But very soon our veterinary officers will come to you because I am sure the vaccines have been procured already. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, how soon is soon?

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, I am going to take up this matter and have the veterinary officers come immediately to provide a response. 

2.18
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on two matters –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, one.

MR AMURIAT: Okay, one matter. I will probably bring the other one tomorrow. (Laughter) I will then concentrate on one matter, that is of a continental nature. As you may have read in both local and international media, it is common knowledge that there is an outbreak of the deadly Ebola Virus in some countries of Africa, especially West Africa. Notable among those that are badly hit are Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. This outbreak has so far claimed lives of about 660 individuals in those West African countries. As a result of that, a number of countries have put measures to see that this virus does not spread into their countries. 

So far, from the latest news, Sierra Leone has declared holidays; schools have remained closed, public places are no go areas and the President of Sierra Leone has decided to postpone his trip to America. 

Close to home, here in Kenya, there is a link because people travel. They come through airports. Kenya has put in measures to ensure that cases of Ebola Virus –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give to hon. Amuriat is that on breaking news this afternoon, there was information that Mr Justin Abwola has died in Kitgum Hospital as a suspected case of Ebola Virus. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, my dear sister, for giving me information. Indeed, I am not surprised by that information because it was reported not long ago that there were cases of Ebola in DRC. You know how porous the border between Congo and Uganda is. 

I would like to ask our good Government, what is being done to ensure that the people of Uganda are secure and that the country will remain free of Ebola given the deadly nature of this virus? What is Government doing to avert a possible catastrophe?

I have been to Entebbe and to the border points around the country. I have seen absolutely nothing happening in those border points to mitigate the possible risks that this country face in a possible outbreak of the Ebola virus. So, I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to respond to this very important question. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question is directed to the government and the government will take it on. 

2.24
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): It is sad, Mr Speaker, that a Ugandan has died in Kitgum Hospital of suspected Ebola. From here, we are going to call the Minister of Health to confirm and take necessary action. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was the question of how we are monitoring the border entry points into Uganda and that cases are screened to avoid the disease from outside the country.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: For this one, I will also ask the Minister of Health to come and brief the House – (Interjections) – we can ask the minister to come today before the House rises. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt honourable, it is important that the minister makes this statement today because we are adjourning plenary today and the country needs to know. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

2.25
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope I will have the courage to speak because I still feel the aches of my suffering population in Rubaga South, right from Kibuye, Ndeeba, Nalukolongo, Natete, Busega. 

Pursuant to Article 28(1) of the Constitution, which guarantees the right of an individual to be heard and pursuant to Article 28(3) which states that one cannot be judged to be wrong by assumption, there must be proof that one is guilty and knowing very well that even the guilty people who are condemned in Luzira Prison, are entitled to a fair living, I wish to report that the situation in Rubaga South, where summary evictions were done, is alarming! Many of the victims of the evictions are children, disabled people, the aged and the sick. 

Mr Speaker, I beg Government to give a statement as to whether it has any arrangement to provide relief aid to those people. Many of them are totally stranded, they are in the dark, in the open, have no food and there is no guarantee that they will get food. The situation is alarming. 

It is also my concern to know from Parliament which you head, Mr Speaker, whether the committee assigned to treat the petition has started doing its work. It will be an absurdity for the same committee to go to the site when the riddles of destruction have disappeared. I propose that they go on site in time to see the destruction mounted on my people. Good enough, the Leader of Government Business is a lawyer and the issues I have articulated should be going straight to his ears without meandering. 

I thank you.

2.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, if you recall, the hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi brought a petition to this House which the Speaker refereed to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. But on the same day, hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba raised a question that required a response from the Minister in charge of KCCA. The minister made that response here upon which Members debated and raised more issues, to which the minister responded yesterday. 

We concluded the matter yesterday by saying that since there was a petition before the committee of Parliament, we should let the committee do its work. We also required the Minister in charge of KCCA to interface with that committee to provide the details most especially, regarding the attachments that were brought with the petition.

So, Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the need to provide relief to these people. I am going to get in touch with the ministry in charge. However, I would like to say that the issue of the committee going to interact with the people early enough is not the work of the Executive. 

I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, the issues that relate to the work of the committee, we will be making administrative communication to that committee so that this matter is expedited.

2.30
MR ODOO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here on matter of national importance. On 24 July at 10.00 p.m. lightning struck Buramba Primary School in my constituency and killed eight pupils on the spot. Fourteen were critically injured and admitted at Kampala International University teaching hospital in Ishaka. It was a big disaster.

On 25 July, we organised a mass service for the dead. The problem now is that because of that incident – we have tried to get some donations for putting up lightening arresters. But what shocked us was that the classrooms that were affected had been constructed by Government by a Government contractor without lightening arrester. We note that is one of the shoddy works that has been done by Government engineers. 

My appeal is that whenever these classrooms are constructed by Government contractors, such provisions should be included. On behalf of the school, the constituency also appeals to Government – yes, a technical staff report from education is going to come, from the RDC and the Municipality Town Clerk next week to the Minister of Disaster, which will be copied to the Minister of Education so that something is done for that school and all the other schools in Uganda because –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, my hon. Colleague, for yielding the Floor. Lightening is rampant across the country. It strikes not only institutional buildings but also households, houses where people dwell.

On the night of 26 July, lightning struck a village in Kanyum Sub County in Kumi District. It set a hut in which a woman and her three children were sleeping on fire. The next, we buried the charred bodies of this woman and her children. The sight was not a good one to look at.

So, while my colleague talks about institutional buildings, I think we need to widen the horizon of this particular – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is not a debate. This is a matter of urgent public importance raised by from the Member for Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality stating a fact of what happened in a particular area. It is not a debate and so, we cannot widen it. He is only reporting to the House a disaster that has happened in his place so that the minister can take note and respond. If you have an additional one, you can say so. Otherwise, you cannot say that we should widen the debate because we are not debating this.

MR AMURIAT: That is the addition information I wanted to give to the House. Thank you for the guidance.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In conclusion, we appeal to Government and the relevant ministries to make strict conditions during construction of such schools. You know these are communities and  - even sometime back, it struck another school called Bunyarigi Primary School in the same month except that no pupil died some buildings had lightening conductors. 

Thank you.

2.35
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, I send my condolences to the families of the children who lost their lives in that incident. But allow me to also let the House know that installing lightening arresters in all schools or educational institutions is a requirement, no matter whether the school is being constructed by local government or just centrally procured.

On this particular school, this is an isolated incident because it is a new school where the ministry expected the contractor to have installed lightening arresters on all buildings. We are currently looking forward to receiving an official report from the District Education Officer of Bushenyi, which shall be discussed in the ministry. 

In the wider perspective, we are currently compiling all education institutions that do not have lightening arresters in order to come up with the budgetary requirement to be tabled before Cabinet and Parliament so that all schools whether old new are installed with lightening arresters. 

Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been raising issues concerning national importance. For example, I recall CAAIP demolished people’s houses and they had nowhere to stay. I raised it but it was not answered. Not only that; Members raised issues relating to their constituencies but we do not receive clear explanations, Mr Speaker.

So, is it procedurally right for us as Members of Parliament, who represent people, to continue asking and they pile up; they do not answer, they do not give solutions? Should we even stop bringing these issues here because we do not see the use of bringing such matter here? I thought it was for public importance and for assisting our people who are suffering. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request you to guide us on what we should really do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedurally, some of the issues do not even qualify to be raised as matters of urgent public importance but because of the laxity of the ministers in responding to questions that are asked by Members, Members have resorted to use this as a way of seeking quick redress to issues that remain burning before their constituents and the people they represent.
That is the avenue that they now find convenient to bring these issues such that they can get a direct response.

Typically, under this procedure it would be a matter that has happened yesterday or the other day, it is important and urgent then you would bring in these other provisions. Because of the failure to implement the rules properly, we have now tried to accommodate the concerns of Members. 

It is sometimes not right to raise a matter that happened last year as a matter of urgent public importance but because a Member is stranded with a question, and it is not resolved and there is no way they have raised questions and ministers have not responded so the only recourse is to come under urgent public importance and we have been trying to be accommodative because these matters are not helping - (Mr Dombo rose_)

On what point do you rise, hon. Dombo?

2.39
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence. Whereas you have wisely guided, I listened to the minister’s statement about Government schools and public buildings and wondered what is going to happen to the private institutions because you know that provision of education right now in the country is mainly from private institutions.

The minister is saying that they are collecting information on the Government institutions. I would like to find out whether there is specific policy requiring whoever constructs a building that is going to accommodate many people to have lightening arresters.

The other is whether Parliament is secure because the way the weather is behaving; the other day, it struck a beach in America and people died. You cannot be sure where it is going to strike next, are Members of Parliament safe?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister the issue is, do we have regulations governing the installation of lightening arresters? Do the building rules have anything to say about these things? Is it any new thing or is it something that people have ignored and it is a question of enforcement?

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, in the Ministry of Education and Sports we have a regulation that requires all education institutions, whether for learning and teaching or even for other purposes to have lightening arresters. But I also recall that Cabinet took a position that all Government buildings must have lightening arresters and that is under the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication.

When we deal with public institutions in the Ministry of Education and Sports, we are also responsible for the policy and direction in private institutions. So, that means that the hon. Dombo should know that when we collect data for public schools, it is for purposes of us getting how much money to implement the installation of lightening arresters but we shall also give directives to all private institutions to install lightening arresters in all their education institutions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is in the building rules somewhere that all buildings must have lightening arrestors especially those located in areas like Uganda. 

Hon. Members, in the gallery this afternoon we have pupils from Kirinya Parents’ Primary school in Wakiso District they are represented by hon. Ssemujju Nganda and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They have come to observe the business of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils from Fountain Boarding Primary School in Lira Municipality they are represented by hon. Jimmy Akena and hon. Atim Joy Ongom. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils from St Agnes Catholic Girls Boarding primary School in Nagalama Mukono District they are represented by hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko and hon. Peace Kusasira. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MR MUWUMA: Thank, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Hon. Katoto raised a pertinent issue, which you also observed and echoed that Members keep raising issues here and they die silently whereby we do not get responses from Government.

It would have been wise that the Leader of Government Business gets to the Floor of Parliament, assures the country and Members that something will happen. We have raised very many issues, which ending passing and dying silently. 

To justify that particular matter, on several occasions when you are in that chair, I have raised issues of national importance regarding disasters in Iganga; so many areas hit and you have made directives. We have written several times with no response and the people of Iganga were asking whether they are part of Uganda and part of the beneficiaries. So, we need some commitment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if it was the directive of the Speaker and it has been ignored, you have a responsibility to notify the Speaker so that they can step up the order to the responsible people. 

But if you have written letters and nobody has responded and you have decided to keep quiet, the Speaker will not know that the Speaker’s orders have not been fulfilled. So, next time, get recourse from the Speaker’s office so that we can move forward.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

1) ON BANANA BACTERIAL WILT AND COFFEEE WILT IN THE COUNTRY

2.46
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Mr Speaker, I would like to start by giving a statement on the control of Banana Wilt disease.

Since the year 2001, the country has had a threat of Banana Bacterial Wilt disease. The disease was first reported in Kayunga and Mukono districts in 2001 where it was spreading rapidly and destroying banana plantations. The disease incidence was highest in 2006 when it ranged between 19 to 94 per cent.

Unfortunately, by 2010 through concerted efforts by MAAIF and other stakeholders especially local Governments and farmers the incidence has been reduced considerably. 
The Banana Bacterial Wilt disease is caused by a bacterium called Xanthomonas, which is a very devastating disease and it has been reported in most of the growing districts in Uganda. Unless controlled, it is capable of causing up to 90 per cent loss of the banana crop, which is equivalent in our sums $ 360 million per year in economic terms.

The Ministry of agriculture and other stakeholders have developed national action plan for the control of this disease and that action plan has been code-named “Kick the Banana Wilt out of Uganda” and was launched in Bukiro sub country headquarters in Mbarara District on the 12th of April 2013. Necessary structures in form of task force teams at district, sub county and community levels were instituted to control and spearhead the control of this disease. At a national level, a steering committee, chaired by the Minister of State for Agriculture is there to oversee and guide the implementation of the action plan for renewed effort. Now, the target was to reduce the disease-incidence from 42 per cent in April 2013 to at least five per cent or less by April this year.

Mr Speaker, in that direction, there has been some considerable progress made; between April 2013 and May 2014, MAAIF committed Shs 4.27 billion towards the control of this disease and on the activities in the districts. It started off by organising four regional workshops to train trainers; namely, the district agricultural officers, district production officers and district NAADS coordinators and NARO scientists. The first meeting of the first training was in Kabarole – that happened on 25th and 26th July 2013; Mbale between 25th and 26th July 2013; Mukono, also on 25th and 26th July 2013 and; Mbarara on 21st and 22nd July 2013.

We also printed 5,000 copies of trainers’ manual and which were distributed to the districts. The promotion of the Banana-Wilt control awareness campaign and information flow. Again, here we had 50,000 posters and brochures in eight local languages, distributed to those districts during December 2013. And again 70,000 spot-messages on eight regional FM radios were aired between July and December 2013.

Now, the buck-stopping was done in 61 district local governments on by-laws formulation and enforcement. Sixty-one districts were supported and guided on the formulation of the by-laws during this exercise. Disbursement of funds to local governments was done in the districts.

During December 2013, 39 districts received a total of Shs 1.938 billion from NAADS and NARO also contributed so much to the control of that disease.

In April 2014, 24 districts received a total of so much from NARO to control the disease.

Monitoring banana bacterial-wilt control activities in 41 districts in the south – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, when you say, “…so much” what will the Hansard record? (Laughter)

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Oh, monitoring Banana Bacterial-Wilt control activities in 41 districts in the south, west and eastern Uganda and their sub-counties. The exercise was done during April 2014. The 24 districts of central region, which received funds in April 2014, were monitored during May and June 2014.
Now, Mr Speaker, there have been some significant achievements in that direction.
Overall, Banana Bacterial Wilt prevalence has reduced from an average of 42 per cent in April 2013 to less than 21.3 per cent in April 2014. Some districts such as Mbarara, Ntungamo and Isingiro attained a recorded incidence of below 3.5 per cent, which is extremely good.

The banana yield has increased from an average of 6.4 tonnes per acre in April 2013 to an average of 7.8 tonnes per acre in April 2014 as a result of some of the control measures.

Of the 63 districts monitored, 37 had bylaws in place; districts of Mayuge, Kiboga, Iganga and Jinja had no bylaws in place yet.  Seventy- six per cent of the sub-counties monitored are imposing the bylaws. None of the 63 districts monitored had contributed funds from their own budgets beyond what MAAIF had distributed for Banana Bacterial Wilt disease control. Except for the districts of Mityana, Ntoroko and Mbale, all had monitored and mobilised the public for community action to control the disease.

Research aimed at producing resistant materials is also going on. Of course, there are still a few challenges because some districts like Mityana, Mbale and Ntoroko delayed in utilising the funds disbursed during December 2013. Some districts like Ntoroko, Bundibugyo, Kabale, and Mityana still have high disease prevalence above 25 per cent and we are continuing to encourage them to control the disease.

There are also at least 18 districts, which grow bananas and they neighbour the 63 districts that have already been supported by MAAIF yet, these districts have not received any funds due to budgetary constraints. These districts that include Buyende, Kaliro, Namayingo, Kibuku, Budaka, Busia, Tororo, Kaberamaido, Serere, Ngora, Kumi, Soroti, Buliisa, Lira, Apac, Kole, Oyam and Dokolo are yet to be considered and immediately we get funding, we shall cover them and ensure that the disease does not spread. Even for the districts that were funded, some counties were not yet covered and therefore, we still have to cover them.

There is massive planting of bananas in Northern Uganda, especially in Acholi and Lango sub-regions, which traditionally, have not been banana-growing areas. Extra efforts are needed and we shall put that effort to support them so that right away from the start, banana-production is done correctly using healthy planting materials.

Mr Speaker, that is the statement on the Banana Bacterial Wilt disease. 

Now, I want to move to the Coffee-Wilt Disease progress report.

Again, on this coffee disease, in 1993, a new devastating disease of Robusta coffee appeared in Uganda, which was identified as Fusarium – those are Latin names and you can pronounce them as you like. (Laughter) Coffee-Wilt disease is a fungal disease, which attacks and kills coffee trees by blocking the vascular bundles. It spreads through wind, water, implements, animals and human activity. By 2002, the Coffee-Wilt disease had affected at least 90 per cent of Robusta coffee farms and destroyed more than 45 per cent –(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank, you, Mr Speaker. The point of procedure I am raising is that: When we raised this issue of coffee disease – hon. Tashobya and I – it was not on Coffee-Wilt; we raised issues concerning the fig-tree borer, which has attacked the coffee shambas and it is a serious issue. It is not at all related to Coffee-Wilt; yet, the minister has come with a report, giving progress on Coffee-Wilt, which we did not raise here. 

Is he procedurally right to continue reporting on Coffee-Wilt yet we were concerned with the fig-tree borer, which has attacked the coffee shambas in the whole of Western Uganda, particularly in Sheema and Kajara?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, it is true that the issue that was raised was to do with the disease quoted by the honourable member –(Laughter)– not the Coffee-Wilt. Two Members raised this issue – and I was actually sitting here when they did. But now you are presenting a report on the Coffee-Wilt disease.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, the communication I got – and as you can see on the Order Paper – was on Coffee-Wilt Disease. But if they want some information on coffee borer or some other thing, then I will ask for some time to go and compile that information and report back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that would be right because the issue that was raised by the Members concerns what is happening right now and it is affecting the farmers. And the intervention that the government is making to distribute these seedlings but the seedlings are being attacked. That is why this question was raised and that means this response is not targeting the actual question that was raised.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I also raised the issue of Banana Wilt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one has been handled.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: As we shelve of the report on Coffee Wilt, I have a lot of question marks on the first part. I do not know whether, procedurally, we are going to shelve the entire report or we can tackle this one and wait for the coffee borer -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should we debate the Banana Wilt separately? Let us proceed with it then. So, hon. minister, the issue of coffee is deferred because the response is not directed to the question but we will deal with the issue of Banana Wilt. [Hon. Member: “Guidance”] Hon. Members, I always talk about this issue of guidance. Yes, procedure.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, this is not procedure but I want to inform the minister that as he comes back to Parliament, there is also a similar problem in Bugisu region where the beans turn black and fall off. So, in the statement, hon. minister, you could include why this is so. We have Buginyanya Agricultural Research Centre under NARO. What is their work? Why are they not helping farmers in the region?

3.00
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Maybe, we could give the minister a chance to tell us the difference between coffee wilt and coffee borer because in our areas we have different diseases and maybe this is also important.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It may be important but it was never raised.

MR WAIRA: Yes, but we have issues concerning coffee diseases. If the minister is here, where is the problem?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have ways in which matters are brought on the Floor of Parliament and this is not one of the ways. So, let us handle the issue of Banana Wilt and then the minister will come back on the issue of the coffee tree borer.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance but there was a question and with your permission, I could respond to it because I know about it. There is a difference between coffee black borers and Coffee Wilt Disease. The two are different. The Coffee Wilt is a bacterial disease and the borer is an insect so that is the major difference.

If you want a comprehensive statement on coffee diseases, I can provide that because regarding Arabica coffee in Mbale for instance, the biggest threat in my view is the Antasia pest and I think Leaf Rust is the most troublesome disease. There are others in that range. So, I would seek your guidance, Mr Speaker. If they want something on a specific issue like this one, I am prepared and if they want a comprehensive review of the coffee pests and diseases, I am also prepared. I know the subject because I was –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the matter that was raised in the House was the issue of insect borer; the insects that are destroying coffee plantations. That is what was raised here. That was the concern raised by the Member for Sheema and the Member for Kajara. So, that is what they wanted the response on; how we are going to deal with this but now, your statement is dealing with the issue of Coffee Wilt.

What we can do is separate the two and you bring the statement on this particular issue and then we can have interaction on it.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish the minister could get interested in the Hansard records so that when he is responding, he looks at what issues were raised during that time as he prepares to report to Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Also hon. Minister, while we wait for that statement, you already know that there are these issues. So, you should also intervene so that by the time you are coming to give a statement to the House, you will also tell us about what interventions you have made to deal with the problem that is current.

3.04
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I have looked at the statement of the minister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we are only dealing with the Banana Wilt now.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I am amazed to know and to be informed that Shs 4.7 billion has already been sent on this control but when you look at what this money did, it is the usual problem that this country grapples with. Money was spent on seminars, some 5000 copies of brochures were printed, money was dispatched to districts for control but the minister does not tell us what exactly the control is about. What is it that they are doing?

He is talking about bylaws but he does not in any way refer to any specifically and say this bylaw is about this or that so that as a Member of Parliament, I can go back to my constituency and ask my district whether the necessary bylaw the minister informed us about is in place.

There is need to find out exactly what this Shs 4.27 billion did because all that I know is what we are being told in the villages that once this banana wilt attacks a given plantation, you have to uproot and burn. Now, I do not know whether the Shs 4.27 billion was spent to only disseminate that information. 

I can tell the minister that I am a banana grower as I informed Parliament the other time. I come from a region that fundamentally depends on bananas as a staple food. I am from Butambala and in the central region and I am a local leader there but I have not been informed by any authority anywhere about any effort to this end.

I would bet if any MP in this Parliament is aware that there is this kind of control anywhere in any of the districts that they come from. Therefore, my bone of contention is that this falls far short of a statement that can come from a minister. Actually, it is not a pointer to anything. What are you saying? What can I take back to the people and say, “There is money spent?” They go for seminars, they print brochures” - to do what? What is the information carried anywhere?

Therefore, I would like to challenge the minister that this is inadequate and what is saddening is that Shs 4.27 billion has been wasted. I think the Committee on Agriculture should interest itself on the fact that this kind of money was spent to do PR. This is how the entire national budget is consistently wasted and that is why when we talk about the revolution in agriculture, we fundamentally know that the bulk of the money goes to seminars, workshops, cars and computers –(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that, Mr Minister, it should be clearly put to Ugandans that the only cure for Banana Wilt is uprooting and burning and planting afresh. I have done it and people are doing it but this issue of telling LCVs to go to homes and tell people to cut bananas down, it is not working. 

The information I wanted to give is that the money that was spent was inadequate and did not assist people. (Interjections) So, we should continue with the issue of uprooting.


MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: As I conclude, I am also aware, where the minister should get concerned, that the major cause of Banana Wilt Disease in this country is over flooding of fake drugs on the market. 

I will divert a bit and tell you about cattle. I also rear cattle at home. Recently, I went somewhere in Container Village and bought a can of drugs which controls “Kawawa” in my language, for they are some small flies and ticks. I sprayed them in the morning but in the evening they were there. They were attacking en mass and when I asked what was happening, I was told there are drugs from Germany, others from India and Malaysia and the costs and effects are different. So, this becomes complicated when it comes to controlling diseases in the country.  

I think it is adequate for us to say that all there is in terms of research is to burn and transplant. No, what research has gone in to conclude that there is nothing we can do other than that? Nothing but only seminars.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, for this paper here - if I was not in Parliament, I would have torn it but because we are in the House of representatives and I give it due dignity, I will simply not take it home but leave it here. 

I thank you.
  
3.10
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are equally affected by the Banana Bacterial Wilt. However, I would like to appreciate the ministry for the initiative particularly for the messages that have been running on the radios. At least, whenever I put Radio West, I hear those messages.

Two, in my district, they have come up with by-laws both at district and sub-county levels. These by-laws have helped people to contain the spread of Banana Bacterial Wilt and I think this depends on district to district and how they came up with that. 

However, I want to come out with these four regional workshops to train the trainers at the regional level. I think this money was wasted. For us, we have a saying in Runyankole that the eyes of the people are in the hands and, therefore, if that training was to be conducted, it should have been taken nearer to the people especially the farmers who deal directly with the plantations. These people that you train do not go down there and if it had been the initiative of the RDCs and District Chairpersons to come up with such by-laws, I do not think we could have benefitted from this scheme.

Hon. Minister, another thing that I would like to inquire from you, is how far have your scientists gone with coming up with an alternative  banana plant like you have done with clonal coffee that has persisted the wilt? Is there any hope that we have an alternative crop that can resist the Banana Bacterial Wilt – (Interruption) 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to the Member and this House that those who have adhered to what should be done on Banana Bacterial Wilt, the wilt has actually reduced. In my constituency of Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality there is a place called Kyandago - the whole banana plantations in that sub-county and parish were wiped out but when we started stumping, burning and following the by-laws, it has actually reduced in the whole district and those areas where it started, they have even started growing bananas and their yields are good. 

I want to assure you that the challenge is with us as politicians and farmers to also adhere to those regulations. That wilt is actually not as big as Coffee Wilt. For the bananas, just sensitise the people to cut and stump – we have even reached an extent of arresting some of the farmers who do not follow those guidelines and the bananas are now actually coming up. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would wish to request the minister that in future, such workshops that are put in regional areas, this money should be given to the district local governments such that they can traverse their local areas in terms of sensitisation like hon. Tayebwa has said so that people can implement. Even equipping our local vigilantes to ensure that those communities that do not comply with uprooting and burning, they can be able to handle the plants. 

I thank you.

3.14
MS FLRORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to appreciate the statement given by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  

There is very great improvement since the ministry intervened in the control of the Banana Bacterial Wilt.  For example, when you see that workshops are one of the ways of disseminating information, we should not talk against workshops. How do people get information? Through workshops, they can be trained through these workshops and so, if it is one of the ways of giving information to the people, we should not criticise it.

I would really like to appreciate the fact that the disease has decreased from 42 percent in April 2013 to less than 21.8 percent in April 2014 and even the yield has increased. So, my colleagues, let us appreciate the efforts that have been made by the ministry –(Interruption) 

MRS OGWAL:  Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the contribution, which the Member is making. However, I would want to know how the rural woman in your village and you know, I have been to your village - will get into that workshop. I just want you to clarify to contribute and you have appreciated the importance of workshops and how people are sensitised and how they learn. But now, you are speaking on behalf of the rural woman, the rural youth, that grandmother, that aunt of yours. How are they entering that workshop to be educated and to be sensitised? How? Can you clarify to us? 

I thank you.

MS MUTAYBULE: Thank you very much, hon. Colleague, for raising that issue. I want to give you an example of Namutumba District, where we had this problem of the banana wilt and we are told by the minister that money was sent to districts and my district incidentally benefitted from this and these workshops were done up to parish level where even the ordinary woman could go and attend these workshops –(Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am reading on Google about BWX which is Banana Wilt Disease management and want to read one paragraph: “Much of the work in controlling BWX has been done through educational campaigns, raising awareness of the disease to the banana farmers. For example, in Uganda and Tanzania where the governments have actively worked alongside farmers to help limit the spread of the disease, over 90 per cent control of BWX has been reported. Moreover, much of the information taught to the farmers can be used in the control of other banana infecting diseases.”

Mr Speaker, this answers the idea of having workshops. (Interjections) You cannot educate people or create awareness –(Interruption) 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. The honourable member knows that we sit on the same committee of Local Government and Public Service. The information I am giving you is from page 3 of the statement given by the minister. The minister says that at least, 63 districts have not been supported by Ministry of Agriculture and fisheries yet 18 districts have not received any funds due to budgetary constraints. 

Hon. Members, I would like to inform you that these 18 districts have not received any money due to budgetary constraint. And if we are not giving them money that means we need to reduce on workshops so that the districts, which are not receiving money can start getting part of this money in other forms rather than spending all of it on workshops. 

I thank you.

MS BOONA: One of the honourable members asked a question about our rural woman in the village; how does she get this information? This money got to the district and the seminars we are talking about took place in Mbarara. I attended both of them and this money was disbursed to the sub county. The sub county was supposed to move to the parishes, cell by cell. Because they could not go cell by cell, meetings were invited at the parishes. When the meeting is at the parish, the rural people have to walk to the parish, which is the first centre in the administrative setting. The seminars were held at the parish level; I was invited in my parish, Rwakishakizi, as a farmer and as a leader and I attended. There were announcements on radio and in the market; that is how information was supposed to reach the local farmers. 

Now, if some districts did not follow these rules, then certainly the information did not reach the people. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you, hon. Colleagues, for giving me that information which is very useful. My colleagues, the minister has stated categorically clear that in December, 2013, the main district received Shs 1.9 billion. And also in April 2014, 24 districts received Shs 0.716 billion. This is an on-going process. The minister has been able to get money for those districts and I know that even the other districts will get money; Namutumba got. 

3.22
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This morning, we interfaced with the Minister of Agriculture to deliberate on a number of issues including Banana Bacterial Wilt. He told us that in the current budget that is before the House for approval, we have a funding gap of Shs 4 billion for the control of Banana Bacterial Wilt. The Shs 4.27 billion that the minister is talking about, thank God was an intervention by the World Bank. 

What a pity, that it is others who appear to care for Uganda while Uganda folds her hands. If it were not for the intervention of the World Bank, even the achievements we are talking about would not be there. Moreover, the banana is a staple food that is greatly relied on in our country. 

Mr Speaker, I have a very big challenge with the Ministry of Finance. Just as we are beginning this debate on Banana Bacterial Wilt, at least one Minister of Finance should be here. But these –(Interruption) 

MR JUNJURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member has made some serious statement regarding the care by foreigners and not Ugandans. I just want to know whether World Bank made a donation or whether it is a loan or a grant; perhaps our children will pay in future. So, I need clarification, what do you mean?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the information I am giving is what we were told by the minister this morning. Ideally, the cry is that the government part is not forthcoming; that is why we have a funding gap of Shs 4 billion. That drives me to strategies that we take as a country in control of pests and diseases. 

Time and again, this Parliament has recommended that money for emergency control of diseases must be housed with the relevant ministry. As we speak now, Ministry of Agriculture cannot move; they have so many problems. Most parts of the country are under quarantine for FMD; they do not have the money. The Ministry of Finance cannot release the money; we do not have vaccines for our animals. Now, the Banana Bacterial Wilt is destroying our crops. 

I think the Ministry of Finance should cooperate and get money for emergency disease control directly under the docket of the Ministry of Agriculture so that they can promptly respond. The achievements that the minister is talking about – that they have reduced the Banana Bacterial Wilt from 42 per cent to the current 21 per cent, if nothing is done, the efforts that have been made will be wasted. 

I beg that the Ministry of Finance cooperates. And when we are debating this issue, Leader of Government Business, please, convey our plea to the Minister of Finance; these are issues relating to finances; at least one of them should be available to respond to us rather than leaving us to talk to ourselves. 

Finally, there is need to prioritise research. The minister stated that research is on-going on the control of Banana Bacterial Wilt. But how much money do we put in research; not only in Banana Bacterial Wilt, but for a number of challenges that agriculture faces now? We put very little. Even for research, it is well-wishers who finance us. 

This is a wakeup call for Government of Uganda to put meaningful attention to agriculture if our citizenry has to survive. 

3.27
MS MASIKO KABAKUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the information of the House, Bujenje is the food basket of Masindi District and that entire region. Actually, the best Matooke came from Bujenje until we were hit by this Banana Bacterial Wilt. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the minister for the statement, but I think there are a few clarifications he has to give. On page two, he said they have committed between April to May 2014, Shs 4.2 billion – Mr Speaker, the minister is being engaged by the hon. Fred Mwesigye – I need clarification, Mr Minister. On that same page, there is No. (i) where you say that 39 districts received 1.9 from NAADS and NARO and another 0.7 billion. Is this part of the Shs 4.7 billion or just an addition?
The Banana Bacterial Wilt has been with us for a long time. But it is interesting for the minister to say that research aimed at producing resistant materials is still on-going. One time, you told us that you had broken through and you even supplied some materials that were said to be resistant but they did not live to the test of the time. What happened? And now, what do we tell our people? What should they expect?

Lastly, on the issue of seminars and workshops, I am glad that Uganda is being praised internationally – I do not know how they picked that but these are the figures you gave – I thought maybe they are using these figures to lobby for more funds and that is why we are now running to the World Bank for loans to control this wilt. 

However, if we do not find our own home grown solution, it might be difficult for us to keep depending on foreigners to fight this disease. The success stories have been told. So, can we learn and spread those success stories to other parts of our country?

And may be briefly, some Member said that agriculture should be helped to grow. How is this going to happen when agriculture has not extension services in place? We all know that agricultural extension services were –(Interjections)– someone is saying they were killed by the NAADS. 

So, even when you work through politicians, when there are no people to follow up, it may be very difficult to sustain this campaign. I do not want to give you my stories where I keep searching for help from people to come and advise me on my mango, oranges, coffee and banana Wilt. If I have to get those people, how about the common peasant in my constituency in this country? When I fail in Masindi, I can ring Kampala, I get one or two because I can afford but I think as you concentrate on fighting this wilt, please, look at the need for extension services in this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the rules guide us on this particular of debate to one hour. That is the rule. If you are in doubt, look at Rule 44 (2) of the Rules of Procedure. We have exceeded one hour. So, I will now ask the Member for Bunyole to use just two minutes before I ask the minister to respond.

3.32
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week, a prominent person in this country made a statement about the hasty implementation of the liberalisation and privatisation of activities of Government. What we are getting now is the effect and if we do not deal with it, we are going to continually deal with symptoms and ad hoc measures when we are unable to deal with the major problem.

What am I saying, Mr Speaker? We liberalised disease control and so, we expect every small district in this country to be in charge of disease in their jurisdiction when diseases do not require a passport; bacteria are just blown by the air but here we are limiting their control to small districts that may not even be having the funding.

I will start with the point as advanced by the hon. Kabakumba Matsiko. It is not going to help this country, however many seminars we conduct, if we do not get a person teaching the farmers every day. (Interruption)

MS LOWILA OKETAYOT: The information I would like to give is that it is not training alone. But also when you look at the training that was conducted – training the technical people – training them about what? See the list – DAOs, DPOs – the technical people with all the required information on Banana Bacterial  Wilt. So, I wonder what they were trained on. They should have been the ones to train the farmers. That is why I want to believe that a lot of money was wasted in these seminars. 

Thank you.

MR DOMBO: That is very good information. The other issue is that –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If we do not get address the country – we do not a regulatory authority and if it is there, it is not doing its work on the importation of drugs in the country.

Last week, I wanted to plant maize and I bought Round-Up from the dealers in Kampala. But when I sprayed the grass, it became greener –(Laughter)– yet, I had spent a lot of money. But those are the drugs that we import, government regulates but - So, if this can happen to Round-Up, how about the control of other diseases?

The final point, Mr Speaker, is: we have talked about bylaws. Recently, as we conducted parliamentary outreaches, one of the biggest challenge we came across on the ground is that many districts have passed bylaws and forwarded them to the Attorney-General’s Office but nobody has attended to them. That was a major complaint in most of the districts that we visited. 

So, I do not know how the Bushenyi people managed to do it. I do not know how the Bushenyi people managed to do it, whether it was a general campaign because it was a common problem? I do not know.  Otherwise, those are some of issues that I believe we can collectively work on. Otherwise, we must rethink disease control, planting materials and the inter-linkage between research and the operations on the ground. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank all the honourable members for their valuable contributions. But I would like to thank most those who have given testimony of the success in the field. Clearly, there has been significant reduction from 42 per cent to 22 per cent and to even 2.5 per cent in some districts. To me, this is a remarkable thing and an effort that we must maintain.

In terms of research, I want to inform the House that we have research scientists who are capable of extracting genes from certain varieties of crops to others. For example, in the line of bananas, we have been able to successfully transfer genes from spirit pepper and incorporated them into bananas and trials are underway being evaluated for this kind of success. If we succeed as we expect, that will be a breakthrough in the control of this disease.

On funding, which someone raised on the basis that we got some help from the World Bank. I want to say, yes, if you have a friend to help you – certainly, the World Bank came at our request because we needed to tackle this issue head on.

On training, I would like to inform you that we were training trainers. This is an issue of multiplier effect; you have to train people to help you train others and this happens in every situation. (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Minister. The honourable member from Bujenje raised a very important issue. You are holding a very important ministry where 85 per cent of Ugandans are involved. When I was growing up there were extension workers. When I was growing up, and I am sure you also recall from when you were growing up, there were extension workers, agriculture officers who used to go from village to village, advising people how to grow bananas and coffee. As I speak, the wilt has killed all the bananas.

So, we would like to know what your ministry is doing about extension workers because we would not have had all these problems if these people were there.

The bananas are gone; Bugisu which used to be a basket for this country, bananas are no longer there. What are you doing about that?

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, the way I have been following this debate – and this is the clarification I am seeking - which are the major banana-growing areas in Uganda? We have heard Members from Mbarara and they have given evidence and in central Uganda, here Masaka and Bugerere were major banana-growing areas. Members have given all this but what exactly took place in central Uganda?

In addition, the minister said that there is massive planting of bananas in Northern Uganda. I moved in Northern Uganda during the OPM scandal; I visited these areas where there was massive harrowing. I have not seen major areas in Lango and Acholi, where there is massive –(Interruption)

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, hon. Ssewungu raised the issue of major banana growing areas in Uganda. I went to school here in Buganda in the 1960’s and 1970’s. During that time, it is true matooke that feed Kampala came from Kayunga, Bugerere, Masaka and to some extent from Mbale. But especially here in Buganda, most of those people working in those plantations were immigrant workers. When these people finally left, banana collapsed. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. My good friend, hon. Baba, is aware and he has stated so, that in the 1960’s Buganda was a rich harvest of bananas. At the advent of cooperative society, Buganda transited from manual labour to semi-mechanisation. That is during the UPC Government. We needed less of manpower because we were going modern. But in 1986, when the NRM came to power and abolished cooperative societies, everything collapsed and Buganda went down the road.

Is the hon. Minister, serving under NRM Government that collapsed cooperative societies, and demolished even tractors that were at parish level, in order to say that Buganda depended on immigrant labour when we were going modern?

Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Member to whom the order was raised made the point that Buganda in the 1960’s depended on immigrant labour. The Member raising the order has confirmed the same. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, as a professional teacher, I know that in class the attention span is not the same. My submission is not related to levels of growing bananas in Uganda. So, hon. Baba’s information was not useful to me. (Laughter)

As I continue, this is helpful to the minister as a clarification. I was still submitting that Northern Uganda, I would like to know, which are these particular areas, I have moved in some parts of Northern Uganda. This kind of massive – (Interjections) – let me conclude my clarification. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you cannot conclude when you are seeking clarification. You cannot conclude a clarification. That means you are now debating. Please, hon. Minister -

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to assure the hon. Member that there is significant transformation in agriculture going on in Northern Uganda. Bananas are being produced there, coffee is growing there and we are pushing fruit trees in that area.

Finally, in my conclusion, I would like to say something about extension because this has been an issue. Clearly, overtime Government has been trying all sorts of extension processes since the introduction in the early 1990’s that moved through the extension systems, progressive farmers’ ideas and in the recent past, we are experimenting with NAADS. After 10 years, it has not done as well as it should. Government has taken a clear decision that we implement a unified extension system and we are now going to recruit officers to man sub counties as foot soldiers, if I may use that word.

We are going to have at each sub county an agricultural officer, a veterinary officer, a fisheries officer where you have a water body and also an entomologist where we have areas of tsetse control. This is going to happen immediately because Government has taken this decision and we have started a process of implementing it. 

I want to thank you hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister and hon. Members. The issue still remains outstanding that our interventions need to be more increased so that these issues can be brought down. 

In the gallery this afternoon, we have pupils from North Road Primary School in Mbale District. Their representatives are hon. Jack Wamanga Wamai and hon. Connie Galiwango. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

II)	STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FY 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are aware that on the 12th of June, we received a motion from the Minister of Finance asking the House to constitute itself to a Committee of Supply to consider those estimates that she was proposing and the other budgetary matters that she was proposing. That motion is still with the House. This is the time when the Shadow Minister of Finance will make the response. 

In the past, we would have a general debate on the Budget where Members would share some of the general issues relating to the Budget but things have since changed. I think it is because of time-constraints but we will see how to get back to this so that after the Shadow Minister of Finance has spoken, then we will have a general debate. But that will not be possible today; this is the time to receive the statement by the Shadow Minister of Finance, which will take 45 minutes. After that, we will continue to debate on the State-of-Nation Address, which we should also conclude today. 

Thank you.

3.49
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to present an alternative to the government Budget of 2014/2015. 

In accordance with Article 82(A) of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda, 1995 and Rule 136 of our Rules of Procedure, I move to present the Opposition’s alternatives to the Financial Year 2014/15 National Budget. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to dedicate this alternative budget 2014/2015 to the present and future generation of our motherland, the Pearl of Africa. It is my sincere hope, belief and prayer that you will find it of great value to help us harness our natural capital to the benefit of every citizen of this country of opportunity.

Today, the country does not have a long-term development plan that spans generations. While it is vital to have a medium- to short-term plan of five to 30 years, it is also very important to have a long-term plan for Uganda for the next 200 years that guides us on how to exploit our natural resources, establish infrastructure that can match our population growth and human development. These and many others cannot be negotiated. This will clearly define and give us strategic direction. It will be naïve to build hydro dams, projecting them to last for the next 100 years without protecting the ecosystem of Lake Victoria and the rivers that feed it. In addition, it will also be ignorant of any parent to send a child to school to study without buying him a pen and a book, just like it would be unforgivable for any government to open its economy for competition with its neighbours without preparing its citizens to compete favourably. These and many others are the hallmarks of the NRM Government for more than 20 years in power.

Mr Speaker, the budget proposals presented by Government for the financial year 2014/2015 like in the past, does not mirror what the Opposition desires for our children and our grandchildren. It is a reflection of the fundamental problem that the NRMO suffers; failure to plan, prioritise and direct public investments in a manner that balances long-term structural transformation with economic growth, creation of jobs and poverty eradication. 

Mr Speaker, like we said last year, the NRMO suffers a perpetual problem of lack of consistence. With the challenges that we face today such as inadequate resource mobilisation, growing inequality, youth unemployment, a failed political and public service system, a disempowered citizenry and an incomplete democratic transition process, the theme for the budget should be: “Restoring Good Governance for Equitable and Sustainable Economic Growth in Uganda”. 

Government clearly states budget sector priorities and strategies but that is where it ends. One cannot leverage Government support in agriculture, tourism, industry and services such as ICT without a long-term plan and adequate resource allocation.

We wish to re-state that Uganda’s problem is in poor leadership and governance. The challenges to the budget process are; failed resource mobilisation, ineffective prioritisation, excessive supplementary budgets and misappropriation of public resources with impunity. These have rendered the budgeting process an academic exercise. Many Ugandans and investors live in fear because of lack of clarity on the political future of the country. For instance, engaging in wars that have drained the budget and increased insecurity in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia and South Sudan. Besides Government’s inability to tame nature hence subjecting close to half of the population to recurrent starvation due to famine. The NRMO has presided over the widest and longest systematic destruction of our environment than any other government in the post-independent history.
 
The old problems of low salaries and wages, non-payment of salaries and non-payment of pensions have worsened. Many civil servants miss their salaries for months while others die chasing their pension. The Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development do not know the size of the civil service and are ignorant on what it pays respectively. Isn’t this is an embarrassment to this government?

Performance of the economy

Mr Speaker, the economy did not achieve the targeted overall performance of 6.2 per cent in the financial year 2013/2014. Uganda's real growth rates have been declining, are inconsistent and not inclusive in the last decade. The Opposition demands that Government accepts our proposal to spur economic growth to double digits than intellectual dishonesty that the economy performed better than the Sub-Saharan average of 5.3 per cent. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Shadow Minister of Finance is making a very important statement, which like other statements that we have ever had in Parliament, should be watched by the entire country, especially those who have no opportunity to access parliamentary Chambers. I have since checked and we have been switched off from UBC. The procedural guidance I am asking from you, Mr Speaker, is that whether this important alternative budget, which is addressing critical issues affecting all of us, should be blocked out of the view of the 36 million Ugandans. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am in charge of the House and the Chamber as business proceeds; I am not in charge of what happens out of this Chamber. I cannot order any institution or anybody out of this House to do anything I want. Please, proceed. (Hon. Amuriat rose_) Another point of procedure?

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in no way challenging or contesting your ruling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then, please, sit down.

MR AMURIAT: But, Mr Speaker, my observation is that Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is a national broadcaster and this is the reason it has consistently covered the proceedings of this House. Therefore, it should surprise anybody that when an important statement that is addressing not only this House but the citizens of this country is being read, the broadcaster is switched off.

I think it should be the concern of this House, the Speaker and Members inclusive that this is consistently going to happen. This happened in the previous two years in this House and it is happening now.

The procedural point that I raise is whether we are procedurally right to proceed on this very important item on our agenda, which intends to address the entire country and yet, the rest of the country apart from Members of Parliament are conspicuously absent?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have an Order Paper and in the Order Paper, there is on the budget for the Financial Year 2014/2015, the shadow Minister of Finance who is responsible to this House. I have already ruled on this subject. Please, proceed, hon. minister. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the economy did not achieve the overall performance of 6.2 per cent in 2013/2014. Uganda's real growth rates have been declining, are inconsistent and not inclusive in the last decade. The Opposition demands that the government accepts our proposal to spur economic growth to double digits rather than intellectual dishonesty that the economy performed better than the Sub-Saharan average of 5.3 per cent. 

The growth in Uganda cannot be termed by any standards inclusive when income inequality is increasing. The absolute number of Ugandans in poverty has remained at 7.5 million with no improvement in income equality (See Figure 1 on growth rates for the last 12 years). Figure 1 growth rate 2002-2014 shows that the economy performed at 4.7 per cent last financial year.

Many Ugandans have been casting doubt on economic figures but finally we know that the figures are just fabricated. The Office of the Auditor-General (OAG) in 2014 established, “The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development lacks formal rules and hence a well-structured process to guide the revenue forecasting process. There was no documentation to explain how the revenue forecasting process was done and how tasks and timelines were set. In addition, the models used by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to forecast revenues and GDP were not robust enough to achieve the comprehensiveness required in revenue forecasting.”

Mr Speaker, it is important to note that for a small economy like that of Uganda, endowed by natural resources, to achieve sustainable levels of development, it would require growth rates of above 10 per cent for a period of more than 10 years. We have no doubt that the potential for higher growth is evident, if only we can solve the problem of long term planning, bad governance, high budget indiscipline and channel resources towards the productive sectors of the economy.  

External Sector

Mr Speaker, the Opposition predicted that Uganda‘s poor performance of exports was expected to continue in 2013/2014 but the NRMO decided to ignore our advice. No wonder exports declined by 8.1 per cent. The Opposition is once again calling upon the NRMO Government to channel more resources towards value addition through processing of exports and establishing a niche for our products.

Financial Sector Developments

Inflation and Interest Rates

Mr Speaker, although headline inflation has remained under single digit, it is still mainly driven by food prices. This is the time for NRMO Government to find plausible interventions to address the supply constraints in the agriculture sector.
 
The NRM/O Government sold the biggest commercial bank; the Uganda Commercial Bank and destroyed the Uganda Cooperative Bank, which was established by the sweat of our grandfathers, mothers, sisters and brothers happy that it would lead to lowering interest rates but instead the situation has worsened. The current market lending rate averaged 25 per cent in comparison with Rwanda and Kenya. This has limited the level of credit available to the private sector. 

The challenge of high interest rates stem from bad governance. The graph shows that the high level of non-performing loans has grown from 4.36 per cent to 6.17 per cent from the Financial Year 2012/2013 to February 2014. This is unacceptable.

Fiscal Developments

Mr Speaker, total budget expenditure of below 20 per cent of GDP is too low. The NRM/O Government’s revenue performance to GDP ratio is at 13 per cent which is below expectation. The average public expenditure level for Sub Saharan Africa is about 23 per cent. Based on a growth rate of 10 per cent, which befits Uganda's economy and revenue to GDP ratio of 18 per cent, we are projecting an increase in the resources available in the FY 2014/15. 

We re-state that Government can only achieve these revenue targets if they adopt the following well thought out measures:

    i) Creating high level of efficiency and effectiveness especially in development projects where improvements should be made in the absorption capacity.
    ii) Strengthening regulatory institutions to mobilise non-tax revenue.
    iii) Abandoning supplementary budgets that draw resources from production to consumption. 
    iv) Redirecting resources from State House expenses to agriculture to boost production. 
    v) Creating optimal administration and creative governance systems.

Non–tax revenue in FY 2014/2015 is expected to decline by 10 per cent compared to the previous financial year, despite an increase in the non–tax revenue rates. This is projected to lead to a shortfall of Shs 51.7 billion and is partly on account of poor enforcement mechanisms in MDAs. There is need for annual auditing of non–tax revenue collections and utilisation in MDAs.

Public Debt 

Mr Speaker, the 2007 Debt Strategy, which was intended to reduce Uganda‘s indebtedness has failed to achieve this objective. We continue to mortgage the future generations. The debt level has become unmanageable. Uganda‘s total external public debt as of March 2014 was at $ 6.65 billion (Shs 17.290 trillion). However, of the $ 2.47 billion, 37 per cent is the loan commitment, which has not been disbursed. 

The chart below shows external debt trends since 2006/2007 to 2012/2013. Mr Speaker, if you look at that graph, it shows the trend is worrying. 

While domestic debt from commercial banks, Treasury Bills and bonds amount to Shs 8.8 trillion, the  Karuma Hydro Power and Isimba Hydro projects is estimated to cost US$1.5 billion or Shs 3.9 trillion and US$556 million or Shs 1,445,600 trillion plus the proposed standard gauge railway which is expected to cost more than US$3 billion or Shs 7.8 trillion that makes a total debt exposure both domestic and external of the Government of Uganda to Shs 39.235 trillion which is budget for Uganda for more than two financial years. This means that every Ugandan, including babies and the sick in hospitals, will be indebted to a tune of more than Shs 1 million by the end of this financial year if the above projects are added on the list. Rt. Hon. Speaker, is this part of the fundamental change which was promised by the NRMO 28 years ago?

The failure to use loans contracted by the NRMO Government still continues. As a result, these loans are attracting high commitment fees, surcharge and interest rates which could have been avoided. 

We are again calling upon the Ninth Parliament to only approve loans after establishing that the necessary capacity, institutions and tools are in place for utilising the loans. The domestic debt of US$ 8.8 trillion is excessive! This level of borrowing which is illegal crowds out the private sector and keeps interest rates high.

The Ugandan economy does not need all this rate of borrowing in order to develop. What we need is to stump out corruption in procurement which makes the cost of the project triple, downsize Government and implement the South Korea model of rural transformation called “Saemul Udong” which established by the late President Park Chung Hee in 1970. By then, South Korea’s per capita income was below US$100, but today, it has developed to become the ninth largest economy in the world.

Budget Strategy for Financial Year 2014/2015

Enhancing Productive Employment 

Rt Hon. Speaker, unemployment is a problem that continues to plague Uganda’s economy. Four million Ugandans of working age population are not working. The situation is getting worse, the self employed increased from 70.9 percent in 2009/10 to 81.5 percent. While paid employment has declined from 21.5 percent to 18.5 percent in the same period. 

About 12 percent of Ugandans are chronically poor. The youth unemployment rate in 2013 was 55 percent for those that have got a decent education and 83 percent for both those who have gone to school and those who have not.  The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development statistics state that over 400,000 students graduate from universities and all tertiary institutions each year but jobs created annually are just about 90,000 creating a job deficit of 310,000 annually. The Opposition demands that this situation be reversed by investing in sectors that create jobs like agriculture, tourism and minerals.

Revenue and Expenditure framework for Financial Year 2014/2015

Rt Hon. Speaker, fellow countrymen and women, based on the measures the Opposition has enumerated, total resource inflows are projected to amount to Shs 17,246 billion. Domestic sources will contribute Shs 14,513 billion representing 84 percent of the total resources. The Uganda Revenue Authority will collect Shs 11,731 billion and Non-Tax Revenues of Shs 243 billion. The Revenue to GDP ratio is projected at 18 percent. Given that the economy is projected to grow at 10 percent, domestic financing and external financing will remain within Governments estimates of Shs 2,539 billion and Shs 2,733 billion respectively.  

Rt Hon. Speaker, this would put our expenditure levels at about 26 percent which is comparable to many developing countries. The additional resources would be spent on salary enhancement, agriculture, minerals, tourism, education and health sectors. 

Linking the National Development Plan and the Budget

The anomaly comes when the expenditure on the primary growth sectors reduces (see Table 1 below). The Government is attempting to boost growth in the services and infrastructure clusters without paying attention to the primary clusters. In the history of the developed countries, the growth trend spanned from the evolution of agriculture (primary growth cluster) to agro-industry and then to services. 

Expenditure on Growth as per GDP

The primary growth structure or the tradable according to the National Development Plan should have received a budget allocation of 8.8 percent this financial year but instead the Government has given it an allocation of 4.5 percent.

The complimentary cluster (Infrastructure) should have received budgetary allocation of 44.2 percent but instead it was allocated 31.2 percent. The enabling cluster( Public administration)according to the NDP should have received 21 percent of the budget but it is receiving 34.3 percent.

Sector Performance for the Financial Year 2013/2014 and Sector Priorities for 2014/2015

    A. National Defence and Security 

Rt Hon. Speaker, National Defence and Security have been allocated Shs 1 trillion in the financial year 2014/15. The sector has consistently been overfunded. The sector’s budget should be cut and some funds put into priority sectors like education.

Rt Hon. Speaker, the Government generally maintains effective internal state security, though non-political violent crime is common. Investigations of serious crime by the Police are weak. State security agencies, for example, ISO, concentrate on protecting the NRMO Government from internal political dissent and challenge, but the borders are porous and easily penetrated by refugees, human and drug traffickers and car robbers. The Uganda Police are now effectively the fifth army division, with some units acting alike and equipped with resources akin to an elite military force.

Like last year, the Opposition is demanding a full accountability on our continued stay in Somalia and South Sudan. As well, we strongly demand the withdrawal of the UPDF from South Sudan. 

    B. Infrastructure Development 
Rt Hon. Speaker, Uganda's infrastructure is substandard by all measures. This is despite the increase in funds for development of roads infrastructure from Shs 380.7 billion in the financial year 2008 to Shs 2,575.5 trillion in the financial year 2014/15. More than 50 kilometres of roads are in a poor condition. Even in Kampala, which is the capital city, there are no traffic lights to guide traffic flow; instead, police officers have to guide traffic flow. This is done in the scorching sun and rain for 24 hours and yet their salaries are delayed.

Mr Speaker, although Government has been prioritising the sector, most roads in the country are still in a very poor state and road users are still dissatisfied with the condition of road network. Public transport is still mainly in private hands with the capital city Kampala lacking a central plan and affordable map-transit circuit. The sector is still faced with challenges of absorption and projects over shot their planned time. 

The rate at which the NRM Government is transforming unpaved roads would take the country forty years to complete. The unit cost of constructing a kilometre of a road in Uganda is the highest in the East African Region. The Opposition proposes that a review of the procurement process of infrastructure expenditure should be done to find ways of reducing the unit cost and establish a very strict procurement process so as to avoid inside trading and create efficiency in the bidding process. 

The proposed fast tracking of the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the neglected railway line is welcome; though this should be delayed until Government finds cheap alternative financing. The responsible minister should report to Parliament on the modalities of funding, the time frame and the competitive procurement process. 

Mr Speaker, while from the regional perspective, the biggest deal in town would be the institution of the standard gauge railway linking the Northern Corridor, the presidents of East African have not devised strategies that will mitigate the high cost of railway. There should be passenger strategy because passengers are the political constituents of the railway. 

Energy, Mineral and Gas Sector

Mr Speaker, like we noted last year, transparency in the oil and mineral sector is still lacking. The country is ill-prepared to begin receiving the petrol dollar. The institutional framework is not developed and jobs are still given out under the carpet. The anticipated start of oil production was to be in 2013, but has now been moved to 2018 and yet it still faces many challenges especially in infrastructure development. There is no sign that Uganda is ready to manage the physical and monitory challenges that come with increased inflow. 

The government should finalise plans to build an oil refinery and also invest the revenue from oil production in agriculture, infrastructure, tourism and industry. In addition, there should be a clear road map for oil production to avoid an oil curse. 

As a strategy to raise revenue, the Opposition proposes that Government establishes a parastatal and raises funds to exploit our vast mineral potential which is projected to last more than 200 years. Earning from the mineral sector will then be invested in infrastructure like standard gauge railway linking all parts of the county. 

Agriculture and division of agricultural input, establish Siros and value addition systems. This strategy will then address the current unemployment to sort out the challenges in the education sector and move the economy to a middle income. 

Mr Speaker, we thank the minister for accepting agriculture and agro-business as priorities for creating jobs. Improving productivity and expanding exports in the medium term. 

However, like last year, the minister has totally neglected the sector that employees more than 70 percent of the labour force. Mr Speaker, the Opposition demands that the 2014/2015 budget reprioritises the agricultural sector to deal with the biting poverty and recurrent famine. 

To that effect we propose that the sector be allocated 920 billion representing six percent of the total budget with a promise to achieve the ten percent allocation to the sector in the next two financial years in line with the Maputo Declaration. This includes mechanisation of the agricultural sector and providing support to farmers in order to stimulate production, high quality, and sustained production and supply because farmers are assured of high profit. 

We wish to re-emphasise that there is no way Uganda can develop without transforming the agricultural sector. It is unfortunate that Uganda with abundant agricultural land most of it fertile and abundant fresh water sources in at least 80 percent of the country cannot even produce enough volume of edible crops to constantly meet both local and international demands. What happened to the food security initiative that President Museveni has been harping about? 

Tourism, Trade and Industry

Mr Speaker, funding to the tourism sector remains extremely low despite expressing interest in supporting the tourism industry through putting emphasis on promotion, training and regulations. Out of Shs 68.4 billion provided for the tourism sector, Shs 5 billion is used for advertising. This is too little for the country’s vast tourism industry. This casts doubt to the NRM commitment that the tourism sector according to vision 2040 and the National Development plan is vital for moving this country from a peasant based economy to a middle income. 

The Opposition maintains last year’s recommendation that the budget allocated to the Tourism Sector be increased to at least two percent of the GDP in the financial year 2014/2015.

Uganda’s Tourism Sector is not fully developed and yet it is the sector largest foreign exchange earner contributing US$1 billion in financial year 2012/2013. 

The Tourism Sector has an annual growth rate of 4.6 percent and contributes 5.5 percent to the GDP. It also provides employment to 1,558,798. Accordingly, Uganda must prioritise tourism by addressing issues such as limited human resource, by training more people, rebranding Uganda’s image both locally and internationally through marketing efficient energy, ICT, transport infrastructure, by improving hotels, roads, air travel and creating a Tourism Fund. 

The Opposition proposes that Government develops airports in the following districts as a priority: Kisoro, Kasese, Tororo, Karamoja Region, West Nile, Lango, Acholi, Teso and Busoga sub region. This will help to lower the cost of air transport internally and externally. For example, it now costs US$600 to fly between Entebbe and Nairobi and yet flying from Eldoret or Kisumu in Kenya to Nairobi costs US$100 only. 

Mr Speaker, in 2012/2013, Uganda’s main trading partners were Kenya, South Sudan, DRC, European Union, Rwanda and United Arab Emirate. The exports included tea, fish tobacco, coffee, cotton, maize and sugar. In the whole of East Africa, Uganda benefited more by exporting to South Sudan where it earned US$4368 million from exports. Export to EU was also beneficial to Uganda as it got US$5157 million. 

East African is perhaps the most economic opportunity for Uganda. But the most remarkable aspect of this is that Ugandan farms, with very few exceptions participating but not contesting this economic space. It is not rocket science to address the underlined constraints though it might be to NRM. 

Uganda is a member of the East African Community, Common Market for East and Southern African, (COMESA) and the Inter-Governmental Authority for Development, (IGAD). It participates in various trade negotiations. Uganda’s involvement in regional integration strengthens her involvement in world trade regime, but still faces constraints such as the following: 

    a) Uganda is not very competitive and so it may be difficult to sustainably benefit from all the integration processes.
    b) The increased cost of doing business, for instance, regarding Uganda’s exports to Kenya are difficult and expensive thus increasing the costs of doing business.
    c) COMESA FTA (Common Market for East and Southern Africa Free Trade Area). Despite Uganda signing an FTA in 2012, it faces challenges of asymmetry especially with Egypt. How prepared are we to participate in the COMESA Free Trade Area and EAC?

Mr Speaker, the allocation to the trade sector is laughable. We urge the Executive to allocate more funds to at least enable Uganda businesses to move away from pre-colonial billing systems to modern systems.

Human Capital and Skills Development 

Education Sector

 Mr Speaker, the Opposition welcomes the Executives' gesture of improving the remuneration of teachers, though it still falls short of the minimum required. Apart from the marginal salary increment, the 2014/15 proposals did not address the critical challenges of high dropout rates and the problems of standards and quality of education in Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE). Uganda’s completion rates in primary education are only 25 per cent and is dropping compared to 84 per cent in Kenya, 81 per cent in Tanzania and 74 per cent in Rwanda. It is no secret that UPE schools face challenges arising from under funding over delayed disbursement. These include, among others, inadequate classrooms, latrines, teachers and dilapidated infrastructure. 

The 2011 UWEZO report indicated that children in primary six could not comprehend material meant for primary three levels. It also discovered that out of the 2, 400 schools visited across the country, 9 of 10 an equivalent of 92 percent of the children in P3 could not read a P2 English level story text and that 1 out of 5 of the children in P3 could not even recognize letters of the English Alphabet. Consistent with this, although the number of children going to school increased in 2013, the rate at which they comprehend is still low.

Many schools are abandoning teaching sciences because it is expensive and there are few science teachers. Government has failed to provide facilities for teaching sciences such as laboratories and teachers. Science subjects are compulsory and yet some students are not interested or don’t know sciences.

We are therefore re-stating the following policy actions to transform and systematically build a quality human resource: 
    a) A High Level Panel on Education Reform to review the education system and propose time bound measures including the level of resource commitments to transform the sector. 
    b) Government should immediately issue policy guidelines to enable parents to provide funds for lunch unless Government is able to allocate funds to address this problem.
    c) The actual number of children at school must be known.
    d) The minimum required amount per pupil/student per term from Government should be increased to UGX 100,000.Children should be given a cup of porridge and an egg per day which comes to UGX 1.83 billion for children.
    e) Increase primary school teacher‘s pay to a minimum level of UGX 500,000 revised annually to keep pace with the cost of living or indexed for inflation.

Mr Speaker, we welcome the introduction of the higher education loans scheme. The Opposition strongly disagrees with the implementation modalities of only considering science students when we do not have science teachers and laboratories.  We once again, call upon the minister to ensure that the funds will be administered in a judicious, transparent and accountable manner. These funds should be open to all needy students in the country. 

Health Sector

Mr Speaker, our health sector is still in a sorry state. Public hospitals are in a dire condition, with drugs and bedding often in short supply. Private hospitals sometimes are as poor in service as Government hospitals. The shortage of human resources, medicines and health supplies in health facilities constitutes a major problem in service delivery. The major weaknesses that have affected the achievement of health policy goals include:
    a) Very few ICT savvy  health workers  
    b) Few skilled and dedicated health workers
    c) Limited health facilities such as clinics, pharmacies and 
    d) Limited incentives for health workers, lack of proper motivation, limited remuneration, less development of human resources and limited encouragement of professionalism among health workers. It is a fact that health workers are underpaid which has resulted in health personnel seeking employment in neighboring countries like Rwanda.

Doctors must be paid well to prevent brain drain. In 2010, it was revealed by the Health Minister that 13 senior surgeons had left Uganda for Rwanda due to poor pay. South Africa employs 250 Ugandan doctors, Swaziland employs 10 doctors and an unknown number of Ugandan doctors found employment all over the Southern African region in countries like Lesotho, Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana. There are also some Ugandan doctors in America and Western Europe.

Furthermore, a consultant surgeon in Rwanda is paid between UGX 5 million and UGX 9 million while in Uganda a consultant would be paid UGX 1.5 million which is a recipe for disaster. The fact that many of our Ugandan doctors relocate to developing countries means that there is an issue that the Uganda Government is not addressing.

Besides, the present gross monthly pay of UGX 550,000 for fresh medical graduates is unjustifiable considering the workload. The doctor – patient ratio in a developing country like Uganda is 1 in 10,000 but at the moment the ratio is 1 in 24,725. Uganda cannot eradicate poverty with this patient – doctor ratio since health is related to wealth. Affirmative action is needed in order to boost our health sector. 

The Opposition detailed alternative policy is in the sectoral policies by the shadow minister.

Water and Environment Sector
  
Mr Speaker, as earlier noted, the funds allocated and activities undertaken for production are inadequate. Also, safe water coverage has stagnated at almost the same levels for a decade. Seventeen percent of deaths among children under the age of 5 are due to diarrhea caused by contaminated water. At the time when governments world-over are trying to make safe water cheap for every citizen, in Uganda the leaders imposed Value Added Tax (VAT) on water for domestic consumption. The Opposition recommends that all citizens should be able to access safe clean water. 

Mr Speaker, we would like to emphasise to President Museveni that the current environment climatic change is also an issue that requires immediate attention, for example, contaminated water sources, decreasing forest cover and wetlands just to mention a few. The Opposition is therefore proposing the following:
    a) A compulsory investment into wastewater recycling by industries and factories that release effluents into lakes and marshland.
    b) Demarcating wetlands that should be protected, those that should not and which areas can be considered for development with the lowest risk of environmental degradation.
    c) Getting rid of encroachers and investors in wetlands and
    d) Establishing water-harvesting systems in every homestead in urban and rural areas. 

The details are in the shadow ministers alternatives.

Justice Law and Order Sector
     
Mr Speaker, the Judiciary has key vacant positions that are likely to affect the provision of judicial services. These vacant positions include that of the Chief Justice and Head of Court of Appeal, eight (8) Justices of Court of Appeal, four Justices of the Supreme Court and eight High Court Judges. These vacancies must urgently be filled.

Mr Speaker, like last year, the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) is faced with challenges of understaffing, underfunding and inadequate facilitation. These are coupled with a case backlog that can only be cleared in the next 30 years.   
  
Another challenge facing the country is arrears for court awards and compensations which rose by 200 percent from UGX 82 billion in the year 2011/2012 to UGX 164 billion in the year 2012/2013. Government is not making efforts to minimize court awards and compensations. The Opposition is recommending increased funding to JLOS so that we can promote the rule of law, complete a backlog of cases, increase staffing levels, recruit and improve staff welfare.   

As a matter of critical concern, the Opposition demands increment of salary of the officials of the Department of Public Prosecution, Inspector General of Government and Police Criminal Investigations Department by not less than 300 percent from their current rate if we are to stump out corruption. Government should stop lip-service that it is committed to fight corruption and yet officials who are engaged with the task are demotivated.

Governance and Public Service Delivery 

Improving government effectiveness 
  
The Opposition wishes to restate its position that, as way of achieving, efficiency and effectiveness there should be downsizing of the entire structure of governance including ministers not exceeding 42, members of parliament, RDCs and presidential advisors.

The Public Service
   
 The Opposition recognizes the Shs 450 billion which the Government is proposing to allocate to enhance the salary of all public servants. However, this is barely the basic minimum that is required; the Opposition recommends that this amount should be doubled. This should be followed by a 25 percent pay rise for the next two years.

Mr Speaker, we again restate that unless public servants are motivated, inspired and corrupt free, the budget resources that we are investing under this year‘s budget and beyond will go to waste. As we noted last year, the future of this nation‘s children who are receiving a substandard education because of a slowdown strike by poorly paid and unmotivated teachers should be a non-negotiable. We cannot seat in this House and agree to negotiate away the lives of the 16 mothers that die per day in this country because we have to build roads and bridges and railways. 

We cannot continue to embarrass our police men and women and our soldiers who cannot get a descent salary to take care of themselves and their families and then expect them to protect us and our properties.

Cash Management

Mr Speaker, it is only absurd that the minister goes ahead to cite the totally failed initiatives as the ones she will use to bolster performance in 2014/15. It is no longer a secret that despite adopting the commitment control system, the total value of domestic arrears payable have continued to increase over the years as shown in the table below:- Table 1: Domestic Arrears for the Last Three Years : Domestic Arrears 2010/2011,Shs 473,655; 2011/2012,Shs763,186 ; 2012/2013, Shs1,127,241

 The current status shows a steady increase in the domestic arrears figures, clearly indicating that the current approaches to address the problem that are not working.   

The arrears have become unmanageable and have spiraled out of control. The current NRMO Government is living on debts. However, this was anticipated because accounting officers will not be disciplined when the top leadership in the country doesn’t have budget discipline.

Excessive supplementary expenditures deprive sectors of the much needed resources to implement productive activities.

MFPED uses concocted statistics to arrive at revenue and expenditures targets.
  
MFPED does not follow the available development plans (i.e. Vision 2040, NDP I) to set priorities.

MFPED has no mechanism and accurate data to use for forecasting. The Input-Output tables have not been updated in the last 10 years; the population census is late by three years; the last manpower survey was conducted two decades ago and the last business survey was held in 2009. Yet if you open three documents from the MFPED, they will all have differing and conflicting figures. They use nominal figures to appraise economic performance.  

Financial Year 2014/2015 TAX and Revenue Measures

Rt Hon. Speaker, tax proposals for 2014/2015 are anti-development and retrogressive. No serious Government on planet earth worth its name can propose tax on pesticides, fertilizers, hoes, salt, paraffin, and mobile money. All the above proposals are directly meant to hit the peasants who are barely surviving and are trying to join the formal economy. 
   
Although it was necessary to remove subsidies to raise more resources, wrong subsidies were targeted. Tax holidays for foreign investors should have been removed instead. 

The proposals to remove tax exemptions in agriculture are expected to worsen income inequality in the country and yet these subsidies were put in place to address inequalities. 

Interest income earned by financial institutions from agriculture will increase the interest rate on loans. While access to agricultural credit remains very low at 10 percent, taxing the sector will subdue growth. This will further reduce loans to the agricultural sector given the sector’s inherit risks.  

As well, we urge Parliament to oppose the proposals that will increase the cost of living. Unlike Uganda, the Rwandese Government has instead proposed to reduce taxes on items like wheat, sugar, telecom and trucks. Like our neighbour, Rwanda, the Uganda Government should leave the following supplies on the list of zero-rated supplies: 

    a) Supply of printing services for educational materials. 
    b) Supply of cereals grown, milled or produced in Uganda. 
    c) Supply of processed milk and milk products. 
    d) Supply of machinery and tools for agriculture. 
    e) Supply of seeds, fertilizers, pesticides and hoes. 
    f) ICT items

The proposal to increase presumptive tax from one percent to three percent is devoid of logic. Small businesses will be forced to pay higher taxes. This may discourage voluntary compliance among small business owners and encourage them to remain informal. If the small businesses have failed to pay one percent, why should we expect them to pay three percent?

The NRMO has failed to control the escalation of school and tuition fees. The proposal to tax business income from educational institutions is ill-advised. Taxing educational institutions will affect the quality of education and further lead to hikes in tuition and school fees.
  
Mr Speaker, the UGX 200 excise tax on Kerosene is a clear acceptance of governance failure to regulate the sector. This is a slap on the face of the peasants who hoped that by voting NRM their future would be bright. This is another example of a broken promise to the people of Uganda. 

Conclusion  

This is going to be a year of desperation across the country. Gambling and sports betting are increasing; borrowers increasingly default on their bank loans; unemployment; children missing out on school because their parents simply cannot afford to pay school fees. Ugandans have now come to realize that in 2011 false hope was created by NRM. It is too late to reverse this because people are “bleeding!”. 

The constantly increasing school and university tuition fees, home and office rent and the other costs of doing business are a nuisance that the average Ugandan will face throughout the year. Many institutions have regularly come out to guide the NRMO Government on the need to increase funding to the agriculture sector and exploit the minerals. Last year we asked you, what we should tell people who think that with us here they are safe when there is totally nowhere to get water or firewood for energy because of environmental degradation? Let us work together to avoid this environmental destruction. 

Mr Speaker, this is the opportunity that the Almighty God has placed upon us. It only comes once. Stand up to be counted when you still have a chance. Be reminded of this great poem:

"In Germany they came first for the communists, and I didn't speak up because I wasn't a communist. Then they came for the Jews, and I didn't speak up because I wasn't a Jew. Then they came for the trade unionists, and I didn't speak up because I wasn't a trade unionist. Then they came for the Catholics, and I didn't speak up because I was a Protestant. Then they came for me, and by that time no one was left to speak up." (Martin Niemöller, prominent German anti-Nazi theologian and Lutheran pastor, best known as the author of the poem “First they came...”)

As the Opposition, our role since the return of multiparty politics has been to make it difficult for anyone in Government to say: “We were never advised.”

Finally, I wish to sum up by urging Government to urgently adopt our well thought out proposals above including, addressing governance failure by restoring term limits, downsizing government, developing a long-term plan that spans generations, that is, 200 years and above, eliminate “rent seekers” and “commission agents” from managing strategic sectors of the economy. It is only then that we shall be able to meet the hope of millions of Ugandans who are beginning to lose hope by putting their lives with bare hands in front of bullets like the recent case in Kasese. Let us not rub it any further by throwing people onto the streets without compensating them like it is happening in Kampala and by imposing all these anti-people taxes. Thank you very much; For God and My Country. I beg to respond. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much Shadow Minister of Finance for the statement you have just made. This statement is part of the debate on the motion that was moved by the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs that the House constitute itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the proposals on the Budget and the estimates on the expenditure and revenue. That is the Opposition’s contribution through its Shadow Minister of Finance. This will feed into the general processes of the Budget; the Minister’s statement and the Shadow Minister’s statement on the Budget will feed into the sectoral application of these matters as they go into committees. And when they come back, all these issues will be brought to surface and we debate them. So it will also be forwarded to the committees just like it was with the finance minister’s Budget Speech.

Hon. Members, we will now move – No, no, no, it is the Shadow Minister of Finance because this is not the budget of Parliament. If the Shadow Minister would have to make some administrative communication at the end, that certainly would be well-placed and well-received. (Laughter) So we will now go and receive the papers.

Honourable members, I need to make a statement on item No.4 (b) on the alternative policy statement by the shadow minister. An issue was raised earlier, which I need to clarify. The policy statements that were brought to this House were not spoken to by the ministers. So that will also apply to the alternative policy statement from the shadow ministers – they will not speak to them. When the committees come back, the ministers who made the policy statement will be entitled to make responses to issues that are raised by the committees. So that right also accrues to the shadow ministers. That is how it will be handled at that time; not now. So what we are going to do is just lay papers and it is very clear; simply say, “Mr Speaker, I beg to lay…” and no more speeches after that. (Laughter) And I will say, “It is so received” and we proceed from there. I am saying so because one of the shadow ministers had already prepared a four-page statement to make today. That is why I have to make this clear. So let us move to the next item. I had altered the Order Paper to accommodate the Public Accounts Committee.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Alice Alaso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to lay on Table a report of the Committee on Public Accounts.
   
Mr Speaker, the first report that is ready from the Public Accounts Committee is the report of the Uganda Industrial Research Institute, Vote-110 for the year ended 30 June 2011 and 30 June 2012.

The second report is the Ministry of Health, Vote-014 and Mulago Hospital Complex, Vote-161 for the year ended 30 June 2010.

Mr Speaker, I also want to lay on Table a report of the Public Accounts Committee and the report of the Auditor-General on a Special Audit of the Presidential Initiative on Market Vendors and Small Business Operators. And together with those reports, I would like to lay on Table minutes of the public hearings. I beg to lay. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those. Honourable members, this is a good sign of an active committee. But this is a report coming from the committee; we will find an appropriate time when the House can debate the committee findings when scheduled. What is the procedural point?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, what I wanted to raise has been overtaken by events.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not “by events”; the Speaker has ruled on it. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Yes, but it has been overtaken by events. On a serious note, Mr Speaker, more importantly, these are reports that are very pregnant with policy and accountability issues. And if we are to use the English adage that “Hit the iron when it is still hot…” so that you can have it malleable, I only want to ask you, Mr Speaker, that as soon as possible, time should be got for these report. This is because I know that as the chairperson has laid these reports – these reports have been in the public domain for some time. It would be good for us to squeeze some time and we look at the report of the Presidential Initiative on Market Vendors and Small Business Operators. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these issues are important and certainly we will find time to debate them; there should be no cause for any alarm.

LAYING OF PAPERS

ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENTS BY SHADOW MINISTERS

4.58
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Mr Speaker, in line with our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay the electronic alternative version of the response of the shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for 2014/2015. I beg to lay. It is here in the system. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are saying laying of documents, laying of papers and I am not sure when these transformations were made that papers have become -

MR EKANYA: Hon. Speaker, some time back, there was a precedent that was set. We had laying using the electronic version because your Parliamentary Commission provided all Members of Parliament with iPads.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the rule says laying of papers.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance. I have talked to the Leader of the Opposition and they have agreed that after here, Members should converge in the canteen because this is a very important day for the Opposition. Thank you very much and you are all welcome. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative to the Government Budget statement 2014/2015 of the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is of course committed to the appropriate sectoral committee to handle with the general policy statement.

5.01
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Michael Lulume Bayigga): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement on Health for Uganda for the financial year 2014/2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate Committee on Health.

5.02
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Francis Epetait): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement in response to the Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is accordingly committed to the appropriate committee to handle the ministerial policy statement.

5.02
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

5.03
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Nabilah Naggayi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the alternative policy statement for Communication, ICT and Technology for the financial year 2014/2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the one on the order paper? It is Information and National Guidance.

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, we had prepared our soft copy version and that is why we are not in that order. However, I beg to lay on Table the alternative policy statement for Information and National Guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

5.04
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nzoghu): Mr Speaker, as provided in Section 6 (e)(4) of the Administration of Parliament Act as amended in 2006 and as provided for in Rule 136 of our Rules of Procedure of the Ninth Parliament, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Works and Infrastructure for financial year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

MR BYANDALA: We do not have that Ministry of Works and Infrastructure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Next.

5.05
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr John Ken Lukyamuzi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Local Government for the financial year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is committed to the appropriate committee for handling. Next, is it Presidency?

5.06
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY AND ANTI-CORRUPTION (Mr Hussein Kyanjo): Mr Speaker, we are still working on it. It is not yet ready.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next.

5.06
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for Housing and Urban Development sector for the financial year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee.

5.07
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the alternative policy statement for the sector on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

5.08
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for East African Community Affairs for the financial year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is committed to the appropriate committee.

5.08
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Nabilah Naggayi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay alternative policy statement for Communication, ICT and Technology for the financial year 2014/2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it is committed to the appropriate committee. 
         
5.09
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the alternative policy statement on rehabilitation, relief and disaster management for the financial year 2014/2015. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that and it is referred to the appropriate committee. 

5.10
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENERGY, OIL AND MINERAL RESOURCES (Ms Florence Ibi Ekwau): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the social development sector covering the youth sub-sector. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and the appropriate committee will receive and handle it. Next.

5.11
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Jack Wamanga-Wamai): Mr Speaker and hon. members, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and refer it to the appropriate committee. Next.

5.11
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENERGY, OIL AND MINERAL RESOURCES (Ms Florence Ibi Ekwau): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative statement on energy and mineral development for the fiscal year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. Next.

5.12
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENERGY, OIL AND MINERAL RESOURCES (Ms Florence Ibi Ekwau): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for Karamoja region covering the year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it is referred to the appropriate committee. Next.

5.12  
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPECIAL REGIONS AND LUWEERO (Mr Stephen Ochola): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for special regions for the year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it is referred to the appropriate committee. Next.

5.12
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr John Ken-Lukyamuzi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. I beg to lay. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The hon. Member was laying the order paper. (Laughter) It is referred to the appropriate committee. Next.

5.13
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Muwanga Kivumbi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to lay on Table the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it is referred to the appropriate committee. Next.
5.13
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND SECURITY (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I would like to lay on Table the Ministry of Defence and Security –(Interjections)- yes, it is combining the two.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MR FUNGAROO: Alternative policy statement for the financial year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it is referred to the appropriate committee. I am advised that the one of water is available now.

5.14
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the alternative policy statement for the water and environment sector for the financial year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. There is another one for Kampala City Council Authority. Can that be the next one? The Minister is here, I am advised. (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Oh, the minister is here.

5.14
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR KAMPALA (Ms Angelline Osegge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the alternative policy statement for Kampala Capital City Authority for the year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and thank you very much, hon. Members.
 
 MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you recall that up to now, we have not received some policy statements from some Government departments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All of them have been received.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: All of them have come but they have come late and so we are processing about three of them because we got the last copy about three days ago. So we are working on about three of them and if you do not mind and it is agreed by the House, we would like to have them received by your office and you send them direct to the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, once they are ready, bring them to the Speaker’s Office and we shall forward them directly to the committee.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: It is just a request and it is not our fault. We kept following up the policies from our colleagues in the Government –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The leave is already granted.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Exactly. (Laughter) But it is normal. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, item five seems to have some issues that needed a resolution and the ministers are here but we are not able to proceed because there are some issues that are not resolved. So we defer item No.5 and handle the loan request that will come later. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY 5 JUNE, 2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. The Speaker has left me with a list but let me also inform you that the Minister for Health is here and is ready to make a short statement on Ebola. We conclude the debate on the State of the Nation Address and then we will receive the statement from the Minister.

Hon. Minister, we conclude the debate on the State of the Nation Address and then we receive your statement. The movers and seconders should move forward. The list has been given to me by the Speaker and so I will not be making any new selections and if you are not on the list, then you are not on the list. We will proceed with the list first. The member for Serere County and the time is three minutes.

5.16
MR OCHOLA STEPHEN (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. I just want to register my disappointment in the State of the Nation Address by H.E the President because he did not convince me. What I expected was accountability of what had happened in the previous financial year and what the country was like. I waited for that moment but I did not see it come to pass. Instead, the President was giving me a lot of stories. 

For example, I saw a lot of things which have not gone right; there is unemployment among the youth. I would have expected the President to tell me what the government has done about it. Look at the issue of agriculture; when the President was starting to speak about it, I thought he was going to bring it out very clearly. But I was more disappointed when it came to the budget speech. There we realised that agriculture is about 3.5 percent of our budget and yet the President was convincing the nation that we are going to cater for that sector which employs over 80 percent of Ugandans. The situation was worsened by the taxation on commodities and implements of agriculture. So I felt I got a raw deal from the President’s speech. I expected something better than that.  

I want to implore H.E the President of this nation, that in the next State of the Nation Address, he should look at issues and show us where the country is, especially in terms of employment. We should have something concrete in the next State of the Nation Address. We should also see agriculture improved in terms of budgetary allocations. 

We should also look at the infrastructures. When you look at some of the regions, like where I come from, we have only one tarmac road; the one from Tororo to Lira to Gulu. There is no other tarmac road besides that. I want to see a situation in our country where at least each and every district headquarters is joined by other district headquarters by tarmac, which is not happening until now. 

On health, I had expected the President to tell us how we are fairing. When you go to hospitals, there are no drugs; most of the hospitals – even in my own district, there are no ambulances. The old ambulances which we had broke down. Some of them got accidents and have not been replaced –(Member timed out.)

5.21
MS FLORENCE NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda for the good State of the State Nation Address and I stand to support the motion. 

African as a continent is blessed and indeed Uganda as a part of the continent is blessed in various ways; in natural resources and fertile soils. I was glad to hear the President mention that agriculture and industry are going to be the focus of Government to reduce poverty and provide employment opportunities to the youth. 

Mr Speaker, I do support the motion. As you may be aware, this country, Uganda is largely populated by the youth, so I was happy to hear that the youth are going to be given an opportunity to venture into agriculture and industrialisation. 

However, I have a concern that the agricultural inputs are being taxed, meaning that most of the youths, especially those graduating from universities are going to be put off the agricultural sector because of the taxes. And the farmers are already constrained; those in subsistence farming, whom we were encouraging to venture into commercial farming, will be negatively affected by these taxes because they cannot afford the pesticides. 

Mr Speaker, I also want Government to intervene in the industrial sector. The President said that the youth, especially those who do sciences will have an opportunity to work in the ICC. However, no figures were given and we are not sure whether most of them are benefiting from the industrialisation. At the moment, most of them find it very hard to join the industrial sector because of corruption which is rampant. And most of these sectors do not have the exact figures – we would like government to carryout research and establish whether the youth are benefiting from the ICC employment sector. 

Mr Speaker, during the State of the Nation Address, I noted that it was quite different from the previous ones –(Member timed out.)

5.25 
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concerns are three on the State of the Nation Address. The first one is to do with agricultural sector. I thought the President would give us accountability. In 2013, the President talked about one product per village. This time round, he failed to tell Ugandans which village had developed the one product per village concept. 

Secondly, he said agriculture was very important. He talked about investment and value addition. I want to present to this House proof that the President did not mean anything about it. Instead of investing in agriculture, the President in the subsequent budget speech allocated meagre resources to the agricultural sector. Instead of innovation and new technology adoption, the President proposes taxes on fertilisers, acaricides, pesticides – everything is being taxed. How will the farmers begin to innovate and adopt new technologies with that type of attitude from His Excellency? Instead of marketing the sector, the sector continues to depend on middlemen. 

In 2013, the President talked about his cow Kiremba which had 154 drug resistant ticks. As a solution, this time in the State of the Nation Address, the President proposes that pesticides and acaricides for killing ticks be taxed. How does he expect my mother’s cow now, with the new taxes, to survive the ticks – (Interjections) – Mr Speaker, protect me from hon. Alupo. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected. 

MS ALASO: We warned the President about NAADS and its failures. He now comes to join us in lamenting. This country is suffering from extension services. The second issue has to do with human resource development. The President made a commitment to develop education and improve on UPE. As we talk now, the last State of the Nation Address failed to give Uganda a comprehensive Government plan for human resource development. Instead of it, we are witnessing a situation where there are no capitation grants; where UPE – all calls for review of UPE have been ignored; teachers are not being paid; the whole programme is a failure. 

Lastly, we used to hackle the President into a comment on corruption. This time, we didn’t hackle him to that; he even could not mention it –(Member timed out.)

5.28
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me, first of all, appreciate H.E, the President for delivering the State-of-the-Nation Address.

I would like to talk about the importance of deepening science and technology in most of our activities particularly in the productive sectors of the economy. What is happening is that when you look at most of these sectors, productivity is so low in comparison to the productivity at the research stations. We suggest that the focus should be on productivity and introducing modern technologies in most of our operations.

Mr Speaker, it is critical that we consider very seriously in this country, the issue of creating a large pool of technology man power. I am saying this because this man power is very rare. I know we have many engineers but technology man power is quite different. It is this man power that transforms the country. It is critical at this stage of development that we begin to have these people in order to copy technologies that is already out there. We do not have these people and I thought that there should be an initiative just to do this in agriculture, the industry sector and all those sectors cutting across the entire economy. I thought this is very important because it is something that we have been ignoring.

But also, we can do without deepening technologies in most of these endeavours if we are to create jobs. In most of these statements made, we hardly talk about job creation. In other countries, when statements of this kind are made, the focus is usually on job creation. This statement focuses more on infrastructure like roads but what are you going to deliver to the people using these roads. That is why the return on investment on most of these roads is so negligible because we have not invested heavily in the productive capacity of the nation. These roads – (Member timed out.)

 5.31
COL.(RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I want to join my colleagues in appreciating and thanking the President for delivering the State-of-the-Nation Address.

At one time, I recall you guided this House that we should talk and discuss, in this House, what puts food in the mouths of Ugandans; that time for politics was gone. In that regard, I rise to concentrate on agriculture in the little time I have. I would like to appeal to my colleagues here to – the President addressed himself on the four-acre model. I appeal to you colleagues – suppose each of us tried to implement at least one acre of something like maize, cotton or coffee depending on the availability of land that you have, wouldn’t you set a very good example to the people that you lead?
  
Therefore, I appeal to you – if we are to follow the President, let us try to implement this four-acre model. It will show that we are good leaders and it can also act as a training model for our people as well as going a long way to enhance the incomes of Ugandans following on what the Speaker guided us on about discussing what puts food in the mouths of the people we lead. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.33
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I sat in that House and listened very carefully and got to realise that there was nothing mentioned about the foreign policy. The foreign policy of a country is very important and usually it is derived from the internal policy. If things are going on very well internally, then things will go on very well abroad.
  
Mr Speaker, we have got forces in South Sudan, Somalia and the Central African Republic but there was no mention of these at all. It took me as a surprise.
  
The President talked about agriculture and he is fond of talking about mechanisation of agriculture yet there is no mechanisation of agriculture at all. Instead, he has now started taxing even the hoes, pesticides yet 85 percent of Ugandans depend on agriculture. He also talked about coffee but how does he expect people to grow more coffee when he is taxing agricultural implements?

The other time, I heard the Minister of Works talk about the building of roads from where people will benefit economically. But the Budadiri Valley, which is the food basket for this nation has no such roads. This is where the best coffee is produced from – that Arabica AA that fetches very high prices on the world market. But when you look at the roads in that place, they are impassable. So, I keep wondering how the peasants of the Budadiri Valley can make their coffee reach the places; I keep wondering.

The maize – when you go to the shops, you see that much of the maize sold is from Mbale. It is with special taste because of the volcanic soils. But what has Government done for these farmers? So, you keep lamenting when actually there is nothing happening on the ground. This is important and when you see our alternatives, you realise that we are just advising Government on how to continue.

I also expected the President to maybe talk about corruption as my colleagues have said. Corruption has eaten up this country. But we just keep burying our heads in the sand when Government has not taken any actions against corruption. We keep spending a lot of money on administration.
 
The world community like the World Bank have talked a lot about Uganda wasting a lot of money on administration. You see how much we spend on RDCs, presidential advisors – all that is wastage of resources. We should put money in the productive sector. I am glad that the President has now come to know – he was agitating for a big population but I keep asking myself, he is talking about big populations like China, but are there social services for such a big population?

5.37
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to support the motion to thank the President for delivering the State-of-the-Nation Address. I will talk more about agriculture. The President said that 68 percent of the households of Uganda is practicing subsistence farming. This is really alarming because this percentage means 68 percent of our population comprises of poor people. These are people who are producing for the stomach. They don’t get surplus for sale. And, therefore, they cannot afford fees for the children and other basic needs for the family.

This calls for increase of the agriculture budget. I am very disappointed about the budget because the increment was so small and yet 68 percent of Ugandans are still very poor. We needed more money in this sector.

What should be done? I think we need to educate the people through the extension officers; we need to empower the extension officers, motivate them, and increase their salary. We need demonstration gardens on commercial farming in many of the affected areas. This should be installed by Government and Government should provide ox ploughs in order for these people to increase acreage in production. We need tractors and combine harvesters and with this one, we can increase the acreage of agriculture and modernise it. The President in his speech said that he wished the 68 percent could convert to commercial farming. But wishes cannot help, we need to do something about it. 

One of the things that Government has been doing is giving input to the farmers. This is not enough; although it may help to some extent but it is not enough. We need to do something better than this.

He talked about the four acre plan; it is good for people who can afford the four acres. It demonstrates the diversification of agriculture. This helps to reduce risk and uncertainty such as breakout of disease and pests, fluctuation of prices which is very common and climatic changes. I urge our farmers to embrace -(Member timed out.)

5.40
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): I wish to thank the President for exposing the position of Uganda in the State of the Nation Address. I want to concentrate my arguments in the area of agriculture because this is where we still look at many Ugandans as being poor. Majority of them are concentrating on agriculture and it is not developed.
  
It would be of serious concern for this country to see that we take serious action in ensuring that we improve on agriculture. The President said that 68 percent of Ugandans are still engaged in subsistence agriculture. That is by 2002 census from which I think nothing much has improved now. Agriculture is growing by 1.5 percent and there is a high cost of inputs.
   
This therefore shows his concern to talk about - even after 50 years of independence, we even recognise that 68 percent of the population are engaged in subsistence agriculture yet we have very good land; our rain is favourable; we have a number of people who are interested and ready to engage in agriculture and I think this should be the time to take concern and change all these methods of doing things if at all we are to improve on the wellbeing of Ugandans.

Given the fact that NAADS was being given a lot of money but the greater percentage of the money was being spent on wages and salaries, this is now the time that as Parliament and Ugandans, we demand that money which is going for NAADS should be put together to ensure that farmers are put in groups; tractors are procured for farmers; the inputs that are very expensive are put in place for farmers so that we guide them to select products and crops that have got high market in the domestic market, in the region and outside and we begin to engage in producing crops and the livestock. We put value and begin to sell them. I think if we move in this direction, then we can achieve vision 2040 and 2020 when Uganda will move to a middle income economy.
   
When the President talks about high inputs and then in the budget taxes were increased on these inputs, I really felt that there was a problem between the State of the Nation Address and the budget that was read. This is an issue that should be of concern to Parliament and to Government that something should be done.

If we want to improve by giving incentives to farmers, then we increase on the tax, which means at the end of the day instead of growing at 1.5 percent, the growth in agriculture is going to drop even below 1.5 percent to maybe one percent. I think these are issues that should be taken seriously by Government.
  
I am concerned that the implementation of decisions that are raised at EAC is still very poor - (Member timed out.)

5.44
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda for such a good report that he gave on the state of the nation.

I want to thank the President because he tackled four sectors where he wanted improvement. That is agriculture, industry, services and ICT. It is well known that agriculture is the backbone of our country. Many of our people upcountry are engaged in agriculture. It is very important for the government to invest in infrastructure that can support this sector for instance in areas of electricity whereby people can be able to add value on their products. There is also need to increase on the water coverage whereby people will be able to irrigate the crops, animals will be able to get water and that is when the agricultural sector can grow.

I want to appreciate the Government of Uganda that at last, yesterday in Namayingo District, we were able to launch the first electric pole in the district. We are hoping that my people will be able to improve on agriculture, unemployment will reduce and we shall be able to add value on our products because most of my people have been taking grain to Kenya just as it is. I am so happy and excited but still I need to urge Government to help us in getting water for irrigation because electricity alone may not be able to help us improve.

We are also interested in rearing animals but because of the scarcity of water in that area we cannot do much. The President and Government promised the people of Namayingo, Bugiri and Mayuge, the Kyabona water scheme but up to today, we have not yet received any positive response towards that. If my people can get the water, we can be able to get water for our crops and animals –(Interjections)- water is still a big challenge even when I hear somebody telling me that we have lake Victoria but the lake does not cover all sub-counties.

5.48
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Mr Speaker, I appreciate you for the opportunity you have given me as I join my colleagues on this side to appreciate the President for what I call one of the most precise and concise State-of-the-Nation Addresses that I have listened to since I started listening to them.

Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate one particular fact that His Excellency made in the address. I think since I started listening to him, it was rare to hear him address youth issues directly. And I think for the first time, I was very happy that youth issues have reached the national platform and are being appreciated as a key challenge facing this nation.

I appreciate the President because for a long time, we had been talking about youth challenges – the lack of capital among that category; the lack of skills among that sector of young persons; the lack of good education; the poor curriculum and issues regarding their livelihood and health. And, so for that matter, I want to appreciate this address.

When you look at the sectors that he talked about like ICT, agriculture, industry and services, these are sectors meant to create jobs for the young people of this country. And when I look at agriculture, I am very happy that there are initiatives that are being undertaken to encourage young people to join the agriculture sector. And as I speak now, I think there is going to be a special fund that will enable the young people to participate using the NAADS programme that is already in place.

I also want to appreciate the fact that there is a new awakening on the importance of using the NAADS resources in a more strategic way to engage farmers and to ensure that they benefit. I think this is the way to go. When you look at our people at the grassroots, out of the 10 people you will meet, seven of them are young people between 18 and 30 years. And it is only prudent that Government encourages this productive and energetic sector to go into agriculture. I appreciate the President for encouraging the young people to engage in agriculture and for taking a proactive stance by putting in interventions like that. 

However, Mr Speaker, we are generally concerned as a House for the fact that there are taxes being introduced into this sector; the taxes targeting fertilizers and hoes. We raise our concern as youth leaders because we think it is not the right way to go. Essentially, you should be supporting the agriculture sector in order to make the progress that we want. And so this tax is not good, Minister of Finance, and so in your appropriation, we hope that you will deal with that.

On the issue of emphasising the fact that as we begin to recognise challenges facing young people in this country, this one should be taken into consideration even in –(Member timed out.) 

5.52
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and also to thank the President for his elaborate State-of-the-Nation Address. In his speech, the President gave a broader picture on the basic priority sectors – that is agriculture, industry, services and ICT. The President mentioned that these four are for employment creation. He went on to talk about services, particularly tourism, stating that in 2012, Uganda was declared the best tourism destination in the whole world. However, he was concerned about pollution, deforestation and cultivation along water bodies, particularly River Nile and Lake Victoria.

Mr Speaker, the President tasked the Ministry of Water and Environment to find ways to stop this pollution, deforestation and cultivation along water bodies. I also humbly appeal to that ministry not only to stop pollution and cultivation along the two water bodies but also along the water bodies in the whole country. In particular, I would like the Minister of Environment to pay attention to River Semliki – which is a river along the border between Uganda and DR Congo. As we speak, this river has got a problem; it is eating its bank towards Uganda. I have mentioned it time and again that there is need for the ministry to come in and save the situation. Most of the floods that afflict Ntoroko District are caused by this river because when it rains, the river overflows and at the end of the day, the whole district floods. So my humble appeal is that as you look into pollution, deforestation and cultivation along water bodies, let it be for all water bodies in the country.

Mr Speaker, the President talked about agriculture being the backbone of this country. However, he went on to say that as a country, we cannot depend only on agriculture but also on industry. Industries create employment for the unemployed youth and when they get jobs, the standard of living also improves. So my humble appeal is that whenever there is a call by the President or from the government to establish a new industry, we should all support that call because at the end of the day, with new industries, we are going to have employment for all the youth of this country and the standard of living will greatly improve.

5.55
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the movers of this motion. Among the four major areas of concern that the President hinted on in this year’s State-of-the-Nation Address, agriculture was one of them – in fact the key.

But, Mr Speaker, Uganda is very good at milking cows that it does not feed. When you look at the agriculture sector, I remember very well that in the last Parliament, this House passed a loan that was meant to specifically help farmers in post-harvest handling. And you will all agree with me that Uganda’s greatest problem at the moment is that element of post-harvest handling and value-addition; after harvesting the crop, then what?

The farmers are being left at the mercy of the middlemen, who exploit them clean. At the end of the day, it is the middlemen growing richer and richer at the expense of the rural farmers.

Mr Speaker, Uganda produces a lot of maize – the one that could feed the whole region – but this maize is bought back from Kenya as posho and chicken feed that we use. But, Mr Speaker, maize from the Kenya Highlands takes nine months to mature and yet in Uganda it takes only three months and you can give it one or two additional months for post-harvest handling. We would be able to feed the entire region but little is being done to help the farmers out of this. In fact it is almost neglected. When you look at my brother from Busoga, hon. Milton Muwuma, they grow a lot of maize; look at Bunyoro, they also grow a lot of maize and the story is the same across the country. But how much is done to help the farmers reap from this?

So, Mr Speaker, I am completely touched when you look at the eggs – go downtown in Kisenyi, you will find trucks and buses loading eggs. These eggs are taken to Rwanda and Burundi, where they are re-packaged and Brussels Airlines airlifts them. Now Rwanda and Burundi are exporting the eggs that come from Uganda at the expense of Uganda. We would be the chief beneficiaries out of this but what is Government doing in order to help the farmers to get out of this? We would be earning in dollars out of our products.

Talk about all these cereals - so Government should take serious initiative into seeing how to help farmers out of being exploited because other countries are benefiting from what Uganda would be reaping.
Mr Speaker, when you look at the issue of coffee, it is what sent most of the children in Uganda to school in the good old days I keep on crying for. These were the cash crops. At the moment, we talk about coffee, fine as it is still earning Uganda good money. What about cotton –(Member timed out.)

5.59
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address. When talking about programmes like NAADS, NUSAF and PRDP, His Excellency did say that the problem is not shortage of money but it is the shortage of reliable agents for conveying this money to the people.

Mr Speaker, I think this is a very serious statement and we should not just leave it like that. As you know, those people are still there handling those programmes and they will still continue failing to take this money to the beneficiaries; the people for whom the money is meant. So Mr Speaker, I think stringent measures should be taken against people who fail to make money reach the targeted population.

When talking about the environment, His Excellency said that there was need to control the problems of pollution and deforestation. Indeed there is a lot of deforestation and pollution of the environment. Regarding deforestation, this is mostly common in the rural areas where there is a lot of charcoal burning and this charcoal is brought to urban areas. What is causing this poverty and if Government would give income generating activities to the local people, I think destruction of the trees would reduce. So Government should do something by extending income generating activities to these rural people so that they stop cutting our trees. The Ministry of Environment also needs to step up efforts in sensitising the people so that tree cutting is reduced.

It is true that we want industries promoted but this should not be at the expense of the environment or at the expense of other economic activities because some of these industries dump their toxic materials into the water bodies and we have laws protecting the environment. So there is need for Ministry of Water to work hand in hand with the relevant ministries to ensure that the environmental laws are actually implemented so that our environment is saved from destruction.

Mr Speaker, Amudat District is one of those districts, which has benefited from rural electrification and I would like to thank Government for that. However, the programme is in such a way that- (Member timed out.)

6.02
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in supporting the motion but, in particular, to thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. Indeed like other colleagues have identified, the President identified four sectors that multiply the economy and among those are - since I am representing the rural constituency of Buhaguzi, I would like to interest myself mainly with agriculture.

Mr Speaker, a lot was said in his speech especially to do with modernisation and improvement of agriculture especially from subsistence farming to commercial farming. We cannot do that if we still continue to rely on rain as a source of water for the agricultural sector.

I would like colleagues to interest themselves in promoting and ensuring that water for production in the coming budget is emphasised. In addition, I would like us as a Government to look at the performance of the Meteorological Department. As we talk, a lot has happened in various areas to do with climate change. Our farmers still guess when to plant and some of us are not technical enough to advise our farmers on when to plant. Seasons have since changed and you find that even a department like the Meteorological Department, which is responsible for disseminating information to our farmers on the right time for planting, when to expect rain and when not to expect rain is underfunded.

Since we have this opportunity of still being in the final part of the budgeting process, we could ensure that that department gets funding so that our farmers are guided on when to do the planting.

Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate Government especially on the road sector in areas of tarmacking major roads going to districts. However, the biggest challenge we have is that while you will have a tarmacked road from Kampala to Hoima, the roads where agriculture is taking place in the rural areas are impassable. Local governments have always complained of the little budget they get especially to do with rehabilitation of these feeder roads. We cannot - (Member timed out.)

6.06
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this time. I want to support the motion thanking the President for delivering his speech. Listening to the speech of the President, I was touched by various issues and one of these issues was mineral exploration. It was exciting listening to the President mentioning all the minerals that Uganda has. However, in the development of these minerals, how I wish the President had mentioned at least a factory in Karamoja. This would have been very interesting and I wish that would have happened because having a factory in Karamoja would not only employ the youth but improve the livelihoods of the people living in the region.

The President mentioned expansion of irrigation, which I thought was very good. It is very important that when we mention such schemes, we should also distribute them in the rest of the country because I know certain soils in all parts of the country are very fertile and the problem is having the technology of irrigation so that the people can produce enough crops for themselves.

The other thing that the President mentioned was tourism, which is a very good sector. I know tourism improves the economy of the country but we have a lot of game parks in our country that need a lot of attention especially, Kidepo. Kidepo is a good resource for the country not only for tourism but also as a link to Sudan. If we improve such places, I am sure the country would do very well.

I thank the President for mentioning rural electrification, which I think is very good but I hope the ministries concerned will ensure that we use this electricity to do a lot of things in many parts of the country.  

Mr Speaker, I was also excited when the President mentioned the microfinance. I hope this is going to be implemented and all the districts are going to benefit.  

It was very interesting when the President mentioned the issue of the youth fund but I hope next time, it is going to be implemented, in the same way we have been discussing in this House; the modalities of giving this fund should be uniform because, for instance, the criteria of giving the fund last time when we debated was a bit challenging. So, I hope this is going to benefit the whole country – (Member timed out.)

6.09
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the movers of this motion and I thank His Excellency for performing his constitutional duty by presenting the State of the Nation Address. 
 
In his presentation, the President indeed indicated that there are four significant sectors that will lead to economic transformation of Uganda and this was agriculture, industry, services and ICT. I want to focus on two; industry and then services. I know that agriculture can lead to socio-economic transformation but to some limited level and for a country to take off, we must go industrialisation. And in Uganda, this is happening at a reasonable pace but I am questioning and I wish for us to look at this critically; who are those investing in Uganda?  

Most of those people that are involved in the manufacturing industry are foreign and our ministers and perhaps even our laws are giving these foreigners 100 percent investment. I know we get jobs from them and we also get taxes from these industries but the returns are repatriated. With this trend, I cast doubt that we may ever take off depending on taxes minus looking at the returns for economic transformation.  

I therefore wish to implore the supervisors of these sectors to look at them critically that Ugandans and Uganda indeed could co-invest with these foreign investors.  

When it comes to the service industry, this is a very good thing and most of our youth, I know, are employed in this. But who are those who own them? The banks are all foreign and I now see so many Indians taking the employment in these institutions that are owned by foreigners. So, today, even when we are saying that unemployment is around 80 percent, we are also reducing the little opportunities that will be there for the Ugandans. I would wish therefore to see Uganda investing in the service industry and seeing banks that belong to Uganda or Ugandans. We are talking about Tourism where we got 1.2 million tourists in Uganda but using one entry point, which is Entebbe Airport. And some people may not want to take six hours to travel to Murchison but wish to fly for two hours and thirty minutes and reach another tourist destination –(Member timed out.)

6.12
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the State of the Nation Address, we would expect the President to inspire the nation, to lift up the spirits of Ugandans so that they can know that the leadership can orient them towards a better Uganda. This is not the first time that the President failed to inspire Ugandans. He has failed to inspire Ugandans before. In this recent State of the Nation Address, he failed to tell us that the regional integration process can provide better livelihood for Ugandans. In particular, he was trying to answer the question of whether we have got dividends out of regional integration. We have been asking about the net trade benefit out of regional integration. The President did not have figures to satisfy us. This is unprecedented.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, having read and keenly listened to the President deliver the State of the Nation Address, it was very inspiring. And also in regard to what Dr Lulume is talking about - regional integration as being of no benefit to the Ugandans when actually we are negotiating at the World Trade Organisation as the East African Community in terms of trade with the international groups. So, I wonder whether my honourable colleague is really in order to mislead this House that we are wasting time in engaging with the international fora like the World Trade Organization, the COMESA and the EAC. This is a global world. So, is the honourable member really in order? 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Buikwe, now you have very good information to be inspired. Please proceed.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much for that wise ruling. She is also my neighbour at Bauman House and I hope she will perform much better than the President when she offers the State of the Nation Address. 
 
But, Mr Speaker, I know what I am talking about because when talking about regional integration especially in market integration, which I believe the President should know, we are talking about the trade benefits, trade diversion in respect of trade creation and then we talk about the net trade benefits; I am surprised that I am receiving a lot of interruption but it is okay, as he is my colleague.

DR RUGUNDA: I thank my colleague, the Shadow Minister for Health, for giving way. The information that I really want to give is that trade figures are well known by many Ugandans. For example, it is very well known that last year, Uganda had trade figures in COMESA of $1.5 billion in terms of exports from Uganda and we had within the East African Community about $600 million. 

So, these are daily figures and I do not think that it is fair that His Excellency the President, while addressing honourable members of Parliament, should routinely recite figures that are common knowledge to the Wanaichi and definitely to hon. Members of Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, I hope that I will get some little more time because of these interruptions but I am delighted that the honourable Minister for Health is giving us this information -(Interjections) -  Mr  Speaker, can I yield the Floor so that we can enrich this debate and hon. Alaso can inform me and I can concentrate? (Laughter) 
 
MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Lulume. The information I would like to give to you in trade terms with the East African region is that all the chicken that is eaten in the DRC plus the eggs are from the European Union largely Belgium, notwithstanding the fact that we as a neighbour, have paid a very high price including security matters to try to help our neighbours.

The second bit of information is that in Juba, South Sudan, our trade is largely a matter of chicken and a few little things that are not organised while our neighbours like Kenya have banks, strategic interests like the pipeline and the railway and all those types of things. In my view, we are not benefiting along those lines. 

DR BAYIGGA: I think that was quite useful even to hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. What I want to emphasise, Mr Speaker, is that yes, there could be some trade but there is trade that is diverted. So what a country should count is the net trade benefit that should accrue to the coffers of our country and I want to assure you that it is Kenya which is reaping out of this integration; Uganda is continuing to be a night consumer within this integration process. Actually, countries like Rwanda are benefiting from the tourism using the integration process more than Uganda. So, the –(Member timed out.)

6.19
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am honoured to be given this opportunity. I want to thank His Excellency, the visionary leader of this country, for the State of the Nation Address he delivered to this Ninth Parliament. Before I proceed, I want to thank the Opposition because for the first time in this House, they have brought an alternative view which is very useful. However –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, you have presided over this House for a long time; every year, the Opposition brings alternative policy positions. Even before my dear honourable sister, Jacqueline Amongin joined this House, we would bring alternative statements and policy positions including the loan scheme. Is she therefore in order to assert very authoritatively that “For the first time”, when the library and the Hansard have our statements?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, for an alternative view to be an alternative, it doesn’t just have to come from the other side; it really has to be an alternative. So, I do not know whether it is an assessment of the honourable member that the views that you used to present in form of alternatives never provided alternatives –(Laughter)– but if that is what she meant that there was no view from this side of the Opposition that would not be in order. But if she is saying that in her assessment the presentations made from this side never made alternatives, then that would be her opinion on which I am not able to rule. 

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I was cut short because I was just thanking the Opposition for presenting their Opposition statement; I expected the Opposition to also appreciate those times when the government is right so that we can balance the debate. 

As a country and as the East African Community, we are negotiating the economic partnership agreement and we finance the East African Community. When you look at our strategic advantages in agriculture – if we are to benefit at the World Trade Organisation, I think it is imperative that we take agriculture as a key sector. In this particular aspect, it was justified for the President of the Republic of Uganda to emphasise agriculture because we must benefit from it at the international level. 

Mr Speaker, I am happy that the Minister of Finance, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, is in the House. Whereas the President in the State of the Nation Address mentioned that most farmers were not able to afford agricultural inputs, majority of the farmers in Uganda are women and 70 percent of the women contribute to agriculture effectively in Uganda. So, I think it is the right time for the Minister of Finance to revisit the tax on agricultural inputs –(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member knows very well that the Minister for Finance reads the Budget Speech on behalf of the President. Is she therefore in order to insinuate that the Minister of Finance who is present here is acting contrary to what the President wanted to mean in the State of the Nation Address?

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the member is saying that there was a major shift of policy between what the President said and what was presented in the budget – (Laughter).

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. As the emphasis for the State of the Nation Address was on agriculture, I want to propose that agriculture should be seen holistically in terms of the value chain; from the production to storage and to the market because if we do not do value addition at the local level, then the local farmer is bound to lose. At the end of the day, the local farmer will get peanuts. That is why some people say, “I would rather be a cow in Europe than be a farmer in Africa.” So, I think at this point in time we need to treat agriculture holistically. 

Mr Speaker, as an advocate of water – water for production is very important; I was overwhelmed when the President talked about partnering with a Japanese company in ensuring that while we emphasise agriculture, there must be water for production including irrigation –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we need to draw this to a close. We have an urgent important statement on Ebola from the Minister of Health –(Interjections)– now the Speaker is speaking – (Laughter)– there is an important statement that we requested for and the minister is here to make that statement. I still have many names on my list. I do not know how to resolve this but if we are to go by the three minutes, we may not be able to capture everyone on the list. Can we reduce this to two minutes please since much of the debate has already been exhausted? We will use two minutes for each member contributing and in that order, I will have Obongi, Otuke, Kampala, Kabula, Namutumba, Yumbe and Ajuri.

6.26
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the interest of time, I want to focus on one item. I want to say that the President did not make a sensible State of the Nation Address but he performed a ceremony designated by law. I congratulate him for playing his role. 

Look at page 13 regarding the issue of ICT growing at 15 percent annually; Mr Speaker, you are a serious person in matters of research. In this statement of the President, he says, “15 percent”, of what? What are the drivers of this growth? What is he using here; is it the number of people using phones, is it the type of technology that Ugandans now have? 

And in the interest of the Minister of Health who is here, one of the forms of information communication technology which Uganda has acquired and which reached Obongi and is now dead is the use of radio call systems. This Parliament passed money to equip every health centre with radio calls. In Obongi, almost all health centres III have radio call structures but they are not working. You find that they are not - (Interruption)

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you, Ndugu Fungaroo. I just want to inform my brother, hon. Fungaroo, that communication technology is rapidly advancing and that radio calls are an old fashioned method of communication. These days, there are numerous advances and we use either telephones or electronic communication and Skype, to mention but a few and that is true.
Mr Speaker, it true that the policy of Government now is to equip health facilities with connectivity of computers so that doctors and nurses in these health centres and hospitals can communicate with their colleagues in more advanced centres within the country and beyond. So, my brother, hon. Fungaroo, we don’t have to go look for radio calls. We should put them in the museum of communication and just focus on modern electronic communication. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is good that it is the Minister of Health answering to this concern. Where we have these radio calls and which are now obsolete, you should have replaced them with the modern technology you are talking about. But what have you taken to Obongi? Internet communication in Obongi is generally very poor. You cannot –(Member timed out.)

6.30
MR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, it is right that the President identified agriculture as one of the main sectors that can create employment. But he is also encouraging farming on a fragmented land system – encouraging farming to be done on four or three acres of land and so on. I would like to inform the House - and it is my opinion - that this kind of farming does not stand the test of time. If he really means well for our people by making agriculture a source of income, we should go for long-term planning where we will resettle our people in major centres like towns and leave the villages with large chunks of land for commercial farming. This is what I advocate for and advise the government and the President to focus on for the future of this country.

Two, the President also lamented about NAADS and its poor performance and he believes strongly and he has said it in his subsequent addresses all over the country that the people who can manage this project are the soldiers. I have nothing against our soldiers; these are our sons, brothers, sisters and our parents but I have a concern. There are some critical sectors in this country where when Government is implementing some critical policies and when there is a lot of money involved, it tends to deploy soldiers to implement such. We don’t know for what motive. Even the current identity card registration – (Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the UPDF Act clearly mandate the UPDF to be called on to give that extra hand in any developmental matter. So, is the Member in order to begin doubting the capacity and ability of the UPDF to serve while it has been called upon in any other form?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you now know those constitutional provisions. Bear them in mind as you speak. (Laughter)

MR JACINTO OGWAL: Mr Speaker, thank you for the wise ruling. My concern remains the same – (Member timed out.)

6.33
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since we have very little time, I will concentrate on the issue of the four-acre plan for agriculture. Consequently, the President touched the poultry industry as a backyard activity. I think agriculture is a very important sector in this country where NAADS has spent lot of money; I think it was a miss of the President to call this a backyard activity - treating it as an extra activity in farming. So, right now, I can say that the poultry industry has been funded through NAADS. Unfortunately, a lot of that money has been squandered; that is why the President maybe considered it as a backyard activity.

We would have expected the President to even talk about the Poultry Bill that we have been waiting for. However, of the Bills that the President talked about in his address, the Poultry Bill was not among. I wonder if the President and this government still consider poultry as a mere backyard activity. I think in – (Interjections)– in the interest of time, I will not accept any briefing. What I am saying is that Government should consider poultry as a holistic and noble activity in agriculture and not a mere backyard activity.

And in the forthcoming Poultry Bill, I would urge Government, through the concerned minister – I have not seen the Minister of Agriculture here –(Member timed out.)

6.35
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want thank the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address but I am going to dissect that address in four ways. The standard form globally for a country that is developing like Uganda is based on strategic management – that is political, economic, socio-infrastructure, information technology and human resource management. When the President said that the political stability of this country crowns it all and that we should take advantage of that, he was absolutely right because he has been in charge. I am sure everybody has to give credit to this government and the President of the Republic of Uganda in the sense that the peace and stability we are enjoying came through his human resource management and his capability and being alert.

When he talked about the economy, he said that the service industry that is growing – and I know in terms of economics that a cost is a committed resource to achieve an objective. Where should we invest our money? Should we invest it in the service industry that is growing at a rate of 9.7 percent or in an industry that is growing at a lesser rate than that?

When he said that we should commit money and invest more in the service industry, where we need to focus most because Government has provided infrastructure so that it can have an economic multiplier effect for Government to sponsor its activities in the budget, other people said that we depend on agriculture. The contribution of agriculture to the GDP is just 22 percent while the service industry is contributing 28 percent and tax collection from the agriculture sector is just 1 percent but for the service industry, it is about 17 percent –(Member timed out.)

6.38
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to support the motion. I would like to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda for the excellent, precise and realistic State of the Nation Address.

On page 7 of the address, the President brings it out clearly that the idea of engaging the 68 percent of the households that were engaging in subsistence farming according to the census of 2002 in the four-acre plan is the best option. Many of us have witnessed this happen where these households have engaged in four-acre plan and earning more than 20 million a year. This is really the way to go. For example, in Namutumba District where the household land holding is three acres on average, if we took on this venture, I think Namutumba would be at its best. What I would like to request is that the new NAADS model should handle the four-acre plan seriously so that our people benefit. 

There is also need for NAADS to also concentrate on fish farming. The Minister of State for Fisheries, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, visited the fish farmers in my district in 2013 and I came to learn that her ministry helped fish farmers through NAADS. How I wish the ministry could do it directly to the farmers themselves because –(Member timed out.)

6.40
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the President for the State of the Nation Address. The President attached more value to the four sectors that look at increased production and productivity. However, considering the low levels of technology and mechanisation in this country where we completely rely on human labour, we need a healthy population. One of the ways of getting a healthy population is prevention because prevention is better than cure and is cheaper. One of the ways of prevention is immunisation. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Government for the 100 percent funding for traditional vaccines in this country. As a country, we have gone further to introduce new vaccines that are mostly or 80 percent funded by donors. Therefore, I am requesting Government to at least fund the 20 percent so as not to let the donors down. I therefore want to sound a drum in the ears of Government that we are in the process of attaining a middle income country and we must be prepared that when we reach there, the donors will immediately withdraw. Therefore, we need to begin to prepare now such that when they withdraw, we shall stand on our own to fund these vaccines because they are very expensive.

As immunisation is one of the areas –(Member timed out.)

6.42
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, whereas I salute the President for fulfilling his obligation, I rise to raise one fundamental omission in this year’s State of the National Address. This Parliament knows that there are three organs upon which a government rests; - Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary. Perusing through the 24 pages of the State of the Nation Address, there is no mention of the Judiciary and yet it is one of the pillars upon which a state rests, upon which a government rests.

The administration of justice in Uganda has made achievements in the last one year, with challenges. Key among the challenges they are talking about is the introduction of the Judiciary Administration Bill. They are talking about challenges within; the inadequacy of High Court judges, the justices of the Court of Appeal are inadequate; the Supreme Court of the Republic of Uganda is not yet duly constituted. We are talking about delays in the administration of justice. May I therefore appeal - because I believe this can be an omission arising from the fact that the Judiciary did not present its brief to be captured in the State of the Nation Address or this is an omission by the speech writers of the President - may I therefore appeal to both that this should be drawn to the attention of the President because the Judiciary plays an important and pivotal role in the development of the state and therefore - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that brings us to the close of the general debate on this matter. I will ask the mover of the motion to call upon the House to support the motion in two minutes.

6.44
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank all the colleagues who joined me in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address and I still continue to urge the House to know that we have a President who has clear and committed leadership with passion; that is why almost every district has seen the President visiting and staying with the people.

Before I conclude, I still call upon the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw his statement that he made because in paragraph 152 - perhaps the statement should be expunged from the Hansard of Parliament. It reads; “They talk of women emancipation yet turn them into clapping and kneeling human beings for crumbs.” I think it is very unfair and I ask him to withdraw.
 
MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is mandated by the Constitution and by the parliamentary Rules of Procedure to provide an alternative view in a critical moment like this and therefore an alternative State of the Nation Address. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to demand a withdrawal of what is prescribed by law? You can refuse it but you cannot demand, in my view. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the honourable member was expressing a disappointment with a particular sentence. I think it is within her right to do so. She has just stated it in the expression that “Withdraw” and I think it is just a demonstration that it is not right; it is not proper for it to occupy that space. That is all she is saying.

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. As I conclude my statement, I urge the Government of Uganda particularly as we send our troops in the region to help in pacifying the region over security. We should be mindful and try to negotiate business terms that benefit the taxpayers after the mission. I am saying this out of the debate that arose in the House where Members are really concerned that after serving in foreign missions, we normally come back empty-handed but Government can still do something. 

I also urge Government to review the taxes imposed on agricultural inputs to support farmers in the fight against poverty.

Mr Speaker, I urge Ugandans to play their role and be patient with development which takes time; even Rome was not built in a day. I will conclude by saying that any hard work done by a Ugandan everyday helps to move Uganda forward. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the state of the nation by H.E, the President, to this Parliament on Thursday, 5 June 2014. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH ON EBOLA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Health, first of all, thank you for responding very quickly to deal with this issue; it was urgent.

6.49
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I apologise that the statement may not be readily available on our website but we have asked that it is posted. So, I expect it to be posted any time. But if I may proceed, with your permission, Sir, this is a short statement from the Ministry of Health and therefore from the Government of Uganda on measures being taken to prevent the spread of Ebola.

Mr Speaker, three countries of West Africa: Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone have for the last four months been severely hit by an outbreak of the Ebola epidemic. As of 27th July, there were 1,323 registered cases in those three countries, including 729 deaths.

The epidemic has since spilled over to Nigeria and we have just received information of a new unconfirmed case in Nairobi, Kenya. This outbreak affected Monrovia, the capital city of Liberia, hence the escalating cases and the transmission by international travellers. This has caused panic among Ugandans with a fear that Ebola could spread to Uganda.

The Government of Uganda therefore wishes to clarify on the following:

There is no confirmed case of Ebola in Uganda. Media reports of a reported case in Kitgum and Kampala districts have not been verified. Any reported case will be investigated promptly and the public will be accordingly informed.

I wish to reaffirm that no case has been reported in the country since the outbreak was declared in West Africa. Our National Taskforce on Epidemics and Disease Surveillance is on alert to watch out on any Ebola alerts throughout the county. The Ministry of Health will regularly update the country on the outbreak.

Since July 2014, the Ministry of Health has undertaken the following measures to prevent the spread of Ebola in Uganda:
    1. We have heightened surveillance in all districts. All districts have been directed to be vigilant and look out for suspected cases and send alerts for immediate action. Additionally, all districts with border posts have been asked to intensify disease surveillance especially for people with a travel history to the affected countries.
    2. We have intensified screening at Entebbe International Airport. We have set up a health desk to conduct this screening. The exercise targets all people with recent travel of 21 days in any affected countries. The isolation unit at Entebbe and the airport medical centre have been equipped. We have selected 21 days because this is on the higher side of the incubation period of this disease. It can normally range from three days to about 21 days.
    3. We have adequate medical and health supplies in all regional referral hospitals in readiness for any possible outbreak.
    4. The National Medical Stores (NMS) has stocked the necessary medical and health supplies ready for dispatch to any affected region.
    5. A team of experts has already been dispatched to Buvuma Island to ascertain the entry points and give guidance on Ebola control measures.
    6. The Ministry of Health has assembled a team of experts to be on standby to be deployed in areas where suspected cases are reported.

Precautions

Mr Speaker, the public is advised to limit their travels to any of the affected countries until the situation is contained. The Ministry of Health clarifies that there is no travel bans to the affected countries. In case of any travels, the public is advised to observe the precautionary measures instituted by the respective affected countries.

The public is further reminded that Ebola is a highly infectious disease, which presents with high grade fever and bleeding tendencies. It is very infectious, kills in a short time but can be prevented. The signs and symptoms of the disease include: fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, headache, measles-like rash, red eyes, and sometimes with bleeding from body openings.

Ebola can be spread through contact with affected persons and by using instruments and objects that have been used by an infected person. Likewise, a person can get it by touching a dead body of a person who has died of the disease hence the need for protective clothing.

The Ministry of Health once again calls upon the public to be vigilant and stay calm as all possible measures are being taken to keep the country safe from the epidemic. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. We requested for this statement at the beginning of the sitting today and I am glad you were able to come up with this statement, which has given good information to the public. Let us now have a limited debate for a short time.

6.57
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the statement. In Uganda - I was trying to recall something; when they talk about Ebola experts, I do not know why Dr Bitekyerezo is not mentioned yet in 2002, I was the chief clinician for Ebola patients in Mbarara where I lost five patients who I buried myself; I dug the graves myself.

Mr Speaker, I am one of those few doctors in Uganda that survived together with Dr Zabron and Dr Isanga who was in Bundibugyo. Dr Lukwiya died and I went to pray for him as they had already buried him in Gulu.

There are some things I want to tell the minister and the nation. I am reliably informed that because of the little money some doctors in Uganda get, whenever they hear that there is an epidemic somewhere, Ugandan doctors tend to go to get the money. The doctor who died in Liberia - Dr Sam Mutooro, I taught him in Mbarara and I employed him in my clinic. He was a very wonderful surgeon and the man is gone.

I am reliably informed that some doctors in Uganda who are attached to WHO have already gone to West Africa and of course the Minister of Health has no control over this because he does not employ them. These doctors are going to go there and come back stealthily. I hope that the Entebbe health unit will be able to screen these doctors when they come back so that they are also put under proper scrutiny for 21 days and quarantined properly so that they do not spread this disease to Ugandans. Mr Speaker, why should we become so lenient simply because these doctors look very diplomatic and they come back from West Africa and the disease spreads in this country? We have a very big challenge.

Today, we were listening to the doctors from regional referral hospitals and Moroto Hospital has only one surgeon or consultant called Dr Andama. The rest are not there. You can imagine if somebody goes and passes through Karamoja because I am very sure that when these people come back and they know we have talked about Ebola, they may end up passing through Busia and Malaba because they do not want to be quarantined and we are going to get problems. So, I am urging the minister to be very serious. 

We should be running adverts on the radios and TVs so that we can stop Ugandans from travelling to West Africa. I also urge my colleagues, as a doctor and not as an MP; fellow colleagues, I want you to stop going to West Africa until things normalise. Whether you are a minister or not, once it has caught you – Hon. Chief Whip, you can end up causing us problems here. 

Ministers, please do not go for those conferences. I want you to learn how to dodge. You cannot attend every conference you have been called to and Ugandans like going to Ghana. Now if it is in Nairobi, we shall get a problem because Ugandans go to Nairobi everyday by bus. You can imagine Rwanda is going to be affected, Uganda will be affected, even Burundi. That is why hon. Minister, you should go on the radio and TV so that they start airing information about these symptoms and how we can prevent further spread of this disease.

I am lucky to be alive; I am supposed to be dead because I touched patients without gloves as we never had gloves in the hospital. I only survived possibly because I was immunologically competent but I do not know whether everybody who goes there is going to survive.

By the way, even the spread mechanism of this disease is still very tricky because almost all the doctors that have been found with such problems in West Africa have died. So, hon. Minister, protect Ugandans. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

7.02
DR MICHAEL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the Minister of Health for giving this informative expose and my colleague, hon. Bitekyerezo, for the addition he has made. 

Mr Speaker, I hope this is not going to end here because the minister has given some good information and I believe this can be uploaded on the iPads of the members of Parliament. By nature, members of Parliament and politicians would want to shake hands. Many of them want to hug and maybe kiss and do other things –(Interruption)– I beg to be protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which rule provides for those things? (Laughter)

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, allow me to proceed. This information is very important and I think it is quite timely. In Uganda, we usually wait for the disease to afflict Ugandans then we come up and start to put out the fire but I believe a stitch in time saves nine.

I am concerned about the budget for public health. Even in the attendant policy statement, very little money is accorded to this very important sector and the spending is on the hardware stuff and the software stuff are not accorded the requisite finances that we need.

Dr Bitekyerezo is trying to advise the Minister of Health to ensure that he goes on the media but the media houses definitely cost some money. You need the requisite funding but I believe that there is only Shs 3 billion for that and if we went into gear and educated people about Ebola outbreaks and how to prevent ourselves from getting it, it is very likely that we will spend it in one month.

So, I think this is a rude awakening to the Ministry of Finance in particular that when they are preparing their budgets, they should accord enough finances for public health and health literacy campaigns to enable health literacy to take root in the Uganda population. That is the only way that people can avoid catching diseases, which would kill them in the first instance.

I would like to add to what Dr Bitekyerezo –(Interruption)

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and my colleague. The information I would like to give, which is very important to the House in regard to the public health budget is that whereas the honourable minister has given a statement on Ebola to the House, we still have a very big challenge in regard to Hepatitis. Hepatitis B is killing so many people in Teso and also the neighbouring districts and people do not know how this disease is acquired or how it is spread. When we presented it as an issue of national importance, the minister stood up and said Teso is going to be given emergency attention but nothing has been done. So when -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a problem of Ebola outbreak; let us stick to that. Please, let us analyse this.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much. Lastly to the hon. Minister of Health, you may assume that many health workers know how to control these diseases or even to identify and make a right diagnosis or even a suspicion, which is not true. This calls for continued medical education of our health workers especially those at the grassroots level - the nurses, the clinical officers and the doctors in health centres IV who may be isolated from the rest of the world. They need to be reached if need be on their mobile telephones so that they can access this information and treat it as a matter of urgency. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.07
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a very simple clarification that I seek from the minister. Last week, we had a national women’s conference and in this conference, there was a resource person from Sierra Leone. We are talking about quarantine and stopping people from going to West Africa but there are people coming into the country from West Africa. Are these people subjected to quarantine? What is the plan of the ministry?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification from the member for Serere.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Minister for this information. The case of Kitgum Hospital concerning the late Abwola Justine is a case of just two days and you said that you have already established that it was not an Ebola case. I am just wondering how much time - were the samples flown from Kitgum to Entebbe today and got the results or you were just trying to stabilise us? Would it be okay if you just told us that you are yet to confirm?

And then on matters of screening, all our neighbours are doing very rigorous screening. Ethiopia is doing very rigorous screening, Nairobi has also started very rigorous screening and then I passed through Entebbe recently and kind of did not see the rigorous screening. Is it that you have to validate some of this information yourself because you could have a very comfortable answer meant to keep us at peace when things are not happening on the ground?

Would you consider, hon. Minister - I know that we represent the entire country here but would you consider a special address to the nation tomorrow morning about these matters that you raised? At 6 O’clock today, President Uhuru Kenyatta was addressing the nation over that one Ebola case. Is it something you want to consider so that we have really a grasp on these issues before they get out of hand? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.10
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for this information but I have a problem with the view given by Dr Bitekyerezo, particularly where he said that Ugandan doctors under the auspices of WHO are going to West Africa to make a contribution in the fight against that disease. I thought that in the spirit of Pan-Africanism and humanity, we as Ugandans, would wish to share our expertise and experience in the fight against Ebola. We have gone through the same kind of problems and during the time when Dr Lukwiya died in Gulu, I was part of the team that led the students, as I was a student in Gulu School of Clinical Officers, and we fought together. I saw Dr Lukwiya die but his death served and saved so many people. We have sent troops to fight in South Sudan and also fight in Congo –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable –

MR FUNGAROO: Let me –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please –(Laughter)– the point of the honourable member was that as we talk now, Ugandan doctors attached to WHO have already gone to those places and they are there. Now when they come back, we should contain them and make sure they do not spread this virus. He was not saying that they should not go, please.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for that clarification, Mr Speaker, but this needs to be clarified and the hon. Minister, as a minister who has worked within and outside Uganda for this Government, tells us the plan of the Government of Uganda maybe under the auspices of the African Union where we are members. Members of a sister African state are being killed by the disease. Is Uganda not making a contribution to save that country? Are you organising experts like Dr Bitekyerezo to be sent to Sierra Leone? –(Laughter)– yes, we send the best and we have them here. So why don’t we feel proud of our own? At least he can go there to train people on how to contain that disease.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to call upon Ugandans here not to get so scared to the extent of withdrawing from the front line, the disease should be fought. (Interruption)  

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Fungaroo. You have just told us that you led a team in Gulu. Wouldn’t it be prudent if you helped the Ugandans and be part of the team to go to Sierra Leone?  (Laughter)
 
MR FUNGAROO: Yes, Mr Speaker, through you if the country deems it fit that I constitute a team and of course I cannot go on my own –(Laughter)– I must go as a system but not on my own. I need to go as part of the team of the Ministry of Health. If the Minister for Health seated in front of me and this Parliament constitutes a team to go to Sierra Leone, I will volunteer to go. [MS KASULE LUMUMBA: “With Dr Lulume.”] Dr Lulume Bayigga is the most capable doctor and actually this is the real Minister for Health managing this country. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member. Can we have the members for Kigulu and Kyadondo. 

7.14
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much. I want to thank the minister for the statement and also build on from where hon. Komuhangi stopped on screening or having a special arrangement for the people coming in from other countries.

Our immigration system is slightly loose. Last weekend, I travelled by bus from Kasese but the way we were congested in the bus without any documentation or checking - we are always reactionary in the way we handle our issues. When we were hit or when we suspected terrorists to have crossed the borders, I remember there were security measures everywhere but all of a sudden, there is laxity. So for this particular issue, we have to be cautious and I want to appeal to the Minister to work with the immigration officials at all border points and if possible, let us create a special stall for these people coming from West Africa and when they come – I remember that the countries we go to, they ask whether you are Nigerian or from this or that country and they check you in a special way. So, let us also borrow that leaf and thoroughly screen these people.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I was reading and it is on the internet even - they are saying that there is a man who has suffered from Ebola and has recovered. He can still transmit Ebola through his semen for two months meaning that if anybody is coming from West Africa and has recovered from Ebola and just gets involved with any woman here – I am telling you that.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Dr Bitekyerezo, for the information. I hope that they are not coming here to pass on semen. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue that I wanted to talk about is to appeal to colleagues not to become alarmists. If we turn into alarmists, we are going to scare off tourists. For example, when I was entering, I got an alarmist colleague trying to create that impression that in Uganda, it is that bad. We will scare off tourists and other guests that will be bringing in dollars and for example when I was exiting –(Interjections)– no, I mean that if we created that impression that Uganda has been invaded by Ebola before we confirm, we shall be unfair to ourselves. There was a colleague outside there who was saying, “My friend, you should not touch me because there is Ebola.” It is too early for us to draw conclusions.

I just want to appeal to the people who hold microphones to respect what comes out of our mouths instead of just saying whatever we feel like. I thank you.

7.17
MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for his statement. Before I came to Parliament, I heard his voice on the radio where he has already started broadcasting and cautioning people. But as somebody has said, we need well organised “pregnant” statements like he has given to the general public and also to re-echo his statement that we should not panic. Otherwise we shall also endanger the would-be tourists who would come to Uganda who could have been diverted from the West African countries.

The clarification that I wanted to get from the hon. Minister is about how he is organised in the way of funding. I know that whenever we get such cases, we usually panic and come to Parliament. Now that he has known that there is a scourge and it is spreading like a wildfire, how is he organised? Have you composed a team with the Ministry of Finance to make sure that just in case you need more money for broadcasting or testing or creating mobile laboratories, you would have them ready?

Lastly, is that some of these outbreaks are due to changes in weather patterns. All of a sudden, we have a dry season which is not really dry and diseases can easily multiply. So we usually get such outbreaks from our border towards Congo. So how are we prepared in that particular area? There are claims that some hospitals have only one doctor. Are these teams already sent to those areas so that in case there is an outbreak they can handle it there and then?

7.19
MR JOSEPH KIYINGI BBOSA (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Allow me to thank the Minister of Health for the statement on Ebola. Allow me to place emphasis on a point that hon. Milton Muwuma did mention here. I have also used road transport by bus, not from Kasese but from Kabale and my experience was a bit worrying because I noticed that some people were being dropped off to my constituency and these people did not even know where they were going. They were just asking the conductor to drop them there. So we need to be very cautions to protect our lives. 

My query to the minister is, research has shown there are other carriers of Ebola. We have Chimpanzees, monkeys and bats. So, I request you to consider those animals as well in your research because we have people who are so passionate about those animals; some even hug and kiss monkeys and others eat their meat; so we need to be cautious. And in such a situation of crisis, I am aware that people are forced to migrate voluntarily or involuntary. So we need to be cautious in that line so as to safeguard our fellow Ugandans. Thank you. 

7.21
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really want to salute the colleagues for making very useful contributions to this discussion and salute my colleague, the Minister of Health in waiting – except that he is going to wait for a long time - for a very good contribution that he made in support of public health. It was a very constructive contribution. 

The comment made by Ndugu Bitekyerezo; it is good that we have an eye witness and somebody who helped others to survive. Hon. Bitekyerezo, we salute you for your professional commitment; that is very good - the courage and the fact that you were even able to see off those who passed away properly. 

Mr Speaker, last week on 24th July, I made a statement at the Media Centre accompanied by the technical staff. This afternoon, I also made a statement on behalf of Government at the Media Centre and we will continue to regularly brief the country about what is happening; alerting the population and tightening our readiness for any eventuality. Now, a point was raised –(Interruption) 

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. It is good that you are planning to keep updating the nation about this problem but I do not know whether you are aware that there are some parts of this country which are not connected to radios. For example, in Amudat District, the radio that we can pick is UBC and KBC and another Kenyan Radio. So in such a situation, how are you going to help the people? For our case, we should not be looking at the radio. Hon. Minister, you need to get ways to also reach the people in Amudat. 

DR RUGUNDA: Our sister Rosemary is raising a unique case of Amudat. But we will continue working as a team. If you cannot get the radio, you may be connected to the Internet – (Laughter) – well, Mr Speaker, let me tell the people that internet connection is a very simple issue. In fact hospitals, health centres, RDCs and CAOs are now connected. So when a CAO or RDC receives information, his or her duty is to convey this message to the people. 

Secondly, political leaders, let us use whatever methods we can – such as the methods we use during campaigns to reach our people. I am particularly asking you, Rosemary, to ensure that you use your network to reach the population. The other point raised was –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Hon. Minister, I think one of the ways we can help them is through the SMS, if the mobile networks are connected. I know they now reach the greater part of this country. That could help besides other means that we want to use. 

DR RUGUNDA: I think my brother Okupa has a reasonable idea; electronic communication may be limited but still the few that receive it can disseminate it. Thank you, Ndugu Okupa, for that input. So the message, Mr Speaker, is that let us use whatever method of communication to reach the Wanainchi even those in Karamoja.

Now, Ndugu Fungaroo, as usual raised significant and controversial points. His point though of us standing side by side with our brothers in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia is absolutely a correct position. In fact, we have already done this. Hon. Elioda, the Minister of State for Health in charge of General Duties, was recently in Accra accompanied by a technical team. They went and attended a ministerial conference in West Africa on the management of Ebola. The World Health Organisation specifically asked Uganda to share her experience and we were gladly available to share our experience. My brother Elioda came back three weeks ago and he is in perfect shape. He gave us a good report and we continue to give technical advice to the countries concerned both directly and through the World Health Organisation. So you made a very good point. 

Now, our sister Komuhangi on rigorous screening and other colleagues who have also raised this point are absolutely right and we cannot do it alone as Ministry of Health; we do it as Government. And as you know, immigration is part of Government and we are working closely together in that direction. (Interruption)

MS CHEMUTAI: I am a member of the Science and Technology Committee and we sometimes interact with students from universities. The other day we interacted with students from Makerere University and we discovered that we also have students from West Africa in Uganda and there are those who are now coming in for admission. So, maybe as you respond to that question, please clarify on how you are handling that.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: My sister, hon. Phyllis Chemutai, has a point but let us also not cut off Uganda from other people. 

Secondly, we need to increase our vigilance and preparedness to deal with any situation.

Three, and which is connected to what my sister, hon. Alice Alaso, said about that case in Kitgum and upon which she wanted to know the position, we got that report. A patient passed on with some symptoms – the symptoms that I read out such as fever are general symptoms. A specimen was taken from him and brought to the Uganda Virus Institute. This afternoon I had a discussion with the Director General of Health Services, Dr Jane Acheng, who told me that the results should be ready tomorrow morning but we are taking results from many different people and whenever there is remote suspicion, we don’t want to take chances; we collect samples and take them. Otherwise, clinically, we did not have a strong case suggesting Ebola. Nevertheless, we are not taking chances; we are waiting for the specimen results and when they come out, the country and definitely the Parliament of Uganda will be informed. 

So, in conclusion, let me take this opportunity to once again salute you, Mr Speaker, for giving us this opportunity to make this short statement. Let me also salute colleagues in the House for the solidarity and common voice for the country to be ready and defend ourselves against Ebola. But let us also, as Ugandans, be ready to share our experiences with our brothers and sisters who are in need. I believe that our experience will save some lives. 

By the way, Mr Speaker, one of the problems in the three countries was that when Ebola broke up, instead of confronting it head on, the tendency was to hide it and go to witchdoctors where people had feelings that there was some bad omen somewhere. So, this rather lackadaisical and unscientific approach – instead of helping the people concerned, we had deaths and the disease spreading. That is why we must be prepared to tell them that whenever there is a problem, confront it straightway, investigate it, involve the population, alert them and the problem will be contained. That experience is important and Uganda must share it with the rest of Africa in order to save the lives of Africans. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister and hon. Members. We only have one item to conclude today’s business. Please bear with me because I am going to adjourn plenary this evening. We received some item that will take us only about three minutes. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please just read the particular items.

7.33
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 together with the report and opinion of the Auditor-General thereon for the following town councils, municipal councils and district local governments: 
    1. Paidha Town Council; 
    2. Kisoro Town Council;
    3. Bugongi Town Council;
    4. Katuna Town Council;
    5. Namutumba Town Council;
    6. Zombo Town Council; 
    7. Adjumani Town Council;
    8. Budaka Town Council;
    9. Kapchorwa Town Council;
    10. Buyende Town Council;
    11. Kaliro Town Council;
    12. Namayingo Town Council;
    13. Kakira Town Council;
    14. Kayunga Town Council;
    15. Mayuge Town Council;
    16. Buwenge Town Council; 
    17. Bulengeni Town Council;
    18. Bugembe Town Council;
    19. Tororo Municipal Council;
    20. Kamuli Town Council;
    21. Maracha Town Council;
    22. Rukungiri Municipal Council;
    23. Koboko Town Council;
    24. Ntungamo Municipal Council;
    25. Arua Municipal Council;
    26. Rushango Town Council;
    27. Malaba Town Council;
    28. Lugazi Town Council;
    29. Bulambuli Town Council;
    30. Katakwi Town Council;
    31. Mbale Municipal Council;
    32. Kabale Municipal Council;
    33. Bugiri Town Council;
    34. Sironko Town Council;
    35. Bukedea Town Council;
    36. Manafwa Town Council;
    37. Binyinyi Town Council;
    38. Mpigi Town Council;
    39. Kiko Town Council;
    40. Rubona Town Council;
    41. Kigorobya Town Council;
    42. Kibuku Town Council;
    43. Fort Portal Municipal Council;
    44. Kigumba Town Council;
    45. Kiryadongo Town Council;
    46. Bweyale Town Council;
    47. Kanara Town Council;
    48. Rwebishengo Town Council;
    49. Buhooro Town Council;
    50. Lwengo Town Council; 
    51. Ntwetwe Town Council; 
    52. Kirugitu Town Council; and
    53. Kyegegwa Town Council.

    54. District local governments
    55. Namayingo District Local Government;
    56. Kapchorwa District Local Government;
    57. Kayunga District Local Government;
    58. Busia District Local Government;
    59. Bugiri District Local Government;
    60. Kibuku District Local Government; 
    61. Manafwa District Local Government;
    62. Kamuli District Local Government;
    63. Nakapiripirit District Local Government;
    64. Moyo District Local Government;
    65. Zombo District Local Government;
    66. Sheema District Local Government;
    67. Nebbi District Local Government;
    68. Iganga District Local Government;
    69. Kumi District Local Government; and 
    70. Katakwi District Local Government. 

I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. They are sent to the Committee on Local Governments Accounts to handle in line with what the legal provisions are and what was guided previously on this subject.

Hon. Members, thank you very much for finishing today’s business on the order paper. All standing committees should stop proceeding with business as of now with the exception of the Public Accounts Committee –(A Member rose­)– hon. Member, please resume your seat - to enable all the members to participate in the sectoral committees and handle the business there relating to the budget so that we can urgently finish these processes.

Sessional committees should meet all the weekdays to facilitate this process; that is Monday to Friday. You can at least have the weekend off to take a quick run to the constituency and come back but from Monday to Friday, please stay in the House here and handle those businesses.

The debate and the responses from the ministers and the shadow ministers as I stated earlier will be handled when we are handling the reports from the committee - that is when we will have substantive responses. It is important that this is done in time because it is how fast we do it that will give us the amount of time we will have to carry out this debate.

If the committees can finish early enough and we have enough space to deal with the reports, then we will have enough time to debate them. If the time is tight, then we will not have enough time to debate them because the law says we must finish them by 31st of August. So, I urge you to finish these businesses quickly so that we have enough time to engage in a serious debate on the budget and what is proposed in the ministerial policy statements so that by the time we come to appropriation, all these issues are sorted out through a proper and very informed debate especially from the engagements of the committees. 

And I urge the committees not to send away ministers just because some documents are missing. If some documents are missing, proceed with the business and report that you did not receive cooperation because if you send them away, we will be losing time. Just come and report that we were not able to obtain this from the minister because of this. It is important because I have seen the practice where a committee sits and for three days they are not sitting because they are sending away everybody just because some particular document has not been brought. Hon. Members, I am urging you that that forms part of your report. If a minister is not complaint or not responding, go on with the rest of the business and report that you did not receive cooperation. That will facilitate you otherwise the time is not there for us to be sending away people and still expect to meet the deadline of 31st August. That will be difficult. So, I urge you to do whatever is before you. If somebody has been sent away, at least the committee should be able to continue with the rest of the business while waiting for information coming from other people but you cannot suspend a committee because one particular document is not there. That will not be fitting in the proper use of the time we have, which time is fairly little.

On the structure of the reporting, I think the Clerk should help. If we could follow the standard that was presented by this Select Committee on Public Service on the salary delays, because these are issues that we are familiar with. Capture the general findings and put the recommendations separate at the end so that they are easy to process but once they are mixed in the text it is very difficult to process from the chairperson when you have to go to page 15 then, page 23 then go to this page. But if all the recommendations are put together at the end of the report, then it is easier for the chairperson to process them and have a decision taken on them quickly. That would save a lot of time. That is what I would recommend for now and I wish you all very hard work so that we can finish these matters quickly. 

I am accordingly –(Ms Huda Oleru rose_)– I do not do clarifications; Speakers do not do clarifications. It is either Point of Procedure or a Point of Order.

MS HUDA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to insist, yesterday on the order paper, we had a loan to be approved by this Parliament for Kayunga -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you wait for me to finish my communication and then you raise that issue because that is part of my communication. (Mr Bigirwa rose_) - let me finish what I am raising then you can raise your procedural point.

The issue of outstanding business that relates to loans; my instructions are that this House will be suspended but if there is proof that the reports are ready, then House can be called back to specifically deal with those issues, dispose of them and then we go back to committees. Those are the instructions. So does that take care of your concern? It is normally important to wait for the communication to end before you –

MR BIGIRWA: Mr Speaker, thank very much. I had wanted clarification but as you had ruled, it turns to procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not rule; I just said it is not there.
 
MR BIGIRWA: Mr Speaker, my concern is that for some time now, we have been debating the State of the Nation Address and crosscutting issues in different ministries have come up but I have always wondered what the response will be thereafter. Who does what? I want to find out from you, Mr Speaker, if it is possible to have a response from the Leader of Government Business to respond to some of these emerging issues. I do not know whether that becomes a budgetary issue, maybe it can be within the committee report. I just need your guidance and clarification on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You just even stated it already. What happens is all these issues are implemented by the budget. All these will come in the budget debate. They are going to the committees; the important aspect - the policy aspect of the State of the Nation Address - is going to committees through the budget. The Leader of the Opposition responded and the Shadow Minister of Finance has made his response today so all those things will be discussed by the committee. You cannot discuss it in the House and come to a comprehensive conclusion on that matter. So these things will go to the committee. That is why we need time, which time can only be created if the committees can finish work early. That way, we can set a whole day for maybe one or two reports only because they are quite many. But if you move up to the 20th and there is no report ready – hoping that I will be the one to chair because I will be asking the chairpersons to present the reports in five minutes. And if five minutes will be enough for you, that will be it and I will allow a debate for 15 minutes, meaning that 20 minutes will be enough for the report. I will not extend the 31st of August this time.

Let us finish the reports as the law dictates – 31st of August, we should have finished and for your information, it will actually end on 29th because 30th is a Saturday and 31st is a Sunday. So we have to finish by 29th. That means we do not have two days on our calendar by law. So we need to work doubly hard to compensate for the two days we will lose towards the end of the month. The House is adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 7.49 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

