Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.





Tuesday, 9 July 2019

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to thank you for the work you have done over the last one week.
 
I have a few matters to communicate and the first is that this morning, I launched the Rotary Cancer Run for 2019 and broke the ground for construction of the bunkers needed for the linear accelerators at Nsambya Hospital. I would like to thank you, honourable members, so much because you have contributed Shs 900 million to that effort. (Applause) I hope that the rest of the Ugandans join us, the bunker will be ready in a few years so that people can get treatment from here in Kampala. Thank you very much.

I would like to now ask you to join the Rotary Cancer Run on 25 August 2019 at Kololo. Come and run for life and run for cancer. Tell your friends to also come and run and to make contributions. 

The second, honourable members, is sad news. We lost hon. Edward Athiyo, a former Member of Parliament and former minister. He is going to be laid to rest in Namalu in Nakapiripirit. He was one of the pioneers in raising education in Karamoja. He served for a long time as a civil servant and politician. At an appropriate time, I hope that we can move a motion here to pay tribute to him. Therefore, I would like to ask members to stand up for one minute of silence in his honour. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter of honouring departed senior citizens remains a problem. I was requested to arrange to lay his body here in state but of course, I could not call the House because he was not a sitting member. The Government has failed to give guidance on who should be brought to this House to pay tribute to; those that are not members of this House. I have written and spoken about it many times. 

I would like to ask Government - and I am really directing that within one month, you should come to tell this House who is entitled to come here and get an official process from this House. 

That is very important because now, it would appear like it is the Speaker who looks bad if she says no. They always say that it is the Speaker who refused. I always refuse because the people who are entitled to get an official process from this House are the members. It is automatic for them but it is not automatic for anybody else. Help me to stop being a bad person. Tell me who should come here so that the whole world knows; so that people do not expect it when they are not supposed to come here. 

I would like to congratulate the African Union on the African Continental Free Trade Area Agreement, signed in Niger, a few weeks ago. Let us ask Government to work out the modalities so that the people of Uganda can know how to move, especially on the negotiation of tariffs, the rules of origin and commitment for service sectors with the other African countries. 

Honourable members, we have changed our internet service provider. I know that some problems are being met on the internet as well as accessing Parliament documents and emails. This is because there is a change taking place between Airtel and MTN. I hope that in a short time, you will be able to go back to the ordinary service. 

However, I would like to reaffirm that the Over-The-Top (OTT) will not be paid for by the Government; you will pay it yourself. I told the Clerk to cancel that part of the contract because it was there. I told her that we shall pay our own OTT. 

Honourable members, on behalf of the Ugandans, I would like to welcome back our Uganda Cranes team from the African Championships in Cairo. They registered a very big achievement and I know that next time, they will do even better. 

I feel proud that in two championships, they have been able to go to the last 16. I think that is a very big achievement. Let us pray for them to do better next time and also continue supporting them.

However, I also would like to ask the Government to support the She-Cranes, who left for London, without money. They are representing us in the World Cup but nobody is saying anything or giving them money because they are women. 

Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the money for the Crane, footballers is available while the one for the She-Cranes is not there. I would like you to explain to us tomorrow whether you have sent the money because they have already left. It is a very serious issue and so, please support them in their campaign. 

Honourable members, early this week, I received a delegation of the hotel and tourism industry; the board of directors. They briefed me about the pressure in their industry. One of the things they told me was the number of taxes. I just want to read to you what they brought to me. They said that they pay:

Income Tax; 
Corporation Tax – 30 per cent;
 Withholding Tax – six per cent; 
VAT – 18 per cent; 
Hotel Tax – $ 2 per room per night; 
Local Service Tax for the districts; 
Fees to trade unions – Shs 2000; 
Occupational Safety and Health – Shs 2,000,000; 
Each Star of the hotel Property Tax – from Shs 200,000 onwards; 
Copyright Tax; 
Ground Rent between $ 5000 and $ 10,000;
 Within the National Parks - per person per night – between $ 5 and $ 30 per person; 
Trading license; 
Restaurant license; 
Bar license; 
Swimming pool license; 
operations license; 
Liquor license; and
Entertainment license. 

In our new law, they have to pay the Uganda Tourism Board (UTB) License, the System Development Levy, Pay-as-You-Earn for their staff and NSSF. I was in shock after they finished reading this list. We are suppressing the industry. 

Therefore, I would like to ask the Committee on Finance to examine these taxes. I have also sent it to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because if all these are of the same industry, it is unfair. I think we are making it difficult for them to operate. Thank you. 

The Committee on Finance, please take up this matter and advise us before we start the next budget cycle so that we can address the anomalies. 

Honourable members, I received a petition from the boda boda riders of Uganda. They are complaining about the lack of activity on the mass killings of the boda boda riders and the robberies. 

They said that on a daily basis, five boda boda riders are killed and their motorcycles are taken. They feel that nobody is taking an interest in this. They want us, therefore, to table a motion in this House to discuss this situation because they are Ugandans and are trying to earn a living. They suspect that the people selling spare parts are the ones behind these killings because they dismantle the motorcycles, to sell its parts spares. 

Therefore, they want us to have a motion here. I hope one of the members will take it up and bring a motion so that we can discuss it and also help these other small people in the economy. I think the rest will come in the main petition but that was the main thing that the industry is not regulated and everybody is doing their own thing. I hope we can take it up and assist these people.

Finally, over the weekend, I was in Fort Portal. I was invited to meet the elderly people’s councils and they also had very interesting issues. First, is that as a community, we are not giving them the due respect. I am told that it is only in Kabarole District where they have a bylaw that if an old person goes to hospital, they are given priority. However, in all the other hospitals, you go there at your own risk. The young people will push and kick you while in the queue. They are asking us to address that issue for the old people.

I am happy with the Electoral Commission, during elections there is a queue for the old people. They vote quickly and go home and that is where it ends. What about in the buses? Of course, we do not have public transport but all these are the things they thought that we should discuss. They are saying that they were supposed to have elected their councils; there are certain aspects of the council, which were not elected and Electoral Commission has not conducted those elections. They are also saying that in the NRM Manifesto of 2016-2021, there was a proposal that there would be an older persons’ Member of Parliament elected in this House. They have been waiting for the law – no, in their capacity as old not – (Laughter) – I know there are some old people here but they were talking about coming in the way the women and youth come to Parliament as a special category. 

Therefore, I would like to remind the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs that there is this matter, which has not been taken up. They also complained about the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE). I know that this House has supported this programme and we resolved that all the old people be paid. However, only few districts benefit from SAGE. Every time we go out, we are asked, “Why are we not covered?” This House resolved and the minister went and did his own things afterwards. This House resolved that all the old people who are eligible in all the districts should be given that money.

One of the things they mentioned about the health services is that they needed some privacy. They said that when they go to the hospitals, they are treated by young doctors and nurses. They did not explain the real problem. Please, I am reporting what they told me. They said that they need some privacy in the hospitals where they can talk to the doctors and nurses in confidence. I am passing on what they told me. They are also interested in the medical insurance and I hope it will come. I told them that there is something in the offering. 

There is no grant for the elderly persons at the local government level. The above are the requests they made. I told them that I will faithfully pass them on so that they can be captured and we see how to support our old people.

We have a number of children in the public gallery. We have Victorious Education Services in Rubaga Division. I do not know where they are seated. They are represented by hon. Kato Lubwama and Nabilah Ssempala. They are welcome. We also have Kamda Community School, Mpata Subcounty in Mukono District. Here they are. They are represented by hon. Johnson Muyanja and hon. Peace Kusasira. You are welcome. We also have delegates from Media Challenge Initiative. Yes, there they are here. They have come to observe the proceedings. Thank you very much. (Applause) I am reading what is written here. Okay, I was given wrong information. It is hon. Moses Kasibante and hon. Nabilah Ssempala. (Laughter) Clerk, you should do your homework better. Do not distribute constituencies. 

There are a few matters of national concern. 

3.06
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern about the renowned Mukono Katosi road. The Reynolds Construction Company Limited (RCC) seems to have handed over incomplete work. As we speak, when it rains, water carries soil from Nakayanga to Kasala. We are worried that within one and a half years, that road might be washed away. Again, the new contractors of Mukono Katosi Water Project have also destroyed all the drainages that were done by RCC. My humble request is that the Ministry of Works and Transport and Uganda National Roads Authority should get interested into our concern, revisit and see how they can make improvement before it is too late. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Works and Transport here? They are not? Minister of Works and Transport should come and give us an update on the issues of Katosi road. Not today –(Laughter)– Minister of Works and Transport, the issue of Katosi road is surrounded by scandal. Can you come and explain to us what is happening. Has the contractor completed the work and has it been handed over? Please, give us a report next week on Tuesday.

3.08
MS ROBINA RWANKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Madam Speaker, I stand up to protest against the numerous boda boda theft and the loss of lives that is happening in Gomba West. On 8 March 2019, we lost one Edward Mukiibi of Kyambogo Kasambya LC1 Parish Maddu Gombolola or Maddu LC111. He was brutally killed. On 30 May 2019, one Patrick Kato of Degeya Parish, Kamengo, was also brutally killed. We found his body one month later in a place called Lutunku and post-mortem results revealed that he had been hammered three times on the head. His throat was slit, his tongue was pulled out, his manhood was removed and his legs were tied.

On 1 July 2019, Mr David Kabirano lost his motorcycle around Maddu. It was one of those whose number plates were found in Katwe. Julius Musisi and Dearson of Maddu also had their motorcycles taken. One Fred from Kirema was also killed. There are certain common features that are the same. They steal the Bajaj make of motorcycle and this is sold at Shs 4.5 million by the young boys. They kill the owners violently before stealing their motorcycles, dismembering their bodies; removing their tongues, private parts and tying their hands and legs –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the police and Ministry of Internal Affairs should take charge and arrest these people. Those that have been arrested should be brought to book and we should sensitise the population on those activities. I support the fact that we should have a motion on the death of these people and the theft of their motorcycles. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Rwakoojo. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is instructed to come to us next Tuesday to respond to that complaint. 

Notwithstanding that, we shall still pursue the issue of the motion for debate on that issue. I appoint hon. Abala to move the motion. 

3.11
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a similar matter regarding the insecurity in the country. Recently, more than nine people – mobile money operators - were killed in the country. 

I am worried because as Parliament, we passed billions of money for Government to procure cameras and put them across the country. However, as of now, mobile money operators work in fear. They close their shops very early for fear of being killed. We need an explanation from the Minister of Security as to why the cameras they procured are not working. 

My prayer is that Government should waive taxes from cameras such that they can be affordable for every citizen of Uganda, especially those operating businesses, to make them secure. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We instruct the Minister of Internal Affairs to respond to that request to reduce the cost of cameras and also to explain to us what they are doing about the killing of mobile money agents. 

By the way, I have noticed that many of them are women. They are targeting women mobile money operators.

Minister of Internal Affairs; give us a report on that issue; Thursday next week. 

3.13
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. There is a very big challenge in Kagadi. We are lacking a magistrate. The one we had was transferred five months back and since then we have not had any.

We only have a visiting magistrate and this has caused many challenges in Kagadi. We have a lot of congestion in police cells, insecurity in the area and a lot of prison breaks. 

We would like to request that a resident magistrate be instated or be transferred to Kagadi such that justice can be provided to the people, well knowing that justice delayed is justice denied.

We pray that a senior state attorney is also assigned into Kagadi because we have got a number of capital offences like robbery, murder and defilement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is required to come and tell us when he will appoint a magistrate for Kagadi and also whether he has plans to appoint a senior state attorney to be based in Kagadi. Could he give us an answer by Tuesday next week? 

Can the Attorney-General respond?

3.15
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I was seated there and I listened to your directives. I will comply. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of insecurity is very paramount. Even where there is footage of the events that took place, police and security agencies seem not to have capacity to identify the people within the footage. 

There is an incident that happened in Mengo. It is now about three weeks ago, but up to now, police are still struggling to tell us who those people appearing in the footage are. 

The procedural issue is, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is given a timeframe, probably not beyond tomorrow, to come and explain to Ugandans what they are doing about what has now become insecurity across the country?

THE SPEAKER: I have already made my ruling on that and I have given him a timeframe. 

3.17
MR APOLLO OFWONO (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an urgent matter on the issue of roads. Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has announced that they are going to repair the roads. We do not know what exactly they are going to work on. They have not given us a clear picture of which part of the road is to be affected and above all, the alternative routes are not known. 

These repairs, according to them, will take about nine months. This is too long. I think that is the busiest road in this country. Trailers from Mombasa to Rwanda and so on, pass there. 

Since even before the repairs there is already jam, from Kampala to Mukono one can take about three hours, now when you add on the repairs going on, how many hours shall we spend on the road? 

They should come up with alternatives; maybe upgrade all the murram roads to tarmac before they can embark on the repairs.  Or maybe engage another form of transport like railway coaches. There are now five coaches from Kampala to Namboole. If five more railway coaches could be acquired, it would supplement –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What is your prayer?

MR OFWONO: My prayer is that before they embark on repairs, they should have alternatives and a better strategy. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ofwono, which road are you talking about? The name I see here is very confusing.

MR OFWONO: I am talking about Nakawa, Bweyogerere, Seeta, up to Mukono. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you talking about the main Jinja-Kampala Road?

MR OFWONO: Yes, the main one.

THE SPEAKER: They say it will take nine months to repair it and you want an alternative?

MR OFWONO: Yes, I want a serious one. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is still not here but this road in very important. As you know, it goes to the East (Laughter). There is a lot of traffic on that road. Can the Minister of Works and Transport come and explain to us the plans they have to alleviate the situation as they work on the Jinja-Kampala Road? You should report next Wednesday.

3.21
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I have been from my constituency of Koboko. In the beginning of last week, it was reported that three people died of Ebola in Aru, which is 35 kilometres from Koboko. Ebola cases were also reported in Ariwara, an international market, which is 34.5 kilometres from Arua. With Koboko and Nebbi being at the border, people are now in panic over Ebola because business people move to and from these places. 

We tried to sensitise people to wash their hands and now there is no more greeting with shaking of hands in Koboko and they say the same is happening in Arua. At first, when Ebola was reported in Kasese, it was considered to be far but these new reported cases are very close to West Nile.

Madam Speaker, my prayers for Koboko, in particular are that:

We have very few medical staff who are not sensitised about handling Ebola. We need them to be sensitised so that they know what to do.
There is no screening equipment like thermometers so that those who are sick can be screened and identified.
In Koboko, our isolation block is under repair and we have nowhere to put people who are suspected to have contracted Ebola. As I came back yesterday, one person was vomiting blood and he was put under a tree because there is nowhere for him to be treated. I would like the Minister of Health to urgently send a team to address this issue in Nebbi, Arua and Koboko. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, first of all, I would like to commend the Ministry of Health because I think they have really done a great job on this issue of Ebola. Let us commend them and ask them to move quickly to handle the situation in Koboko, Nebbi and Arua. The minister can give us an update next Thursday.

3.24
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have spent eight months in the village mobilising farmers. One of the issues they asked me to come and raise on the Floor of the House is that vanilla farmers are facing a serious security threat on their farms. Vanilla is one of the most lucrative crops in this country and thieves are targeting vanilla farmers who they kill on the farms. 

In the three years that the crop takes to mature, farmers have to guard the farms night and day. It is becoming very difficult for them to concentrate on other family matters. (Laughter) We ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to explain to the House how he is going to protect these farmers. 

The second thing is for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to explain what plans they have to protect these farmers who are facing death on their farms. It is not only in my place; this is happening in Kasese and Bundibugyo almost every day.

THE SPEAKER: Let us ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to give us an update on the situation of vanilla farmers in Uganda with specific reference to vanilla growers in Kagadi District. He can report on Wednesday next week.

3.26
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the proposal by Government to impose taxes on coffee farmers. Whereas in the financial year, which has just ended, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, through Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), has been imposing one per cent tax on coffee delivered to factories for grading, this time round, under the proposed Bill of Uganda Coffee Development Authority –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, it is a proposed Bill as it has not come to this House.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, I was confronted by farmers in my constituency over the weekend.

THE SPEAKER: No, you cannot discuss a Bill that has not come to this House.

MR KIYINGI: No, I am not discussing a Bill, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are discussing the taxes therein.

MR KIYINGI: This is a concern, which has been raised by farmers in the –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let the Bill come. If there is a tax in that Bill, we shall discuss it here.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, they have already been imposing taxes on the farmers through traders. One of my traders lost over Shs 340 million in taxes. The Government intends to expand coffee production and we cannot afford –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, is it a tax in the proposed Bill or it is an existing tax?

MR KIYINGI: There is an on-going tax, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Charged by whom?

MR KIYINGI: By URA through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to traders and coffee traders are being affected, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, bring the text of that tax and lay it on the Table so that we know who is charging it and where the money is going.

3.29
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the performance of our national football team; the Uganda Cranes, at the ongoing African Cup of Nations (AFCON).

I would like to applaud the Uganda Cranes for having participated in the ongoing AFCON with patriotism and charisma, although they bowed out 1-0 against Senegal at the round of the last 16 on the 5th July. 

Equally, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and Parliament, for rallying support from Government on Wednesday, 19 June 2019, where you provided US$ 350,000 to Uganda Broadcasting Corporation to purchase rights to broadcast AFCON to Ugandans. Unfortunately, this did not come to pass –

THE SPEAKER: Oh, there are some children who are leaving the House. Are they the ones who were this side? Okay, I think I had recognised them.

MR SSEWANYANA: Madam Speaker, unfortunately, this did not come to pass as many Ugandans had to go to cinema halls, restaurants and clubs to pay entry to watch the games because Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) failed to relay these games live. It is a concern that as a country, we cannot watch these games live yet our country participated.

After achieving their first knock-out stage qualification in 41 years, Uganda Cranes were faced with a tough mission of going past Round 16. Considering the magnitude and importance of the event, the Uganda Cranes’ match against Senegal pulled so much interest internationally and here in the country, with sponsors, government and fans putting much emphasis on it.

On 2nd July, the country rose to news that players had gone on strike over non-payment of their performance bonuses and thereafter, they did not train for two days. This was not only national but international news to, which painted Uganda a bad name.

Madam Speaker, the country’s football federation, however insisted that the players were paid all their entire match bonuses including allowances covering the one and half months of training camp, which they had agreed on before the tournament.

I am raising this as a matter of national importance, because I would like to request the Minister of State for Sports in the Ministry of Education and Sports to inform this House whether it is true the team was paid as claimed by the Federation of Uganda Football Association (FUFA) and that the each player was paid –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MR SSEWANYANA: Whether they were paid $14,000 as agreed between the two parties.

Madam Speaker, such demotivation leads to loss of team morale and I believe it was one of the cases that led Uganda into performing like that, otherwise, had it been fulfilled, Uganda would have performed better or even become champions of the Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON) for this edition.

My humble prayer is that the Minister of Education and Sports should set up an inquiry committee or Parliament should investigate corruption allegations and misappropriation of funds in future in FUFA.

The minister should also task FUFA to fulfil its promise to players as soon as possible especially those dating back 2018.

Government should work towards upholding the integrity of sports and ensure transparency and accountability in sports governance. Thank you, all.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall require the Minister of Education and Sports to come and report on the performance of the Uganda Cranes and the issue of money. Who was supposed to pay UBC? Was it Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  First and foremost, I would like to salute our national team for the good performance it staged. (Applause) 

I would like to also thank Members who participated in escorting and supporting the team in morale boosting. Please keep it up.

Madam Speaker, my colleague, the Shadow Minister of Education and Sports, with whom we enjoyed the games in Cairo has raised various issues. He raised the issue of UBC but both of us were in Cairo. He has raised the issue of the performance of Uganda Cranes team and the issue of allowances. I think he also needs to come up with a comprehensive report reflecting our behaviour and our image in Cairo.

That being the case, I promise to come with a report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of committee cannot come now. We first want to hear from the Government side and during that debate, we shall get evidence from Members or those who have further information before we take a decision. Otherwise, thank you very much for raising it.

Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, what have you done about the She-Cranes? They have gone without money.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to inform the House that the She-Cranes arrived safely in Liverpool and are busy training. We advanced Shs 5 million to each, as upkeep for them to leave at home. 

Madam speaker, the remaining balance, as per your interaction when I was not around,  the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the Ministry of Education and Sports was handling it and I need to see him but I am sure that as we move to join our colleagues, the money will be ready.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the young women have been engaging in many competitions as they build up for the world championship and you knew about this; they won long ago. Why don’t you plan for them?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I said that before the team left, Shs 5 million was advanced to each player to leave at home. The details of the money that was agreed as per the budget will be given to them later. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you paying for their accommodation in Liverpool because what you paid was meant as upkeep? What about their accommodation out there?

MR BAKKABULINDI:  Madam Speaker, I will come with the details on how they are going to be paid since I was not around.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, come with the report on FUFA and She-Cranes on Tuesday.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I beg that I report the week after next week.

THE SPEAKER: No! Honourable minister, this is a case of discrimination. Whenever She-Canes go to play, they have no money. We, therefore, want an answer next week on Tuesday.  

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. When hon. Allan Ssewanyana stood up to speak, among the issues he raised was the issue of UBC. It was on the instruction of this Parliament that UBC was required to broadcast live. I remember on your particular instruction, Madam Speaker, UBC was to receive money from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to facilitate that –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to complete. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, UBC has issued a Press Release indicating that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development declined, neglected and/or refused to advance them money for that particular purpose.

The face of that ministry is a man called hon. David Bahati who is here. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that he tells us why the ministry refused to release the money? That is important because we are the appropriating authority and we directed them to give money for Ugandans to watch their soccer on their own television sets. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that he tells us why they refused to give that money?

THE SPEAKER: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you undertook on this Floor to give money, you are here.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on the issue of UBC and from the information we have yes, I did promise this House that we were going to work on this issue but we discovered that this request came when we were closing the financial year.

This House had already approved a supplementary budget, which requires prior approval by Parliament and it was not possible to come with a supplementary in one day, appropriate it, look for money when the financial year is closing.

We agreed with UBC to go ahead and contact the organisation to give them the services to broadcast and then we pay them in July; we made that commitment with the service provider. 

We called our team which was in Egypt to work with them to ensure that they broadcast, and then we pay the money in July when the financial year starts.

We did succeed on two occasions but we only failed on Friday, that is the best we could do because we have the Public Finance Management Act; friends, you have seen how you put people in the Executive to task to account in the parliamentary committees.

We cannot break the Public Finance Management Act because there was no window to get the money so out of the times that we played, at least we did two live coverages when our teams were playing; we only missed on Friday.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, what we demanded was not only showing Ugandan games but all the games. Our satellite in Mpoma is the one which feeds DSTV and others. We should not be misled by the honourable minister saying that it was because of failure to release funds. We have seen UBC carrying out other activities without being paid in time.

Is the minister in order to mislead this House that it was failure to get a supplementary budget that they failed to run all the games; in fact right now we need the games because the tournament is still on; we are enjoying. We should not think about Uganda alone we are thinking about African cup of nations. 

Is the honourable minister in order to mislead this House that they feared the Public Finance Management Act, which they have always been violating in this House? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Who was responsible for preparing that budget for the games?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports is not in charge of ICT and I would like it to be clear. Secondly, it is true as my colleague has said and I pleaded with CAF - they allowed the opening and the first match and those people’s language was cash and nothing else; remember that UBC earlier on had some arrears with international arrangements so they wanted their money. The Ministry of Finance tried; they accepted the opening and first game but rejected our papers because they wanted cash.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, it was lack of preparedness on our behalf this is just embarrassing. 

3.45
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to bring to the attention of this House some concerns on issues regarding the rule of law especially the gaps in access to justice.

In 2008, the war crimes division was established and later renamed, “The International Crimes Division of the High Court of Uganda”.

This is a very innovative court and in the context of world practice I think this is one of the courts that have served to give Uganda a very high level image because it works at the level of International Criminal Court.

Beyond that it is fulfilling the principle of complementarity as stipulated in the preamble of Article One of the Rome Statute.

It was very appalling when we had a courtesy call in this court premises to find out that the reasons why there are delays in the issues pertaining to Kwoyelo and other suspects was because of the state of the infrastructure of these court rooms, which is very embarrassing for the country.

The hon. Lady Justice Oguli and her team are dispensing justice at a very painful level; this now explains why all these cases in ICD are dragging to date. Even the victims’ lawyers have not been paid to date. Madam Speaker, this is undermining the fight against impunity-

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR KOMAKECH: My prayer is; that the minister of Justice together with Public Service and Finance should respond with emergency to ensure that the International Crimes Division is heavily facilitated to dispense justice.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice is here does he have anything to say about the International Crimes Division?

3.48
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, it is true that ever since the inception of the International Crimes Division, there has been some disharmony between it and other divisions of the High Court but we have put in place a mechanism to harmonise the International Crimes Division so that it is also regarded as any other division of the high court.

I trust that in the coming financial year, it will be budgeted for like any other division of the high court so that the unfavourable state of infrastructure will be addressed.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, with immense respect to my brother hon. Rukutana, I think one of the issues that had been raised in this is this emergency. The question is, “How do you deal with suspects who are already rotting in prison?” But you are talking about the next financial year, which will begin in July next year.

You have a division of the High Court, which you created but it is not funded. Would it not be procedurally right that the minister guides us on the administrative measures being undertaken in the meantime; for those particular people who are facing prosecution but are not being attended to? 

You are rendering labour underplayed; you have judges of the High Court deployed in this division by whatever name you would now want to call it since it is not a division but we are having backlog elsewhere. 

However, you are telling us that you are putting in place measures without disclosing them, would it not be procedurally right that the minister comes out clear: (i) on the measures they are undertaking, (ii) what is going to be done because it is a constitutional requirement to do speedy justice.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Sseggona that the next financial year does not start next year. It starts July this year -(Interjections)– no; I meant this financial year; correction. That is one.

Secondly, there are measures we are putting in place to alleviate the problem of congestion. One of them is increasing the number of judges. Another one is enhancing judges’ emoluments. Those measures are aimed at ensuring that there is efficiency in the courts and the problem of congestion will be addressed –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA:  Madam Speaker, I thought I would be of assistance to my brother. The issue in contention is not cases, which have no judges to hear them. Actually, we have an issue of backlog elsewhere. In this particular division, we have judges who cannot work. They are ready to work but cannot hear the cases and that is the issue I asked him to clarify. It has nothing to do with appointing more judges. They are there but they cannot work.

Secondly, when the minister says, “This financial year, we are coming up with measures”, where are you going to take that budget? The budget was before us. Simply tell us when this trial is beginning and we close the chapter because this is an alternative to the ICC. On one hand, you want to pull out of the ICC and on the other hand locally, you cannot provide the service. Where do you want people to go? 

Is this man, therefore, in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: There is no man here.

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: I apologise, Madam Speaker, for calling him a man without evidence. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order. (Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I am standing here. I am a man in my full form. (Laughter) I have a family comprising wives and children. My family is known to all and sundry.

Is hon. Sseggona in order to doubt whether I am a man or not? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, either substantiate or withdraw. 

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Madam Speaker, with the confirmation from my senior brother that he is a man, I withdraw. Now, I have evidence. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to follow up this matter, to see that this money is provided for in the next budget so that the division can actually work? Please, make it a point to follow it up, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

3.54
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDS, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. In Uganda, we have only two schools for the deaf at secondary level. Yesterday, a natural calamity occurred and the roofs of classes, which host S.1 and S.2 at the School of the Deaf in Wakiso District were blown off.

At the moment, the children do not have where to sit. I would like to request the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to urgently help these children because they are not children you can allocate to any other school due to the challenges they have.

I wish this is done immediately because the children are suffering. Their books got wet and some of them are under sponsorship and nobody is going to help them. So, I kindly request and I am happy that the Minister of State for Education and Sports is in the House and comes from that district. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Ministry of Education and Sports to urgently respond to the situation in the School for the Deaf in Wakiso?

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Member for raising this concern. It is true and we are aware about these challenges. However, I would like to assure her that we are going to do the needful to ensure that we work on that school.

THE SPEAKER: When can you update us? Today is Tuesday. Can you update us?

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I have taken note and would like to assure the House that I may not say tomorrow or the other day. However, I would like to assure you that we are working because we have a long list of the schools that we have to work on. Because this is an emergency, I would like to assure you that I am going to go back, sit with our team and work out a mechanism of working on this school as soon as possible.

THE SPEAKER: Couldn’t this call for a call on the Contingency Fund? There is money under the Contingency Fund.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, it is true we have an emergency construction fund in the Ministry of Education and Sports. It has a budget of about Shs 2 billion.

Unfortunately, my colleagues will bear with us because the list for all those schools that have to be worked on is very long. Every time –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, if I am given a chance to explain –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Madam Speaker, ordinarily, I should be the last person to raise this point against my twin sister. This is her constituency, neighbouring mine.

The financial year has just begun. The calamity happened just yesterday and as hon. Asamo said, they are only two schools in the country. With this school having lost a roof, we now have one and a half schools in the country. This budget has not been touched because the financial year has just begun.

By the minister moving around in circles without telling us the specifics that the ministry can do and telling us that they have a long list, is she in order? This is a special needs’ school.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these are unique children with unique problems. They cannot go to any other school. So, this is urgent and we need urgent action.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, may I beg for your indulgence that we come and report in two weeks’ time from the –(Interjections)– to give you an update.

THE SPEAKER: Next week on Tuesday. (Applause)

MS SENINDE: Most obliged.

3.40
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance over the continued brutality and killing of members of the fishing community by the UPDF Fish Protection Force.

Last month, a one Stephen Lukoma was shot dead in his bed in Buvuma Islands. Before we got the report, on the 7th of this month – a day before yesterday – another one, Ronald Lubanga, was beaten to death by the same force.

My concern is that we have raised such issues a number of times on this Floor and there is a pending report by the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in this House.

What assurances can the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries give the fishing community so that they can undertake their activities? 
Even those who are involved in appropriate fishing activities are under threat. Their engines get taken away and they are asked to pay Shs 500,000 to reclaim them even when they are practising appropriate fishing methods.

Secondly, I would like the minister to brief this House on what attempts have been undertaken by Government to bring the perpetrators –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Macodwogo, the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs, I think you have heard.

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col Okello-Engola Macodwogo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Can the honourable member repeat what he wanted me – (Laughter)

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the second chance. My issue is, last month, a one Stephen Lokoma was shot dead in his bed by members of the UPDF Fish Protection Force. On 7 July 2019, Ronald Lubanga was beaten to death by the same force. Regarding all these deaths, we have not got any report from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the UPDF or Ministry of Internal Affairs.

My prayers are: 

Can the ministry responsible come on this Floor and brief the House on what remedies have been put in place to ensure that such activities do not recur?

What actions have been undertaken to bring to book the perpetrators of these murders?

Thank you.

COL OKELLO-ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, as Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, we are going to establish what occurred through investigations and we will let this House know soon. 

4.04
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The situation in Lake Kioga is not very far from that in Buvuma Island. You will recall that I reported, in this august House, a few weeks ago, about a fisherman who was tortured in Bangladesh Landing Site in Amolatar District. He collapsed and unfortunately, died. This fisherman was from across and his body was transported and buried in a place called Rwampanga in Nakasongola, which is on the other side of the lake. 

If someone can have the audacity to torture somebody to the extent that he collapses and dies, who takes him or her on? This is a country with rule of law. This young man, however, was tortured and died in the hands of the UPDF who are enforcing legal fishing. Therefore, who takes such people on? These occurrences are happening on Lake Kioga and Lake Kwania.

Will the investigation that the minister is talking about cover Lake Kioga as well? We would like to know because we are also concerned as people who are surrounded by Lake Kioga. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we sat as the Business Committee, we took into account the rampant human rights abuses on the waters; Lake Victoria, Lake Kioga and all other lakes. We said that the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should complete and bring all the petitions so that we can debate them together. 

What investigations? They are telling lies. We have given them names of officers who have been involved in these atrocities. In fact, one of the killers in Namayingo District was promoted from the rank of Captain to Major.

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, please, bring the report so that we can debate it and deal with these people. They are telling lies. Let us have that debate by Tuesday next week.  Thank you. 

4.06
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of grave national concern in regard to the relationship between the community and Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA). Over the weekend, I was in Lii sub-county, which is in Nwoya County, Nwoya District. I received a complaint from the community about the killing of civilians by rangers on account that they were found poaching in Murchison Falls National Game Park.

Madam Speaker, from January to date, we have lost close to 29 people who were killed by game rangers. In Lii sub-county alone, we lost 10 people. In Anaka, Purongo and Got-Apwoyo sub-counties, we lost a total of 12 people. In Koch Goma, we lost a total of seven people. We have details of the people killed by game rangers and in the course of time, I will provide them to this House. 

Our prayer is that these killings must be investigated. We know it is prohibited to go poaching in the game parks but at the same time, we know that it is within the mandate of UWA to arrest and prosecute a person and when found guilty, sentence him to jail.

These killings are not only in Nwoya. I took my time to investigate in the neighbouring districts and I found that it is the same in Oyam, especially Oyam South – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can you supply the names of the victims so that an investigation can be done? 

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, in the course of this session, I will come back with the names of the victims. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oyet will supply the names of the victims and we shall ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to investigate and give us an urgent response. 

We would also like to hear from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities because these game rangers are killing people. This is not the first time and there is no one accounting for it. 

4.09
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning malaria deaths in Nwoya District. The situation has become so bad to the extent that each day, we bury more than five children. (Interjections)– Adults are also dying but my concern is for children. 

I thank the Ministry of Health because they normally respond very fast. The last time I raised the issue of leprosy, after two weeks, they went on the ground. 

Therefore, I would like to request them - the issue is that we treat malaria using Coartem and it is normally administered with milk, yet we have a community where milk is scarce.

Madam Speaker, the children present with anaemia and it is worse between the ages of 8-14 years. When you see these children, you realise that they appear as if they have sickle cells. I carried one of the children one night after someone stopped me. I shared the pain of that man - he told me that when he was living in Gulu, he had four healthy children. However, when he returned to live in the village in 2014, he lost two of them.

It starts like malaria, which is treated but afterwards, the child will present symptoms similar to those of sickle cells and the blood dries off completely, which means the child has to be taken for blood transfusion yet even if they try to treat, the child dies. Just yesterday, two children were buried aged 5- and 4 years.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Ministry of Health to investigate this Coartem to find out whether it is still working or not. Worse still, how about the effect if the children or patients take it without milk? Is this what is causing all these effects because the death rate is high?

If there is any other alternative medicine – maybe they should return to Chloroquine, which is a bit cheap and we see if it can treat malaria other than the Coartem whose condition cannot be met by the villagers; it is too much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you give us the locality so that the minister is aware of the villages facing this problem? You talked of Nwoya District but it is big; tell us the locality so that we can focus.

MS ADONG: It is the entire district, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, we buried two in Purong Village and one died in Alero Village. In a day, we bury children of ages between 5 to 10 years. Children are dying.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health is required to go and establish the incidence of Malaria and other diseases in Nwoya District, which are killing the infants and to report back to us next Thursday.

4.12
MR JACK ODUR (NRM, Kibanda County South, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern regarding Bunyoro Ranching Scheme. There was a resolution of the National Resistance Council to repose and restructure the government-sponsored ranching schemes in the country. However, my concern is on the Bunyoro Ranching Scheme.

If I may read, that resolution said thus: “The registrar of titles be directed to give notice of cancellation of all titles in respect to government-sponsored ranching schemes on grounds of non-fulfilment of the terms and conditions of allocation on the part of the ranchers and fresh titles be issued on the recommendation of the ranch restructuring board to ranchers whose ranches have been reduced and be given to squatters, be allocated land by the ranch restructuring board.”

Madam Speaker, Kiryandongo now is in chaos because of land grabbers. When this instrument was issued in 1990, the restructuring programme took place and those ranches were given out to squatters.

To our dismay, I do not want to use the word mafias but land grabbers come from Kampala here and go conniving with the District Land Board and our people, at every other time, have been evicted, brutally beaten in the hands of the police and local leaders.

THE SPEAKER: This is not a debate, please, make your point.

MR JACK ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It has become a very big problem in terms of security. People are living in fear and have lost property. Property has been destroyed during evictions and it has come to an alarming situation.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Uganda Land Commission give this House status reports on those ranches. 
Secondly, the cancellation of legally acquired titles must be effected to save our squatters, who by desolation, Government gave out those ranches to.

Lastly, the Ministry of Internal Affairs should, with immediate effect, stop the eviction and the brutality meted out to our people. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development but this issue of ranches needs attention. Do you have ranches where titles have been issued and you would like the minister to deal with?

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Madam Speaker, the issue of ranches cannot be handled piecemeal. I would implore you and this House, if it is to be tackled referring to the relevant committee, to look at all the ranches that were restructured. Otherwise, another person will come from another area and make the same prayers.

The best way would be to handle all the ranches because there is a lot of land grabbing and I know the land grabbers will not be happy but –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we are handling matters of national importance and very urgent indeed. This is the period we are using. Therefore, a member stands here with matter, which he or she wants Parliament to handle urgently.

Is hon. Sseggona in order to suffocate the matter, which has been brought before this August House by saying that it be taken to the committee to handle everything yet the Member is only expressing an urgent matter concerning his constituency?

We are not discussing statements brought by Members. A Member stands here while aware of what they are reporting from their constituency. Is hon. Sseggona in order to divert the honourable member who is rising an urgent matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Odur has a very serious issue in his constituency relating to those ranches. If there are other Members with similar issues, they can raise them at their own time. However, we need to handle hon. Odur’s issues. Therefore, you are out of order.

So, you said it is Ranch No.30? Which ranch is that so that the minister can focus?

MR JACK ODUR: Mr Speaker, thank you. The ranches are 15, 21, 22 and 30. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Ranches 15, 20, 21, 22 and 30.

MR JACK ODUR: Exactly.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should come here and update us on the said ranches on the Bunyoro Ranching Scheme. It is urgent because evictions are taking place. 

Also can we ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to stop the evictions as the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development sorts out this issue? These are Ugandans being made homeless by land grabbers. We want a response by Wednesday next week from the minister.

4.19
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandogo): Thank you very much, Madam speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding ranches in Kiryandongo specifically Ranch No. 30. I will not talk about the other ranches because my colleague has already spoken about those. 

Ranch 30 is said to have been leased to Kiryandongo Sugar Limited yet there are bona fide occupants who have stayed on the land for more than 50 years. The occupants refused cash compensation and requested to be left on the land or be resettled somewhere. 

However, the investor has gone ahead to cultivate the land forcefully. Of course, they are always accompanied by armed forces. They have cultivated up to the compound. The occupants are not allowed to cultivate anything on the said land.

The investor said that he is going to cultivate all their land and leave them with their houses until they find the conditions so unbearable that they leave the place by themselves.

Madam Speaker, they always intimidate and harass people. The people have lost hope. Their only hope is in this House. We have been to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Justice Catherine Bamugemereire Land Commission, Office of the President and State House land matters office but nobody seems to care. No one has even gone to give hope to the affected people. People are left to think that maybe there are powerful godfathers behind the company.

The people pray that Kiryandongo Sugar Limited halts any further cultivation and allow the affected people to go on cultivating the land and plant their crops until their issues are settled.

The other issue I would like to raise regards the elephants. Last week, a herd of elephants from Murchison Falls National Park crossed into the neighbouring villages of Kibyama, Kiroko, Rwamudopyo, Kigaragara and Mpumwe; all in Kigumba Sub-County. They severely destroyed gardens; specifically crops like maize, sunflowers, cassava, bananas among others. This left the people with nothing completely to feed on.

I was also informed that for the last four years, the community does not benefit from revenue sharing. The money was diverted towards the construction of a trench that prevents the elephants from crossing. 

I was also informed that scout rangers were trained by Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) to keep patrolling people’s gardens. However, UWA does not give them the necessary gargets like gumboots, rain coats among others, to enable them do their work yet they work day and night.

The people pray that;

 Government intervenes by giving the affected villages food items and seeds to plant during the second season.
Government fast-tracks the construction of the trench around the park to prevent the animals from crossing into the villages.
 Government explains why they are using the money meant for their revenue sharing to construct the trench instead of allocating money for the same.
 UWA provides the necessary requirements to the scout rangers to enable them do their work effectively.
The President quickly assents to the law on wildlife that this Parliament passed so that the people can easily be compensated.
I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Kahunde. I do not know whether the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs can update us on why the law has not been assented to since it was done in May.

Secondly, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities will come and explain to us why the money for the citizens is being used to construct a trench. If it is true that they are using it, they should not.

The minister should also tell us how he is to address the issue of the rangers and the scouts. Hon. Kamuntu should come and update us next week on Thursday.

Hon. Nzoghu, you had an issue regarding elephants. (Hon. Kawooya rose_) I thought you had a report to table.

4.25
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Madam Speaker, I had two issues on Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and the report. Can I go ahead?

THE SPEAKER: Go ahead.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern about national roads that are taken over by UNRA under their maintenance programme.

The issue of local Governments’ maintenance of roads has been brought to this House by many Members and it is long since we approved the National Road Fund. When we put UNRA in place, Ugandans had hope that things were going to change.

I would like to add my voice in thanking African Union (AU) for approving and sanctioning the charter on free trade movement. However, I would like to bring to your attention that the people of Sembabule District are denied their free trade movement because of the condition of the roads under UNRA road network. Specifically, all the roads that join Sembabule District to other districts are cut off.

Therefore, I wonder whether the Sembabule people are under this free trade movement. For example, on the Sembabule-Mateete-Kyabakuza road, more than 10 women have had miscarriages; many deaths have been reported. That is the road that joins us to Masaka tarmac road.

There is also the road from Rumegere to Lwemiyaga up to Kiruhura District – that means that Sembabule cannot cross to Kiruhura District. 

We cannot move on the Mateete-Rwebitakuli road up to Lwengo border and to districts near us. That is the case with all the roads to the border. People in Sembabule are just within. 

The road from Rumegere-Ntusi-Nabitanga-Lyantonde border is impassable; Nabitanga-Kiruhura once again.
For over a year, the people of Sembabule had a problem of foot and mouth disease. They were denied an income but now under the production, we are denied chance to trade even the few food stuffs we have.

Network sustainability, rural development, economic growth and rural transformation are all about road network. It is one of the highest on the Government –(Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS KAWOOYA BANGIRANA: Madam Speaker, we have only three prayers;

UNRA should take urgent action programme to ensure the maintenance of the road network from Sembabule-Mateete-Kyabakuza because it is impassable and yet, that is what joins us to the main referral hospital.
UNRA should ensure that there is a status road network and they bring a comprehensive report because so many have failed. We have eight road networks that join others.
Lastly, it is my prayer that UNRA establishes the effectiveness of routine maintenances vis-a-vis first class murram because they are spending a lot on maintenance instead of having a first class murram road. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Works and Transport is requested to come and answer on behalf of UNRA the issues raised by hon. Kawooya about interconnectivity of Ssembabule and the neighbouring districts.

4.30
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Insingiro County South, Insingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, just about three months ago, this august House passed a very big loan of $300 million to construct an ultra-modern hospital in this country and the only one in Sub-Saharan region. How we were all excited. 

Madam Speaker, since that time, a lot of controversy surrounds that project. We staked our necks and guaranteed a big loan but since that time, the press has been awash with very scaring stories about loss of funds, misappropriation and disagreement between people, the proprietors and Roko. I am very scared. I think every Ugandan should be scared about what is happening. 

Madam Speaker, we authorised the Committee on Health to expeditiously look into the issues as I have put them across. To date - expeditiously meant about two weeks - but it is now over a month plus but we have not had any report and things continue to escalate. Every other day, there is a story about the project.

Madam Speaker, my prayer, therefore, is that the Committee on Health acts as authorised by this House. This House reiterates its authority and directive that the committee handling this expeditiously handles this issue, conclusively investigate and bring to this House a report.

THE SPEAKER: I think I would rather have the Minister come to first to explain next week because we made this request some time back. The Minister of health should come and explain the state of Lubowa Hospital, then after the debate, we can ask the committee to follow it up. Let us hear from the minister first. We want her to come next week on Tuesday because this is an old request. 

4.33
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, one of my sub-counties called Kichwamba in Bigando area has been raided by elephants. They have descended on all the crops. The affected farmers having lost all their crops, can no longer support the education of their children or even food.

Madam Speaker, I just have two prayers. First, that these farmers are seeking for compensation from Government and secondly, Government should give them the assurance that in the upcoming season, their crops will no longer be destroyed by elephants.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Tourism is directed to respond to the issue of Kichwamba of the elephants’ destruction together with the one of Kiryandongo. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE POPULATION AND WORLD POPULATION DAY

THE SPEAKER: Do you have an issue?

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. On 6 March, you set up a select committee to look into the complaints of Uganda’s South Sudan traders. 

Subsequently, a report was brought to this House and approved with all its recommendations on 24th April. Madam Speaker, when we met the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development  and Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; and the traders who are complaining because since 2011 when they submitted to both ministries, they had not been handled except for 10 companies. However, even the 10 companies, still had claims with the Government of South Sudan.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that whereas they had done their part, the bilateral agreement section 5, 6(c) and 10, which Uganda Government entered with the Government of South Sudan, required a verification team both from Uganda and Sudan. The Government of South Sudan had not given in a verification team for ten years. Traders’ assets are being attached and lost in South Sudan.

Madam Speaker, it is a very important concern because even when we went to South Sudan, that is what compelled the committee to find out exactly whether it was true that the Government of South Sudan was breaching the bilateral agreement, yet, they were supposed to give a verification committee without which, no trader would be paid. South Sudan is supposed to pay with its money. Uganda under the bilateral agreement section 6(c) only undertook responsibility to advance the money and the Government of South Sudan would pay it back within 12 months.

On reaching South Sudan, the committee interfaced with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and lucky enough by the time of contracting these companies, he was the Under-Secretary in the ministry. We interfaced with the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Defence, and the Speaker of Parliament. Madam Speaker, we brought their messages to you because they gave us a specific message to carry to the Speaker because the Parliament of Uganda had sent the delegation.

Part of those was a Ministerial Order putting in place a verification committee, which had not been set up for ten years, and I think Parliament of Uganda had scored.

Part of that was a letter written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development of Uganda and copied to the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda acknowledging the claims and taking up the issue and urgently confirming to you that they were doing the verification.

While in Sudan, the committee witnessed the inauguration of the verification committee and they called for the claims for Uganda. Right now, we are aware that verification in Sudan is going on. It is upon that that Parliament even appropriated money.

Madam Speaker, we brought it to your attention that Government of South Sudan refused to accept claims for compensation and those claims, which were not supported.

When the committee interfaced with these traders, we saw that they were genuine but only lost out because of the war. This is the recommendation that this House carried, that that category- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Go to the procedural issue.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: That that category be handled under ex gratia, which you are supposed to handle, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising now is that yesterday I read a press release signed by Mr Keith Muhakanizi, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) appointing a company Ernest&Young to do verification yet South Sudan is already doing verification.

I have a letter I would like to lay on Table. On 17th May when we approached the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - because we had written to them while in South Sudan to send their verification team from Uganda to join the one of South Sudan - they wrote back to us appointing this team and I am laying the letter on Table. 

We wonder whether it is procedurally right or it is not a diplomatic breach. Does the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development want to intentionally fail traders from being paid? South Sudan is undertaking verification now. It is 10 years down the road and the ministry said they were being failed because of the verification committee’s absence, which has now been set up and is at work in South Sudan. What does this mean when now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is appointing Ernst & Young in Uganda? What are they verifying? 

Madam Speaker, we would like you to guide on this procedure so that this Parliament is taken seriously. 

I lay the press release on the Table as well as the letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development signed by the Deputy PS/ST appointing a Ugandan verification team, which was supposed to join the South Sudanese team in South Sudan. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, can you explain that advert; the press release?

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that we have a bilateral agreement between the South Sudan Government and the Government of Uganda. In that bilateral agreement, we put a clause that requires a joint verification committee between the two countries. We also appropriated Shs 76 billion to start helping our traders. The PS/ST, who is now the head of the technical arm of the ministry, put an advert in the papers in that regard. 

I would like to propose that the Leader of Government Business is requested to come and explain this matter to the House so that it comes to a close. We cannot go on pretending that we are going to help our brothers and sisters who are suffering in South Sudan when actually we are going round in circles. I beg to suggest. 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we just ignore that advert? The one who wrote that letter is the Deputy PS/ST, Patrick Ocailap, who was in office when the PS was not there. How long are Ugandans going to suffer because of our inefficiency or corruption? When shall they be paid? 

We appropriated based on verification and I did not find the people who are going to get the money. So, what is he looking for? We cannot go on like this. 

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister coordinates ministries. The ministries take positions and they are responsible for their positions before they communicate them to the Prime Minister for ministerial or inter-ministerial coordination.

Hon. David Bahati, as the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, knows and is able to take political responsibility for the actions and inactions of the ministry. By hon. Bahati telling us that the Prime Minister will come here and explain what the ministry cannot explain - Are we proceeding well? Don’t we need a ministerial commitment on the steps they are undertaking to solve this problem once and for all? He is not saying it is an inter-ministerial issue because the appointment arose from the same ministry. 

Therefore, what business has the Prime Minister got to do when the minister is seated in our midst? Is it not procedurally right that the minister himself explains?
 

4.45
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that we get back to the House tomorrow to explain Government’s final decision on this. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what other decision is there? We sat here, received a report and appropriated money; it is part of the Appropriation Act. What else is Government doing on that issue? The money was appropriated for those people; they should be paid. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I was just asking for time to ask the officer who did it –because the press release was not authored by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but by the PS/ST. He has to explain why he ignored the earlier decision. 

That is why I am asking that tomorrow, after helping the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to put their House in order, we get back here and inform this House on the decision that Government has taken. I just beg for that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Government no longer has a decision to take on that matter. They came here and we appropriated money. The Act has been signed; just pay the money. There is nothing to discuss. This is not right. These are Ugandans who are suffering.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE POPULATION AND WORLD POPULATION DAY

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay some papers before I read the statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to item 6? 

MR BAHATI: I am going to item 5(a) on the supplementary – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us follow the Order Paper. When you finish that one, we can bring this item upwards. Start with the statement. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, can you protect me from hon. Nzoghu? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, allow the minister to make his statement without interference, even if you are an elephant. (Laughter) 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this is a statement on the World Population Day. Every year, Uganda joins the international community to observe the World Population Day on 11 July. This year, the celebrations will be held in Adjumani District in the West Nile Region on 11 July under the theme, “Renewing the promise: Empowering Uganda’s Youth to drive Socio-economic Transformation.” 

This year’s theme focuses on empowering the youth as an engine of growth of our economy and to ensure Uganda’s socio-economic transformation and realisation of the Vision 2040 of becoming an upper middle income country by 2040 as well as harnessing of the demographic dividend. The demographic dividend is an optimised relationship between population growth and accelerated economic growth. It hinges on key and strategic public investments in critical areas like infrastructure, education, health and job creation. 

Madam Speaker, to understand the relevance of this theme to Uganda’s development, we need to put in context the prevailing population and development issues. This statement is aimed at briefly giving a perspective on prevailing population and development issues in the country, support respective actions that will be taken by leaders at different levels. 

Uganda has registered an impressive increase in the longevity of its population. The life expectancy in Uganda has increased from 43 years, in 1991, to 63 years in 2016. HIV/AIDS prevalence rate in the general population declined from 18.5 per cent, in 1991 to 6.1 per cent, in 2016. However, the HIV/AIDS situation in Uganda stagnated yet this is a preventable condition. In addition, it has no cure and its treatment is extremely expensive.
 
The Government has put in place 90 strategies on HIV/AIDS whereby we intend to ensure that 90 per cent of infected persons are tested and put on treatment and 90 per cent of those on treatment have their viral load suppressed such that they do not infect others. These Government efforts need to be supported by everyone if we are to succeed in controlling this epidemic. 

Uganda has also seen an improvement in its immunisation programme. Immunisation against DPT3 currently stands at 79 per cent although full immunisation stands at 55 per cent. This has led to improvement in child survival. Infant mortality dropped from 112 deaths per 1,000 live births, in 1991 to 43 deaths, in 2016, representing 63 per cent drop.

Madam Speaker, maternal mortality also declined from 506 deaths per 100,000 live births, in l99l to 336, in 2016, representing a decline of 34 per cent. 

Fertility has also declined from 7.4 children per woman, in 1988 to, 5.4 in 2016, a decline of 24 per cent. 

In the education sector, Uganda has since 1997, seen tremendous increase in the enrolment of our children under Universal Primary Education (UPE). In 1997, we had 3 million children enrolled under UPE. This increased to 8.7 million by 2016. 

In addition, we have also achieved parity in terms of boys and girls enrolling for UPE. As a result, literacy rate in Uganda increased from 54 per cent, in 1991 to 75 per cent currently.

Poverty in Uganda has also reduced. It stood at 56 per cent in 1991. This means that in 1991, for every two Ugandans, one was living below the poverty line. The good news is that poverty levels declined to 21.4 per cent in 2016. 

In addition, the population with access to electricity has more than doubled from 11 per cent, in 2010 to 23 per cent in 2016. It is worth noting that dwellings with permanent materials has increased from 56.3 per cent, in 2002 to 70.3 per cent, in 2014. 

The population of households using sources of drinking water has also increased to 78 per cent and the population depending on sustainable agriculture in Uganda remains at 68.9 per cent. Households that have access to soap and water for handwashing have increased slowly from 29 to 44 per cent.

A combination of increased child survival coupled with relative high fertility and life expectancy have led to an increase in the population. At the population gross rate of 0.3 per cent per annum, Uganda’s population growth increased from 16.7 million, in 1990 to 34.6 million, in 2014. It is projected to reach 40.3 million by the end of this year. I need to add that 78 per cent of our population is below 30 years and 49.3 per cent is under the age of 15 years. 

The implication for this youthful population is that there is a high child dependency burden on the working age population, which constrains the provision of basic needs and social services. The Government is working hard to reduce this dependency burden by ensuring that our population age structure changes, which is favourable for development.

Uganda still faces a big challenge of teenage pregnancies. The teenage pregnancy rate has stagnated at 25 per cent for the last 10 years. This means that in Uganda, one out of every four teenage girls is either pregnant or has had a baby before they reach the age of 19. This is a matter of national concern. We need to talk about this matter and discourage this issue in our population.

In addition, Uganda is faced with the increase of non-communicable diseases (NCDs), which include diabetes, high blood pressure and cancers, which come about as a result of our lifestyles such as absence of balanced nutrition and lack of physical exercise; these are largely preventable. The Government is rolling out programmes to tackle these diseases. 

Madam Speaker, I also would like to use this opportunity to tell you that on 14 July 2019, we have a day of national physical activities and we will start walking from Kololo for 10 kilometres. I encourage Members to join that walk from Kololo on Sunday 14 July 2019.

In conclusion, the World Population Day will be on Thursday, 11 July 2019, at Parida Stadium in Adjumani District, in West Nile Region. I would like to invite all Members to join us as we celebrate this. His Excellency, the President is expected to be our Chief Guest. 

However, above all, I would like the members of this House and population to understand population and development issues and do something about them. I know that this House has the authority and capacity to make an impact when we decide. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Of course, honourable members are invited to go to Adjumani on 11 July 2019 but the House will also be in session. Are there any comments?

4.57
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement presented. However, I would like to say that in the next statement the minister will make to this House, he has to take us to the specifics. For example, when you talked about the population, in Busoga sub region, 20 per cent of the girl child is impregnated before the age of 18, according to the statistics. 

So, other than merely making a statement in that direction, we would like the minister to show us the Government programme in that direction because as far as I am concerned, the Government used to sponsor some of the players like Marie Stopes to engage and create awareness on the programme. However, Government has phased out that programme. 

Therefore, while the minister is telling us that they are doing much, that would only be accompanied by the financial support towards the players like Marie Stopes who are trying to do a good job as far as creating awareness about the dangers of early pregnancy to the young people and at the same time supporting some of the programmes, which support the youth. Thank you.

4.58
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I expected the minister to tell the country the measures that the Government is planning to take, particularly to tag the number of children per family.

Madam Speaker, I must say that the challenge we are having right now is the exponential increase in the population against the decreasing service delivery. Whereas our population is increasing, the size of land has not increased. 

I have seen families struggling a lot, especially families which have more than 10 or 15 children; they struggle with providing education and health for their children. I think it is high time Government stopped pretending and we agree on how many children each family should have as a maximum. I can clearly say that families which has about two or four children – I have seen it in my constituency – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Use half a minute to conclude.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Such families have been able to educate their children fairly well compared to parents who have more than 10 children in school and cannot afford all the fees.

I think that even where we are getting support, it is because they have control and are tagging the number of children per family. Therefore, this is the right time to have the number of children per family regulated in this country.

5.01
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. On behalf of Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, we welcome this statement as we join the rest of the world in commemorating World Population Day.

I would like to comment on the statement by raising a question to the minister in regards to the Integrated Early Childhood Development Policy that was launched by Government in 2016. This is a policy position that the Government considered after undertaking research and comparing notes with other countries. While at the launch of the implementation of this Integrated Early Childhood Policy, it was revealed that it would require –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Use half a minute. Members, please try to use your three minutes.

MR ATIKU: It was communicated that Government would require about Shs 1.2 trillion and this would help Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Health, and Ministry of Education and Sports to help the country set a firm foundation on which this country would guarantee the future of its children. However, every year that we pass the budget, I do not see this commitment. 

Honourable minister, can you answer this question: How much of the Shs 1.2 trillion have you committed so far since 2016? We do not seem to see the commitment in action.

5.04
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement, although in my view it is very hollow. This statement presents to us a theme that the youth in Uganda should be the drivers of socioeconomic transformation. That is brilliant. You then go further to explore options of preventing disease through healthcare services, and you mention HIV. However, a 5.4 fertility rate is still very high. The report praises the ministry for reducing it, which would be very good, but I say it is still very high at 5.4. Focus should be shifted to empowering the girl child to be a weapon against teenage pregnancy through education.

We see budgetary allocations getting higher for infrastructural development but hardly any attention is given to human capital development. Could there be a shift? This report falls short of mentioning this. You should have mentioned something to do with the kind of education we are giving the girl child in Uganda. 

Severally, we mention skilling the youth. However, if Uganda and the ministry’s focus is on harnessing the demographic dividends of the huge population of the youth, a lot more focus should be on how to have this human resource made productive and their quality increased. The girl child who has been empowered through – not this education, which is a relic of the colonial times; there was a mention of a change in curriculum but that change has never been effected up to now.

As we talk, Kenya, effective this calendar year, 2019, has changed their curriculum to practical subjects, commencing with Early Child Development (ECD). However, here we are good at talking and very short at implementing some of the –(Member timed out)

5.06
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the good statement. 

If we are to plan better for our country and control the population increase, we need to address the issue of the porous borders we have with other countries. I hail from Bunyoro, which borders Congo. We have a porous border and people from Congo just cross daily to Uganda and settle here. Without control, we shall continue having problems. 

The minister estimated that Uganda has almost 40 million people but if we do not control the movement of people, who come here from other countries and occupy our land and forest reserves for free, then we shall have a big problem. They are even exerting more pressure on our social services. 

I, therefore, request Government to control the free movement of people from Congo to Uganda if our people are to benefit better. Thank you.

5.08
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Uganda Parliamentarians Forum on Food Security, Population and Development, I would like to thank the minister for the statement and other key actors like Population Secretariat, United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) and others.

Last year, at around the same time, we made this statement in conjunction with the ministry. I thought that this year, there should be some measurable progress showing what was done last year and what is going to be done this year, which needs to be reported to the nation, whether at the venue or before, for example in the statement that was made on the Floor of the House. 

I have picked three or four things that I would like to mention, and one of them is about the growing population of this country. We have said before that a big population is not the problem for this country or any other county but it is the quality of the population that matters most in the progress of the country. We would like to see the Government mentioning the steps taken to make our population a quality population. Population growth will always happen but we need a quality population that contributes to progress.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the decline in maternal mortality by 34 per cent as mentioned by the minister is a constant statistic. Last year, when we celebrated the same day, we pledged that by the time we celebrate the next World Population Day, we would be able to comfortably say that there is no woman dying in Uganda while giving birth. We would like to see the Government mentioning the steps taken to ensure that maternal mortality has been reduced to zero, like we are aiming at reducing poverty to zero.

The decline in fertility by 24 per cent is appreciable. However, last year we mentioned that there is a problem in the communities concerning the birth control methods we are using and we needed to make them friendlier and more appreciable to the people. The illustration was that if most of us translated the idea of birth control into our local languages, most people would resist birth control because it would scare them. I thought the minister would say that they have taken steps to make these birth control methods friendlier to the people and because people now appreciate them, the population is being controlled. However, to say “birth control” or “reduced fertility”, it still causes fear among many people.

Madam Speaker, we all know that traditionally women who cannot produce –(Member timed out.)

5.11
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, from the statement of the minister, I beg to submit that, one, the future of Uganda lies in the quality and productiveness of our ever growing population. In 1962, when this country gained independence, we were about six million people. Over 50 years down the road, we are 40 million plus. When you pick on an area like agriculture, the fundamental question is: how productive are the 40 million people of Uganda in agriculture?

A country like Israel, which is 70 per cent a desert, with a population of eight million people, is talking about precision agriculture while in Uganda, which is gifted by nature and is the Pearl of Africa, we are still struggling to transit from subsistence to commercial agriculture. The fundamental question that we must answer, as leaders, concerns the quality and productiveness of our population.

I would like to give an example of Lira Town, where more than five people have been killed and burnt to ashes for stealing. We need to do something as Government. We must put in place mechanisms. In fact, we must say that the poor Ugandans in the countryside are the ones who should be guided to have structured births. You and I in Parliament are end at three, four and in the worst case scenario five children. On the other hand, our old girls and boys outside who take time to reach Alebtong Town have two wives and when this one is pregnant, the other one has delivered. At the end of 10 years, he has 20 children, and before you realise it they start looking for leaders to pay school fees. We must speak facts. What is the quality of our population?

If we do not speak out, you and I who are driving will be seen by those who are not driving as the people who made them not to drive. They will come to your home and my home to steal because they must survive. There are people who are now professional thieves. You go to downtown Kampala with your good necklaces bought from United Arab Emirates, Dubai and Washington D.C. and by the time you come back here, they will not be on your neck –(Member timed out)

5.14
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for his report. I rise to comment on the issue of early pregnancies. 

It is evident that we have many girls out there who get pregnant and end up becoming single mothers yet they are not adults. The programmes that the Government has out there – the Youth Livelihood Programme and the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Fund – do not consider these young girls. When they go to the youth groups, they say to them, “You are a mother”. When they go to the women groups, they say, “You are not yet 18 years.” Therefore, we have a group of people in the middle who are not supported by Government programmes. Even when the minister produces reports, he does not give any recommendations on how these girls can be supported. 

I think it is critical that the minister helps us to come up with recommendations concerning these young people because they are many and they are supposed to be part of the active population. We have a community of people who are dependent on old parents. How are we going to help them? The men who impregnate them do not come out because they fear the law; they know they have impregnated a child.

The minister should tell us whether we shall have a special programme for the young mothers who are heading families, and some of them have two or three children with different men. We need to consider this as a very big programme which will be a big thing to the young girls.

I remember in Omoro District, somebody told our committee, “Those ones are taken by men, so we do not put them in the group. When we included them at the time of the application, they got pregnant and we removed them.” Madam Speaker, it is a time bomb for our young girls to get out of this space. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite hon. Kafuuzi, I would like to remind the minister that last year, we were with you at Sheraton Hotel on the same issues. In your census results, there was a category of people aged 10 to 17 years who have ever been married. I asked you what you were dong about those people. Can you imagine; people aged 10 to 17 are married and officially captured by Uganda Bureau of Statistics! I hope the minister can explain that.

5.17
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka South County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened to the minister’s statement and I am concerned. Last year, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development made a statement here a day before Labour Day and I remember asking why that statement did not indicate the employment that has been created. I asked the minister to give us clear statistics so that we know the plan - where we are going and where we are coming form. 

I am asking the same question of the Minister of State for Finance who holds the docket of planning. He has told us about the population but he has not told us about the plans they have for this population, which is exploding and getting out of hand. The Ministry of Education and Sports builds one seed school in one district in 10 years. This means that we are going to have a number of people who are illiterate in that area, yet they are producing more. What plans do we have? We have over 30 universities producing over 30,000 graduates with bachelors’ degrees a year; what plans do we have for them? I would have been happier if the minister’s statement had either statistics or real plans stating what we should expect in the near future.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will get a shock when you go out there. If you go for a public rally, the children are actually more than their parents. Each time I go out, I wonder, “Do we have schools in this parish for these children; do we have hospitals?” That is what I imagine whenever I go out. I go with a helicopter and everyone comes around, and you see the children in hundreds of thousands.

5.19
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join Members in thanking the minister for his report. 

I would like to comment on the statistics given by the minister on the decline in HIV/AIDS rates. The minister said that in 1991, the prevalence rate was at 18 per cent and then it dropped to 6.5 per cent in 2016. Thereafter, it stagnated. He did not further say that in 2017, it was at 6.5 per cent, in 2018 it was at 6.5 per cent and we expect it to be at 6.5 per cent in 2019. Madam Speaker, in absolute numbers, 6.5 per cent in 2016 is not the same as 6.5 per cent in 2017 or 6.5 per cent in 2017, 2018 and 2019 because the population grows. In other words, it means that the number of people infected by HIV/AIDS is still growing and yet there are several interventions that are ongoing in this field. What is causing this stagnation or what is causing this continuous growth?

Recently, we have heard that the American Government, under the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), has given Uganda much more money than our neighbouring East African countries. We are being told that the rate of this disease is stagnating and yet it is increasing in absolute terms. Can the Government come out clearly to tell us whether there are interventions or AIDS has become a hot potato for making money? Thank you.

5.21
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report from the minister appeared to lack information from other ministries.

When you talk about population in Uganda at this moment when there is a lot of insecurity, you must talk about employment. You must talk about how many people have been employed, how many do not have employment and how those people are being planned for. I am sure that in a few years to come, we shall have more problems than we are having now because the population is increasing and people are not getting jobs. We, therefore, need to know how we are going to create jobs for the people who are increasing so that we become more secure. 

When people talk about insecurity, they talk about protection and cameras, but what we need to do is to make sure that our people are busy. Even if we buy more cameras and more guns, if the souls of the people are not delivered by giving them jobs, we are sitting on a time bomb. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know this is an interesting subject but I think we need a debate on planning in this country. I do not know whether the minister can arrange to have the debate on the census so that we know the number of children we have, those married at 10 years and so on. I think we need to debate this issue. 

Can I ask the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring it up? I know we can find time for it next week. Let us debate it fully so that we can touch all the areas of employment and health. Otherwise, we are planning in a piecemeal manner. 

MR BAHATI: I would like to say that we are in the process of developing the third National Development Plan (NDP III). If you allow, next week we can have that input to present the strategic direction - the things we are looking at - and then Parliament will also give us some input.

THE SPEAKER: Are you bringing the National Development Plan so that we can debate it?

MR BAHATI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: We must have a serious debate. Sometimes it comes when there is no time but let us make time to discuss this. Thank you. 

Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, lay your paper on the Table and then we can go to item No.4 on the Order Paper.  

5.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I would be given a chance to speak. 

Let me say two things. One is about education for our children. Our curriculum has changed and we have decided to ignore practical subjects. In addition, we have ignored religious education. We teach social services but we have ignored religious education. The third item is civic education. When I was in primary 3, we had a civic education book, which is not there anymore. Civic education taught us love for our country. With regard to religious education, we learnt morals. The practical curriculum gave us ideas on how to do things. We were skilled, but these subjects are no longer there.

Madam Speaker, in my district, we already have a youth group called the Aguu. Aguu is a bad name and these people are causing a lot of insecurity for innocent people, especially women who walk back to their homes from markets. This is happening because we have ignored the plight of these youth. Just like the Speaker said, she saw very many children - At the time when children are supposed to be in school, if you have big meetings or rallies, the children will be there in big numbers. Something should be done about this because we are sitting on a time bomb. 

Maybe for us in the Acholi sub-region, we could say that the war could have caused that problem, but it looks like it is not only in the Acholi sub-region that this is happening; it is all over. So, we cannot ignore these youth and children who are about 12 to 15 years old. If we ignore them, we are sitting on a time bomb. We can talk about empowerment but the empowerment will be lip service if the youth are not empowered. 

We really need to do a lot more. I am actually happy about the debate on planning that the Speaker talked about. If it comes, we shall debate. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, can you supply the Clerk with the soft copy of your projections on the population so that when we have that debate, Members have the latest figures. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2019

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the relevant committee for perusal and report back. 

LAYING OF PAPERS 

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the Treasury Memorandum on the parliamentary resolutions on the report of the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for the financial year 2014/2015 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for perusal and report back.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 15(10) (C) AND RULE 157 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, when last session ended, the committees’ lifespan also ended; so, we need to either renew or reappoint new members. I therefore, invite the whips to make their presentations. I hope there are no excess numbers of members in particular committees and I also hope that all committees at least have members to be able to do work.

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

5.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to designate the following Members to serve on the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries: 

Hon. Janet Okorimoe 		- Chairperson 
Hon. Akugizibwe Lawrence  	- Vice Chairperson
Hon. Caroline Nanyondo 
Hon. Kezekiah Mbogo 
Hon. Vicent Woboya 
Hon. Terrence Achia Sodium
Hon. Jalia Bintu Lukumu 
Hon. Joseph Kakooza 
Hon. Cosmas Elotu
10. 	Hon. Evelyn Chemutai 
11. 	Hon. Aisha Sekindi 
12. 	Hon. Peace Kusasira 
13. 	Hon. Catherine Lamwaka 
14. 	Hon. Tarsis Rwaburindora 
15. 	Hon. Hillary Lokwang 
16. 	Hon. Aboud Kitatta 
17. 	Hon. Richard Othieno Okoth. 

I beg to propose.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, read for us the Members designated to this committee.

5.31
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries:
 
Hon. Santa Alum Sandra 
Hon. Veronica Nanyondo 
Hon. Francis Gonahasa 
Hon. Harold Tonny Muhindo. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Aja Baryayanga will designate independent Members.

5.32
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf on the Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries: 

Hon. Godfrey Watenga 
Hon. Kenneth Eitunganane Esiangu 
Hon. Christopher Kipterit Akorimoi 
Hon. Mukasa Julius Opondo. 

I beg to designate.

5.33
MAJ. EVARLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I would like to designate Gen. Ivan Koreta to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 26 Members. I put the question that the Members whose names have been read be approved as members of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs

5.34
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I designate the following as the NRM members to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs:  

Hon. Doreen Amule 	- Chairperson
Hon. Moses Nagwomu 	- Vice Chairperson 
Hon. Daniel Muheirwe
Hon. Lowila C.D 
Hon. Margaret Lamwaka 
Hon. Donozio Mugabe 
Hon. Muyanja Mbabali 
Hon. Judith Babirye 
Hon. Richard Oseku 
10. 	Hon. Peter Abraham Lokii 
11. 	Hon. Fred Mwesigye 
12. 	Hon. Herbert Kabafunzaki 
13. 	Hon. Wamala Namboozo 
14. 	Hon. Margaret Mbeiza. 

I beg to designate.

5.35
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs: 

Hon. Munyagwa Mubarak 
Hon. Gilbert Olanya 
Hon. Fungaroo Hassan Kaps 
Hon. Kivumbi Muhammed. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baryayanga, read out the independents on my behalf. 

5.35
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): I beg to designate the following independent Members to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs: 

Hon. Francis Zaake 
Hon. Lucy Achiro 
Hon. Beatrice Anywar 
Hon. Kato Lubwama. 

I beg to designate.

5.36
MAJ. EVARLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I hereby designate Brig. Felix Kulayigye to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that Members nominated to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on East African Community Affairs

5.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I designate the following Members to the Committee on East African Community Affairs:

Hon. George Ouma Abott 	- Chairperson 
Hon. Agnes Amede	- Vice Chairperson.
Hon. Sophia Nalule Jjuuko 
Hon. Christopher Kalemba 
Hon. Idah Nabayiga 
Hon. Felix Okot Ogong 
Hon. Catherine Ndamira 
Hon. Grace Namukhula 
Hon. Stephen Mayende Dede 
10. 	Hon. James Niringiyimana 
11. 	Hon. Yeri Ofwono 
12. 	Hon. Paul Musoke Sebulime 
13. 	Hon. Peter Mugema 
14. 	Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo.

5.37
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): Madam Speaker, I beg to submit the names for the Committee on East African Affairs at a later date. Thank you.

5.38
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Madam Speaker, on your behalf, I beg to designate the following members to the Committee on East African Community Affairs: 

Hon. Veronica Kadogo Babirye 
Hon. Gerald Karuhanga. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Those are 16 Members. The Opposition has not yet submitted theirs, but in the meantime - The UDPF, do you have any Members for the Committee on East African Community Affairs? Okay, they do not have. Those are 16 Members.

Honourable members, I put the question that the Members nominated for the Committee on East African Community Affairs be approved?

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: The opposition will present their names tomorrow or the day after. 

The Committee on Education and Sports

5.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Education and Sports:

Hon. Jacob Richards Opolot	- Chairperson 
Hon. John Twesigye Ntamuhiira - Vice Chairperson 
Hon. Julius Acon
Hon. Maria Goretti Ajilo
Hon. Margaret Baba Diri 
Hon. Robert Musoke
Hon. Nathan Twesigye Itungo
Hon. Ismael Orot
Hon. Sheila Kabaije Mwine
10. 	Hon. Stephen Kisa
11. 	Hon. Geoffrey Macho 
12. 	Hon. Janepher Egunyu Nantume 
13. 	Hon. Molly Lanyero
14. 	Hon. Hellen Adoa 
15. 	Hon. Isaac Etuka. 

I beg to designate.

5.40
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following to the Committee on Education and Sports: 

Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho 
Hon. Allan Ssewanyana
Hon. Joseph Ssewungu Gonzaga 
Hon. Joy Atim Ongom
Hon. Winfred Kiiza. 

I beg to designate.

5.40
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Rt. Hon. Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Education and Sports:

Hon. Lydia Chekwel		
Hon. Jacob Richards Opolot
Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija
Hon. Moses Kasibante  
Hon. Adong Lilly

I beg to designate.

5.41
MAJ. EVARLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I hereby designate Brig. Francis Takirwa to the Committee on Education and Sports.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure provide that you cannot be designated twice. The Government Chief Whip designated hon. Opolot Jacob and the dean of Independents also designated him. So, which one do we take, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the same Member and he is an Independent Member of Parliament and chairperson of the committee. (Applause) So, there is no problem.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, this will help the subsequent parliaments to understand this a little bit better. Hon. Opolot, who is seated next to me here, is an independent Member of Parliament. Now, we are seeing a scenario where he is being designated as a committee chairperson by the National Resistance Movement (NRM). This is not unusual; however, we seek guidance from the Speaker. 

We are still in a multiparty era, much as it has its own challenges. We have Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) members who are also in the NRM Cabinet. However, we need guidance on record so that in future, our children or the Chief Opposition Whip can designate hon. Nankabirwa to be a committee chairperson because she has also started designating members of Uganda People’s Congress. So, we need guidance from your Chair. It is nothing personal but for posterity, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will issue a ruling on that. However, hon. Jacob Opolot is an independent but is the chairperson of the committee. 

MS BETTY AOL: I would like to say something small.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you let me take my vote first? You are going to confuse me. Let me take my vote on the Committee on Education and Sports.

Honourable members, I put the question that the Members nominated for the Committee on Education and Sports be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, what was the problem?

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, you remember the confusion we had with the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). Hon. Kasibante is an independent Member of Parliament and we designated him to be the vice chairperson of the committee. However, the head of Independents designated him somewhere else.

So, what hon. Otto has raised is an issue of great concern that you should take up so that next time, you guide us properly. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is work I gave to the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, which he has deliberately refused to complete and bring a report on how to handle the issue of Independents. Now, the Speaker has got to call and say, “Can you help us here?” Why should the Speaker be begging? This is what happens.

Let us finish this. What is your problem, hon. Nandala?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true that the Constitution recognises the multiparty system and independent Members of Parliament. In our Rules of Procedure, we have two sides, the opposition side which is on your left and the ruling side which is on your right. The middle side is no man’s land. (Laughter)

Our Rules of Procedure state that it will be the Speaker to designate independent Members of Parliament. Now, we see the Kabale Municipality MP speaking as if the Speaker – (Interjection) – Please, the law does not say, “On behalf”. It says that the Speaker will designate Independent Members of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I would like you to take this in good faith because we need this institution to follow the rules. When my sister, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the Government Chief Whip, got up, she first designated an independent Member of Parliament – (Interjections) - Please listen, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. This Member is supposed to be designated by the Speaker.

I would like to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. When it came to hon. Kasibante, a certain rule was applied; when it came to hon. Opolot, a certain rule was applied. Which rule should we follow from now on, as far as Independents are concerned?

THE SPEAKER: I have said that I will give my ruling in writing. Let us proceed with this work. Let us go to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Why are you harassing the Government Chief Whip, hon. Olanya? I think he is simply smiling. (Laughter)

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development

5.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I wish to designate the following:

Hon. Henry Musasizi	  	- Chairperson 
Hon. Jane Avur Pacuto		- Vice Chairperson
Hon. Genensio Tumuramye 
Hon. Amos Lugoloobi 
Hon. Charles Ilukor
Hon. Michael Ayepa
Hon. Patrick Opolot
Hon. Jack Odur
Hon. Lawrence Bategeka 
10. 	Hon. Moses Walyomu
11. 	Hon. Hatwib Katoto
12. 	Hon. Elly Asiku
13. 	Hon. Isaac Mulindwa
14. 	Hon. Remigio Achia 
15. 	Hon. David Abala
16. 	Hon. John Baptist Lokii

I beg to designate.

5.48
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I designate the following:

Hon. Franca Akello
Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi
Hon. Anthony Akol
Hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi 

I beg to designate.

5.49
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development:

Hon. Julie Mukoda
Hon. Stella Kiiza
Hon. Francis Mukula
Hon. James Kakooza

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAEKR: The UPDF, are you designating Members to this committee? Honourable members, those are 24 Members. Therefore, I put the question that the Members who are nominated to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Committee on Foreign Affairs

5.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I would like to propose the following Members:

Hon. Hood Katuramu 		–  Chairperson
Hon. Violet Akurut 		-  Vice Chairperson 
Hon. Judith Alyek
Hon. Apollo Masika
Hon. Jacqueline Aol
Hon. Loy Katali
Hon. Connie Nakayenze
Hon. Rosette Mutambi 
Hon. Bildad Adome
10. 	Hon. Bonny Okello
11. 	Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe
12. 	Hon. Fred Angella 
 Hon. Sulaiman Hashim
 Hon. Rose Ayaka
 Hon. Moses Balyeku.

5.51
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): On the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I designate the following:

Hon. Atkins Katusabe
Hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai
Hon. Lyandro Komakech 

I beg to designate. 

5.51
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Foreign Affairs:

Hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko
Hon. Hood Katuramu
Hon. Peter Ocen
Hon. Abdu Latif Sebaggala 
Hon. Fred Mukudoi. 

I beg to designate.

5.52
MAJ. EVARLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I hereby designate Lt Gen. Pecos Kutesa to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 24 Members on the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I now put the question that the Members nominated to the Committee on Foreign Affairs be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.53
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From my party, I had proposed hon. Patrick Ocan to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE SPEAKER: I thought the Chief Opposition Whip was the one designating. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we know there are only two whips - the Government Chief Whip and the Chief Opposition Whip. The procedural issue, therefore, is: how can somebody at the back just get up and start designating? Is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: I am now instructing the Leader of the Opposition to officially nominate the candidate whom the UPC has proposed. 

MR HAROLD MUHINDO: Madam Speaker, I had mentioned earlier that we would give other submissions tomorrow. Therefore, the office is catering for hon. Patrick Ocan and he will be designated by tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, there are some pending submissions from the Opposition. For now, let me put the question that the Members designated to the Committee on Foreign Affairs be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development

5.54
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I propose the following Members to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development: 

Hon. Alex Ndeezi 		- Chairperson 
Hon. Agnes Kunihira 	- Vice Chairperson 
Hon. Patrick Okabe
Hon. John Kamara
Hon. Kenneth Lubogo 
Hon. Mourine Osoru
Hon. Nora Bigirwa
Hon. Sylvia Rwabwogo
Hon. Jacqueline Aol 
10. 	Hon. Kesande Grace
11. 	Hon. Rwakajara Aritnaiwe
12. 	Hon. Mariam Naigaga
13. 	Hon. Henry Kibalya.

I beg to designate.

5.55
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): To the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, I designate the following:

Hon. Lucy Akello
Prof Morris Ogenga-Latigo.

I beg to designate.

5.56
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale:  On behalf of the Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development:

Hon. Sarah Wekomba
Hon. Joshua Anywarach

I beg to designate.

5.56
MAJ. EVARLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I designate Maj. Evelyn Asiimwe to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are 19 Members. I put the question that the Members nominated to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Health

5.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I propose the following:  

Dr Michael Bukenya 		- Chairperson 
Hon. Spellanza Baguma 	- Vice Chairperson. 
Hon. Pauline Kemirembe
Hon. Sylivia Nayebale
Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari
Hon. Jastin Ayebazibwe 
Hon. Bebona Josephine
Hon. Milly Mugeni 
Hon. Ssebikaali Yoweeri
10. 	Hon. Sam Lyomoki
11. 	Hon. Stella Atyang
12. 	Hon. Pius Wakabi
13. 	Hon. Paula Turyahikayo
14. 	Hon. Gordon Arinda

I beg to designate.

5.58
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): On the Committee on Health, I designate the following as members: 

Hon. Gershom Sizomu Rabbi 
Hon. Robinah Ssentongo. 

I beg to designate.

5.58
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following members to the Committee on Health: 

1. 	Hon. Fred Baseke
2. 	Hon. Herbert Kinobere
3. 	Hon. Kenneth Soyekwo. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Does the UPDF have any nominees to the Committee on Health? Okay. Honourable members, these are 19 nominees. I put the question that the members nominated for the Committee on Health be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY

5.59
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (RUTH NANKABIRWA): Madam Speaker, I beg to propose that hon. Annet Nyakecho chairs the Committee on Information, Communication and Technology and hon. Paul Amoru serves as the vice chairperson. 

The following honourable members are designated to serve as members of this committee: 

1. 	Hon. Sarah Nakawunde
2. 	Hon. Lillian Nakate
3. 	Hon. Christine Achen Ayo
4. 	Hon. Cuthbert Abigaba
5. 	Hon. Moses Kahima
6. 	Hon. Eric Musana
7. 	Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire
8. 	Hon. Alex Ruhunda
9. 	Hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe
10. 	Hon. Taban Amin
11. 	Hon. James Acidri
12. 	Hon. Oscar Amonyo
13. 	Hon. Tonny Ayoo. 

I beg to designate.

6.00
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): On the Committee on Information, Communication and Technology, I designate the following: 

1. 	Hon. Denis Oguzu Lee
2. 	Hon. Fred Tumuheirwe Turyamuhweza
3. 	Hon. Maxwell Akora Ebong.
 
I beg to designate.

6.01
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following members to the Committee on Information, Communication and Technology and National Guidance: 

1. Hon. Annet Nyakecho
2. Hon. Bernard Atiku
3. Hon. Stephen Birahwa Mukitale. 

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Any proposals from the UPDF? No. Those are 20 Members. Honourable members, I put the question that the Members nominated on the Committee on Information, Communication and Technology be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

6.01
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (RUTH NANKABIRWA): Madam Speaker, I beg to propose that hon. Jacob Markson Oboth chairs this committee and hon. Sam Bitangaro becomes the vice chairperson of this committee. 

The following honourable members are nominated to serve as members of this committee;

1. 	Rose Akello
2. 	Hon. Veronica Isala Eragu
3. 	Hon. Jackson Kafuuzi
4. 	Hon. Alex Byarugaba
5. 	Hon. Aston Kajara
6. 	Hon. Denis Hamson Obua
7. 	Hon. Brenda Suubi Asinde
8. 	Hon. Dorothy Azairwe
9. 	Hon. Akampurira Mbabazi
10. 	Hon. Robinah Gureme Rwakoojo
11. 	Hon. Ongalo Obote
12. 	Hon. Abbas Agaba Mugisha
13. 	Hon. Gaster Kyawa Mugoya
14. 	Hon. Hellen Grace Asamo
15. 	Hon. Stella Namoe Nyomera
16. 	Hon. Jovah Kamateeka Hon. 

I beg to designate.

6.02
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary affairs, I beg to designate the following as members: 

1. 	Hon. Abdu Katuntu
2. 	Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju
3. 	Hon. Medard Sseggona
4. 	Hon. Mathias Mpuuga
5. 	Hon. Asuman Basalirwa
6. 	Hon. Paul Mwiru
I beg to designate.

6.03
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of Madam Speaker, I beg to designate the following members to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs: hon. Jacob Markson Oboth, hon. Paul Akamba, hon. Edward Otto Makmot, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba and hon. Muhammad Nsereko. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Any proposals from UPDF? No. Okay, we have 28 members. Honourable members, I put the question that the Members nominated to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

6.04
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (RUTH NANKABIRWA): Madam Speaker, I would like to designate hon. Keefa Kiwanuka from Kiboga East County as chairperson of this committee and hon. Andrew Kiiza Kaluya as the vice chairperson. The following members are designated as Members on this committee: 

1. 	Hon Fredrick Angura
2. 	Hon. Margaret Komuhangi
3. 	Hon. Ruth Katushabe
4. 	Hon. Nsaba Buturo
5. 	Hon. Samson Lokeris
6. 	Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi
7. 	Hon. Thomas Tayebwa
8. 	Hon. Sarah Najjuma
9. 	Hon. Judith Nabakooba
10. 	Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma
11. 	Hon. Charles Ngabirano
12. 	Hon. Sarah Kityo Babirye
13. 	Hon. Suubi Kyinyamatama
14. 	Hon. John Bosco Ikojo
15. 	Hon. Solomon Silwanyi
16. 	Hon. Anifa Kawooya
17. 	Hon. Kisembo Basemera
18. 	Hon. Anthony Okello. 

I beg to designate.

6.05
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): Madam Speaker, on the Committee on Natural Resources, I designate the following as members:

1. 	Hon. Herbert Edmund Ariko
2. 	Hon. Roland Mugume Kaginda - [Member rose]

THE SPEAKER: What rule? What is that? Miscellaneous -

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter on the miscellaneous rule 17 and rule 84 about sectoral committees. I applied to join the Committee on Natural Resources as a ceramic technologist. I have not heard my name among those read. I am following the Constitution of my party, which guides that in designation, profession must be put into consideration.

Secondly, I have been keenly listening. We have maintained the status quo regarding leadership of committees. True, that is within the mandate of our parties. I have served in this Parliament under my profession with diligence but I cannot head a committee appointed by my sister.

I am raising this because fore warned, is fore armed. On 3 January 2019, while in Kiboga launching and inaugurating the office of Umeme, I thought it was a joke; my elder sister, the Chief Whip and Woman Representative for Kiboga, put it to Umeme and these were her words: “In case of any problem, you do not need to look for the minister for energy. I am enough, I know my mandate. I am the one who even designates these committees. I designated that committee to the MP of Kiboga East because he is my MP and I want to control this sector.”  

I was present and I said, no, maybe we are qualified to be in the committee. She told me and - she will remember that she said to me, “I have the mandate to throw you wherever I want.”  

On 20th –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I am seeking justice.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: On 20 February 2019, at her home in Kiboga, the Government Chief Whip held a meeting. She invited some people from Kyankwanzi and said that the President had sent her to look for candidates against me. 

Part of the resolutions – I am speaking because I can give evidence – part of the resolutions of the meeting were to remove me from any committee where I am observable when I serve. It was to remove “her” maybe because she is strong in the constituency because of the committee where she serves in Parliament.

In the Retreat at Kyankwanzi, I also tried to raise it. I need justice and that is why I raise it under the Miscellaneous Rule 17. She would have designated me to any committee out of good will and I would not have mind. However, because I was fore warned, I only seek justice before you, Madam Speaker. I have committed no crime by serving diligently. I applied to be on the Committee on Natural Resources but I have never been invited at any one time to discuss whether she should remove me. 

I am elected to speak and seek justice for others. Why can’t I do so and give a voice to myself? Madam Speaker, it is your Chair that should give the small voices justice. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, do you know about this matter?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we have a system we follow in the National Resistance Movement (NRM) where I consult widely, including the Speaker and the Prime Minister. 

I then submit my proposals to the Central Executive Committee (CEC) of NRM, which sat on Sunday in Nakasero. They discuss all the names and pass the proposals. What I am presenting is what has gone through the Central Executive Committee.

There are many members of Parliament who have been designated to committees, which were not of their first choice. I give guidance to Members when they are applying to give me three choices so that when faced with a dilemma of balancing the numbers on the committee, especially those that are highly on demand, I go to choice number 2 - (Interjections) - where you deliberately give me one choice, I put you anywhere to serve because I am mandated to designate you. 

I have designated hon. Ann Nankabirwa on another committee just like other Members who are assigned to serve on any other committee. As members of Parliament, we should not be so sentimental on the issue of committees. She is designated to serve on another committee and that is within my mandate.

I am a Woman Member of Parliament for Kiboga District but I stood here and advocated for the establishment of Kyankwanzi District. I was the only one here not because I wanted to contest there. Madam Speaker, this is local politics; you are free to carry out your own investigations. As far as designation on committees is concerned, you have to serve on any committee you are designated to.

MR CENTENARY: Madam Speaker, I think the Member did present her case and there were some allegations against the Government Chief Whip over what she spoke in Kyankwanzi and on different fora. She has come to explain the reasons she designated the honourable member to another committee but has neither refuted nor accepted the allegations surrounding the chairperson whom she designated to that committee.

She has also not explained to us whether she gave the honourable member an opportunity since she talked about the three options. Did she consult with the honourable member over the three options? Thank you.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This situation before the House is a very peculiar one. First of all, our Constitution is clear that no one should be subjected to forced labour - (Laughter) - Of course there are exceptions that were set in the case of Gen. David Tinyefuza versus the Attorney General.

I live in Namasuba and the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) headquarters is on my way. However, for the last two years, I have made it none of my business to even step there because we have internal contradictions. I have even given them notice that I am leaving.

Madam Speaker, we see your Chair as the Supreme Court. If these problems in the party are transferred to the House and we cannot appeal to anyone then the House is destined for disaster. I respect the decision to designate me and I will go wherever I have been. 

However, what hon. Ann Nankabirwa is saying is very serious. It is the fulcrum of multiparty democracy. In this situation, I implore you, the Speaker, to look at the powers these rules vest in you. They have given you so much power that we do not even see you in party eyes. That is why even members of the Opposition stream in the House with the hope that there will be fairness and we get it.

Therefore, in that same vein – in my local language they say that if you take the horse to the well and force it to drink water, it will not. We go ahead to say that if a dog is happy, it will shake its tail but you cannot shake its tail to make it happy.

Regarding the concerns raised by hon. Ann Nankabirwa, whereas there are rigid rules, which my good friend hon. Ruth Nankabirwa – you know we have had our own share of the media but we are good friends. She spoke on behalf of all my friends during my wedding. Her strict application of the rules is destined to bring disaster. She should have declared her interest that, “In the issue of hon. Ann Nankabirwa, I withdraw and get someone else to designate because our backyard is not very clean.” 

This is the only plea I have.  If the process is not fair, let it at least be seen to appear so. Hon. Ann Maria almost broke down in tears in her pursuance. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, you have wide powers, we expect you to do something. I am not a shadow minister - they have not appointed me, I am not a committee chairperson. I am the only ordinary backbench member on this side. I do not have any position - (Laughter) - Everyone in FDC has a position. That means all of them have positions to lead me, the one without a position. There is a chairperson and a commissioner; I am the only one without. (Laughter) However, I have accepted, so I rest my case. Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have looked at the rules about the mandate of the Chief Whip. However, my colleague raised the issue of bad faith and when my sister - fortunately, they are both my sisters because we are from the same clan, so none of them should get annoyed when I say what I am going to say.

Madam Speaker, when the Government Chief Whip rose to speak about the subject matter, she did not distance herself from the bad faith aspect. What we all see is that this is our workplace and I see magnanimity in the mind of the Government Chief Whip. My contribution on this matter is that the Government Chief Whip can handle this without necessarily drawing the Office of the Speaker to rule on a matter of this nature. I would implore her to withdraw that designation and then handle it outside and come and do what is in the interest of all of us. Thank you.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What hon. Anna Maria has raised is something that should not just be swept under the carpet - there is a problem. In Tororo, for instance, no NRM Member of Parliament here has ever chaired a committee, not even a single NRM member and we are all very – (Interjections) - I am saying, no NRM Member of Parliament has ever chaired a committee and yet we are all very competent people - more competent than those chairing some of these committees.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, by virtue of our Rules of Procedure and our Party Constitution the NRM Party is supposed to designate Members and even appoint from among its members those to chair committees that are supposed to be chaired by the ruling party. I would like to tell you that it is true there is a problem in our house. Madam Speaker, when it comes to - because they discuss but Members are not given an opportunity to respond. 

Natural justice is not just a matter that we talk about; it is even enshrined in our Constitution that any citizen is entitled and must be given natural justice. If you are accusing me, if you think I have a problem with you or if you have a problem with me and you even have the liberty to go and discuss me in a forum, then have the courtesy - it is not even courtesy, Madam Speaker, it is mandatory that you must give me an opportunity to respond to whatever allegations you have against me. It is a requirement of our Constitution. Therefore, we have a problem. It is not only hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa complaining, there are many Members who are dying silently –(Applause). 

Madam Speaker, this explains why some Members choose not to attend these committees deliberately. Therefore, Madam Speaker, what we are only appealing for is fair play. Can my NRM Party tell me why not a single member of the NRM from Tororo District has chaired a committee for five years? Why? Madam Speaker, we need fairness.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this subject is new. It is unprecedented. Let me get time to reflect on it, I will give my ruling. Let us proceed. I had asked you to nominate your Members.

6.24
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): Madam Speaker, on the Committee of Natural Resources and Environment, I designate the following as members:

1. 	Hon Ariko Edmund 
2. 	Hon. Mugume Roland Kaginda
3. 	Hon. Jimmy Michael Akena
4. 	Hon. Florence Namayanja

I beg to designate. 

6.25
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to designate the following on the Committee of Natural Resources and Environment:

1. 	Hon. Andrew kaluya
2. 	Hon. Andrew Aja Baryayanga
3. 	Hon. Ronald Reagan Okumu
4. 	Hon. Katwesigye Olive Koyekyenga
5. 	Hon. Kasiano Wadri Ezatu
6. 	Hon. Alioni Odria

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: UPDF, do you have any nominee? Therefore, these are 26.

6.25
MAJ. EVARLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I would like to designate hon. Brig Innocent George Oula on the Committee of Natural Resources and Environment.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Members who have been nominated on the Natural Resources committee be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I will come back to you with the ruling on the complaint by hon. Ann Nankabirwa. Let us go to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

6.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, on the Committee of Physical infrastructure, I would like to designate:

1. 	Hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko as Chairperson
2. 	Hon. George Kumama as Vice chairperson 
3. 	Hon. Jenepher Mbabazi 
4. 	Hon. Rose Mutonyi 
5. 	Hon. Paul Asaba 
6. 	Hon. James Waluswaka
7. 	Hon. Caroline Kamusiime
8. 	Hon. Amos Mandela
9. 	Hon. Albert Lokoru
10. 	Hon. Cissy Namujju
11. 	Hon. Rwemulikya Ibanda
12. 	Hon. Boaz Ninsiima
13. 	Hon. Pentagon Kamusiime
14. 	Hon. James Baba
15. 	Hon. Robert Kasolo
16. 	Hon. Alex Burundo
17. 	Hon. Guma Gumisiriza
18. 	Hon. Abraham Byandala
19. 	Hon. Kasozi Muyomba
20. 	Hon. Rehama Watongola

I beg to designate 

6.27
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Harold Muhindo): Madam Speaker, I designate the following as Members of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure:

Mr William Nzoghu 
Mr Elijah Okupa 
Mr Jonathan Odur 
Mr Emmanuel Ssempala 
Mr Francis Mwijukye 

I beg to designate. 

6.28
THE DEAN OF THE INDEPENDENTS (Mr Andrew Baryayanga): On behalf of the Rt. Hon. Speaker, I beg to designate the following members to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure:

Mr Michael Mawanda
Mr Samuel Okwir
Ms Lydia Mirembe 
Mr Julius Ochen 
Ms Anne Mary Tumwine

I beg to designate. 

6.28
MAJ. EVERLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I hereby designate Maj. Susan Lakot to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

MR ANGUNDRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been serving on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure but if you take it regionally, out of the names which have been read out here, you will realise that there is only one person from the West Nile Region and it is very unfair.

Meanwhile, there are some committees where they have designated six, seven or even 10 members from the same area. Some of these committees help a lot. If you take coverage of tarmac roads and the road network in some of these areas, you will realise that the West Nile Region is one of the areas which has poor roads. However, you are only designating one Member to oversee areas of road infrastructure. Is it fair? It is very wrong and it should be corrected. It is not good. 

If we are running things like this, it means that we are not coming here to speak for our people. It is very wrong. Why should we put the same people on one committee? 

Take a look at the chairpersons. Most of them come from one region. Why do we really need to pile some of these things in one area? It is very unfair. This is not the way for us to do things. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Did you apply for that committee?

MR ANGUDRU: I have served as a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to just read out the constituencies; hon. Robert Ssekitoleko is from Nakifuma, hon. George Kumama is from that side of the River Nile, hon. Janepher Mbabazi is from Kagadi, hon. Rose Mutonyi is from Masaaba Islands, hon. Paul Asaba is from Toro, hon. James Waluswaka is from Bunyole, hon. Caroline Kamusiime is from Rukiga, hon. Amos Mandera is from Buyamba County in Rakai, hon. Albert Lokoru is from Tepeth in Karamoja, hon. Cissy Namujju is from Lwengo, hon. Ibanda Rwemulikya is from Ntoroko, hon. Boaz Ninsiima is from Kooki County, hon. Pentagon is from Butemba County in Kyankwanzi, hon. James Baaba is from Koboko in West Nile, hon. Robert Kasolo is from Iki-Iki in Budaka, hon. Alex Burundo is from Bulambuli in the highlands of Elgon, hon. David Gumisiriza is from Ibanda, hon. Abraham Byandala is from Katikamu in Buganda, hon. Joseph Muyomba is from Bukoto West down in the greater Masaka and hon. Rehema Watongola is from Kamuli Municipality. 

MR ANGUNDRU: Madam Speaker, out of all those, how many are from Buganda Region?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should also look at the statistics in this House. The biggest caucus in this House is the Buganda Caucus, which has 104 members. You should also take note of that. However, I will discuss your issue with the Government Chief Whip because I do not know whether you applied for the committee or not. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I have called for my application file to crosscheck.

MS ASIIMWE: Madam Speaker, I already designated Maj. Susan Lakot on the Committee of Physical Infrastructure.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee is oversubscribed by one member. They are supposed to be 30 but it has 31 members.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the NRM is entitled to 21 members but I submitted 20. Therefore, I request my colleagues, either the Independents or the Opposition, to remove one member because I am entitled to what I have submitted. 

THE SPEAKER: We have to go by proportions in the representation of the House. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The procedural issue I am raising is that we are forming these committees and members are going to committees, where they have expertise. Of course, while they served there, some of them have learnt a lot of things.

The Government Chief Whip said that these names were taken and discussed somewhere. At the end, after passing the process, that is when she came here. Since she is a member of the Central Executive Committee (CEC) and they discussed, why should she now say that she wants the file? Didn’t you see the name of our colleague on the list?

Madam Speaker, I am aware that in the National Resistance Movement (NRM), you are one of the members of CEC. Is it true that this meeting took place and they discussed these things because –?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not in the country and so, I did not take part in that meeting.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the deliberation by my good friend, hon. Moses Angundru from West Nile, he alluded to the fact that while in those committees is where they get the roads and other things. I was moving to have that statement expunged because I am a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and we execute our work as per our mandate. We deal with ministerial policy statements and estimates from the Government as we appropriate. 

Therefore, I am seeking your indulgence that he moves to expunge that statement from the Hansard. This is because if my children read the Hansard and see that I was a Member of the Tenth Parliament when that statement was put on record, they may not understand me. I would like to seek your indulgence on that. 

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start by opposing my colleague’s application to have the statement expunged because it is a statement of fact. The reason people are scampering for certain committees is because of the difference in benefits. Madam Speaker, I will be categorical. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure gives roads to Members.

I am a Member of Parliament for Kyaka South County and my colleague, hon. Paul Asaba is a Member of Parliament for Kyaka North County. He has made two roads and I have made none. If you expunge that, it is not proper.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is corruption.

MR KAFUUZI: That is why people are fighting for it.

THE SPEAKER: I will not allow that statement to remain on this record. What about me who does not go to that committee?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, the practice should stop. I am a member of the Committee on Human Rights and I am happy because it adds to my profession and I am not complaining. However, if it is going to affect our electorate then people have a right to complain. Yes, you can have it expunged but the practice should stop. If it works then it should cut across to all the members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to cause an investigation into this matter because that is corruption. 

6.41
MR MOSES ANGUNDRU (NRM, Terego West County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I need to clarify this matter. The road from Manibe to Yumbe, is a national road. Yumbe harbours very many refugees. The reason I am complaining is, the gateway to the refugee settlement areas passes via my constituency. It is true that Uganda National Roads Authority and the Ministry of Works and Transport do their work but with the large number of heavy trucks, which take food to the refugee camps every time, the road does not last long. 

Therefore, pushing for these things needs somebody within the area who understands the terrain of the area to ensure that - the electorate will also be asking, what are you doing as a Member of Parliament when the roads are very bad? That was the statement that I made.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you want all of us to go to that committee to lobby? I would like to ask the Deputy Opposition Chief Whip and the Dean of Independents to agree to withdraw one member before we complete this committee because we are oversubscribed. We need 30 members and they are 31. 

Honourable members, within our rules, parties have proportions.

6.42
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Tonny Muhindo): Madam Speaker, I have designated five members on this committee. Five members is a small number and if we withdraw, we will remain with four members. It would be fair for the side, which already has over 20 members, to reduce by one as it still remains above 20. It will be hard for us to withdraw.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we operate via proportions in this House. The number of members you get in a committee is proportional to your size in the House. On the NRM side, their percentage is 70, the percentage of the Independents is 15, the percentage of the Opposition is 14 and UPDF is 1 per cent. Please, withdraw one member. No, the Independents are more than the Opposition. Hon. Tonny Muhindo, withdraw one member and we move.

MR MUHINDO: Madam Speaker, following the scenario that we have all observed, I do not want to make a withdrawal without consulting the members. Since we still have this exercise going on, I will give a good update tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Does that mean that we should not take your nominees? Okay, the Opposition will make a submission tomorrow. However, I put the question that the remaining members who have been nominated be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS

6.45
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to designate hon. Jesca Ababiku as the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs and hon. Esther Anyakun as the Vice Chairperson. The following are members to serve on this committee:

1. 	Hon. Michael Tusiime 
2. 	Hon. Seguya Lubyayi 
3. 	Hon. Joseph Ssekabiito 
4. 	Hon. Mutebi Wanzala
5. 	Hon. Henry Makumbi
6. 	Hon. Rosemary Tumusiime
7. 	Hon. Peter Ogwang
8. 	Hon. Milly Mugeni
9. 	Hon. Tom Alero 
10. 	Hon. Pamela Kamugo
11. 	Hon. Ashraf Olega 
12. 	Hon. Rukiya Chekamondo 
13. 	Hon. Jacquiline Amongin  
14. 	Hon. Simeo Nsubuga 
15. 	Hon. Naome Kibaaju 
16. 	Hon. Stephen Kangwagye
17. 	Hon. Patrick Kasumba
18. 	Hon. Edward Ssembatya
19. 	Hon. Rose Kabagyenyi 

I beg to designate.

6.47
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Tonny Muhindo): Madam Speaker, I designate the following as members on the Committee on Presidential Affairs:

1. 	Hon. Michael Kabaziguruka
2. 	Hon. Ibrahim Kasozi
3. 	Hon. Jackson Mbaju
4. 	Hon. Nambooze Bakireke
5. 	Hon. Nabilah Naggayi

I beg to designate.

6.47
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Speaker, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Presidential Affairs:

1. 	Hon. William Wilson Nokrach
2. 	Hon. Annita Among
3. 	Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi
4. 	Hon. Ishma Mafabi

I beg to designate.

6.48
CAPT. EVARLYNE ASIIMWE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I hereby designate Brig. Flavia Byekwaso to the Committee on Presidential Affairs

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this has exceeded. Can I ask the Government Chief Whip to withdraw one member?

6.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I withdraw Mr Edward Ssembatya Ndawula from the Committee on Presidential Affairs. He will be designated to another committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we now have 30 Members. I put the question that Members nominated be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

6.49
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I would like to nominate Mr Godfrey Onzima to chair the committee and Ms Elizabeth Karungi to be his Vice-Chairperson.

1. 	Hon. Muyanja Ssenyonga
2. 	Hon. Sam Byibesho
3. 	Hon. Reuben Chelimo
4. 	Hon. Muhumuza Gafabusa
5. 	Hon. Susan Amero
6. 	Hon. Betty Aol Ocan
7. 	Hon. Agnes Taaka
8. 	Hon. Jovrine Kaliisa
9. 	Hon. Silvia Akello
10. 	Hon. Raphael Magyezi
11. 	Hon. Anthony Ssemuli
12. 	Hon. Edward Ssembatya

I beg to submit.

6.50
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I nominate the following Members to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government
1. Hon. Peter Okot
2. Hon. Simon Oyet
3. Hon. Betty Bamukwatsa 
I beg to designate

6.50
MR AJA BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Madam Speaker, on your behalf, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government
1. Hon. Zaitun Driwaru
2. Hon. Silas Aogon
I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Does the UPDF have any names? No? Okay. These are 19 Members. I put the question that the Members nominated to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

6.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate Mr Fred Bwino Kyakulaga as the chairperson of this committee and Mr David Mutebi as the vice chairperson.

Hon.  Margaret Aachilla Aleper
Hon. Peter Ssematimba
Hon. Zerubabel Nyiira
Hon. Hellen Kahunde
Hon. Syda Bbumba
Hon. Robinah Nabbanja
Hon. Robert Migadde
Hon. Lawrence Biyika
Hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa
Hon. Dennis Sabiti
Hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa

I beg to designate.

6.52
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): For the committee on Science, Technology and Innovations, I designate;

Hon. Abacacon Gutomoi
Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi as members.

I beg to designate.

6.52
MR AJA BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Madam Speaker, on your behalf, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Science Technology and Innovations

Hon. Rosemary Nauwat
Hon. Waira Majegere Kyewalabye
Hon. John Bagoole
Hon. Atuhaire Jacklet
Hon. Okin Ojara

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Does the UPDF have any names? These are 20 names. I put the question that the Members nominated be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

6.53
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate Mr Kasule Sebunya as chairperson and Mr Lawrence Mangusho as vice-chairperson.

Hon. Mwine Mpaka
Hon. Timuzigu Kamugisha
Hon. Nelson Lufafa
Hon. Tophace Kaahwa
Hon. Monicah Amoding
Hon. Ssengo Kalule
Hon. Ismail Ogama
Hon. Geoffrey Dhamuzungu
Hon. Justine Khainza
Hon. Faith Alupo
Hon. Andrew Joseph Koluo
Hon. Robina Hope Mukisa
Hon. Gordon Bafaki as members

6.54
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, for the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, I designate;

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal
Hon. Mary Kabanda
Hon. Odonga Otto
Hon. Robert Centenary 

I beg to designate.

6.55
MR AJA BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Madam Speaker, on your behalf, I beg to designate the following Members to the Committee on Trade Tourism and Industry.

Hon. Jane Nabulindo
Hon. Robert Ntende
Hon. Gideon Onyango
Hon. David Lukyamuzi

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Does the UPDF have any nominees? (Interjection) No? Okay. These are 24 Members. I put the question that the Members nominated to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Honourable members, we have a new committee on climate change. We shall be presenting the proposals but not today. I think Members are not ready. We shall do it later. Let us deal with the sessional committees first.

6.56
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you. Madam Speaker, you will recall that around December, you designated Members on a standing committee. There are some Members from the independent side who were not designated including me. We have not had Standing Committees to belong to since December. We need to solve that, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Bring the list of the Members who have not been designated and we shall do it. 

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, the Dean of the Independents has those names. Every time we meet him in the corridors, he says the list is with the Speaker and the Clerk.

THE SPEAKER: It will be resolved.

6.59
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to make an amendment to remove hon. Jacqueline Aol from the Committee on Foreign Affairs so that she remains on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development because her name had appeared on the list for two committees. I apologise for that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. JacqueLine Aol has been removed from the Committee on Foreign Affairs and she remains on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

I think this is an appropriate time to adjourn. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 July 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
