
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 18TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Wednesday, 6 July 2005

(Parliament met at 10.26 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for what you have been able to accomplish in the last few days. You sat up to almost 8.00 p.m yesterday and completed a Bill, which has been on hold for quite sometime. I hope we shall continue to be diligent for we have a lot to do within a very short time; we have two Constitutional amendment Bills, the Budget, and many other things.  I appeal to you to be diligent and spare time so that we finish our Business in time. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

10.31
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I really do not have a Ministerial Statement as defined in our Rules of Procedure. I just want to respond to a matter, which was raised on the Floor of the House regarding a statement attributed to the Army Commander in relation to Col Bogere, Army Representative in this Parliament. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since the Order Paper indicated Ministerial Statement from the Minister of Defense, who has just informed the House that he intends not to make any ministerial statement, does this require adjusting the Order Paper?

THE SPEAKER: Let us adjust the Order Paper so that the Minister answers a query raised by hon. Wandera.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that the Army Council of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces Council (UPDF) has not been convened. There is not set date for the meeting of the Army Council or even a plan by the Commander-in-Chief to convene an Army Council meeting to consider this matter. 

This does not mean that the Army Council will not meet and if it does, it may or may not call on the MPs to account for their work as representatives. My proposal is that the Army Council is entitled to do that and when it does –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, since Gen. Aronda, is a Member of Parliament and is the one who made that statement in the press is it not procedurally correct for him to come and address the House on this matter, other than the Minister of Defense?

THE SPEAKER: The Army Commander did not make the statement as a Member of Parliament but as a Commander of the Army.  The Minister is in charge of the Army, and he is the right person to speak about this. 

MR MBABAZI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is what is happening. However, I would like to add that the military as you all know acts under very strict discipline and the convening of meetings and the conduct of military officers is regulated by the standard and conventional discipline of the Forces. Therefore, when the command of the Forces makes statements, he does so as one entrusted with the responsibility of command and control of the military to ensure that it is very disciplined. 

Finally, just as a statement of principle, we are all accountable to our Constituencies regarding what we do in a representative capacity. The Constituencies have the, right of asking us to account for what we do here in Parliament. 

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I want the Minister to explain to this House whether Col Bogere has any case to answer. He has been beating about the bush and I am satisfied with the explanation. If he has a case, I would like to know why our Army is being partisan contrary to Article 208 of the Constitution, which says, “Army shall be non partisan” The issue of term limits has become a partisan issue. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t you give the Minister an opportunity answer the first question before you raise the other one?  You seem to be providing answers to your questions. 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am a little bit bothered with the manner in which matters pertaining to Defence have become open discussion. As the honourable minister put it, we are all accountable to our Constituencies and in this case, we have an Army Constituency. I wonder why my honourable colleague in charge of Defense cannot discipline the people under him so that certain issues are internally settled, other than be made public issues.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify whether the Army representatives are not entitled to the same privileges as all the other Members of Parliament with regard to what they say and do here in Parliament.  Does the discipline of the Army apply selectively? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member don’t you think your question will follow the answer to the one hon. Wandera asked? 

MR WAGONDA:  Mr Speaker I would also like to know whether the discipline in the Army is applied selectively. We have had cases where serving military officers have made challenging statements even about the Head of State and no disciplinary action has been taken against them. Yet, we have heard a Member of Parliament being dealt with outside the provisions of the law where even the Constituency could have exercised the right of Recall. They instead resorted to other methods of getting at a member out of this House and I find this very disturbing. Could the minister tell this House and the whole nation what is going on?

MR ALEX ONZIMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, I know we are all accountable to our Constituencies. However, does not the honourable Minister of Defence know that our accountability to our Constituencies normally comes, at the end of our terms? That is when you go back, present yourselves and if the Constituency say, “Well, when you were there what you did is a,b,c,d and on the basis of that, you behaved contrary to what we sent you for.” However, must a Member of Parliament be harassed from the beginning to the end, even for taking a decision, which, to me, was patriotic?  

THE SPEAKER:  No, for that hon. Onzima, you know that one of the grounds for a Recall of a member is abandonment.  It means as a member like you and I you are supposed to constantly be in touch with your Constituency and explain to them what you are doing in Parliament. You do not have to wait for five years to go back to your Constituency to give accountability. I thought this was a matter of general concern, to not only the Army but also all of us. We are supposed to be in constant touch otherwise if we are not, it may be cause for the Constituency to Recall you. I will take only five so the Minister can answer all at once. 

MR ANGIRO GUTUMOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the honourable minister to clarify, the Constituency of hon. Bogere.  Up to now according to him all the UPDF soldiers belong to either that Constituency or the Army Council who elected him.  Secondly, did he consult his Constituency about the way he was going to vote?  Thirdly, if according to your statement we are accountable to our Constituencies, are you telling the country that the Army had already decided that third term should be the way for all the Army representatives?

DR. STEVEN MALLINGA:  Thank you Mr Speaker. We have to accept that representing the Army is slightly different from representing the civilian population.  They have the Army Council, which takes positions and our brothers come here to obey that position.  If they stray, that is indiscipline.  You cannot run an Army based on everybody having their own opinion.  When I went into the Army, the first thing I was told was, “Remove your Makerere and put it at the bottom of your kit bag.  You are here to obey Army orders and not to think.” (Laughter)  So, there is a position which these people represent when they come here and that position fulfills discipline.  If you relax the discipline, then the Army institution breaks down.  

MR MIKE SEBALU:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  My observation goes to the statement made by hon. Wandera that the decision to amend the Constitution for term limits is partisan. Due to my recollection, the decision we took on that day was to commit the Bill to the Committee Stage. (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Sebalu, just ask the minister a question – if you have anything for clarification.  We shall come to that later on.

MR MIKE SEBALU:  I was only making that comment because I did not see it as being partisan –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No. Let us get another question.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to know from the minister whether the Armed Forces Council has ever sat and taken positions on the entire Clauses we are going to amend. How will their Representatives know how to vote?

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Captain, I said we finished this.

CAPT BASALIZA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I have one serious issue to talk about.  It appears we are politicising the issue of Col Bogere. What I want to say is that we voted on sending –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, ask the minister a question. We shall deal with clarifications later.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for the comments and questions. Does Col Bogere have a case to answer?  I already answered this.  To the best of my knowledge, we have not even considered summoning the meeting of the Council for dealing with Col Bogere in any way. I am not aware of any decision in that respect.  I only said, and hon. Onzima knows this, that I can only explain the statement of the Army Commander in his capacity as one in charge of military discipline, of command and control of the military.  I therefore, cannot come here and say that Col Bogere has a case to answer. I will later on give you my interpretation in answer to hon. Onzima’s concern about what Col Bogere’s Constituency is entitled to, even if I am not aware of any plan by the Constituency to exercise that power.   

I agree with my hon. Awori, that matters of the military, should as far as possible, be handled within the military and not in the public domain. We try to stick to that code of behaviour.  However, there are some incidents, which may not be easy to conceal from the public. Therefore, when the military takes actions, the results will be clear and apparent.  

The rest of the honourable members, who asked questions, provided their own wrong answers on the assumption that Col Bogere is either under trial or in fact, has already been convicted and punished.   

Hon. Wagonda Muguli asked if Army Representatives are not entitled to the same privileges as other Members of Parliament. Is discipline in UPDF applied selectively?  This cannot be surely, in respect of Col Bogere, because none of these applies to him.  The same answer goes to the question raised by hon. Angiro Gutomoi on whether the Army was consulted and as far as voting was concerned.

I want to use this opportunity to address the question of third term. Clearly, the idea of third term was first created President Museveni’s opponents in order to distort the debate on Bill No. 3.  Even a child can see that this is a distortion, without being taught.  All of us know that we are debating Constitutional amendment Bills.  There are 98 Clauses, one of which is 105(2)– (interruption) 

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  Mr Speaker, I know that within this House, there are people who are opposed to the third term project and there are honourable members of this House who have greatly contributed to the debate.  Is the honourable Minister of Defence in order to insinuate that anybody who is opposed to the third term project has the capacity of understanding below that of a child; when actually, there is an age limit for Members of Parliament who qualify to come to this House, having satisfied the minimum requirements.  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER:  My understanding of the Parliamentary and Legal language he is using is that, the subject of this debate has nothing to do with third term.  (Applause)  There is nothing in this document about third term. That is why he said that he does not know where those who use the phrase “third term” get it.  The document itself does not bear that. “Term limits”, does not mean “third term” that is Legal language and therefore, the ruling is that, he is in order.  (Laughter, Applause) 

MR JAMES MWANDHA:  I want to inform the honourable Minister of Defence that during the debate on the Constitution (Amendment) (No. 3) Bill, 2005, you went to all lengths to explain to the House, that the debate should concentrate on the merits and demerits of opening up.  However, Sir, you remember, you gave up, because member after member, those who supported opening up, were opening up for President Museveni.  Therefore, the minister should be informed that the majority of contributions in the House were for opening up for President Museveni. They claimed he was still young, was performing, was a winning horse, and all sorts of things. I thought it would help him to get this information.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members let us proceed; you have the information. Order please

MR MBABAZI:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Just to respond to hon. Mwandha.  In law, we have an expression, “Obiter Dictum”  used in relation to judgments, statements made by a Judge in court, which are not relevant to the issue at hand. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER:  Would you please summarise the responses?  We have a lot to handle

MR MBABAZI:  Mr Speaker, I just wanted to say that, in response to hon. Onzima’s question as to what a Constituency is entitled to, I want to add that desertion is both physical and constructive desertion. Physical desertion means, failure go to or consult your Constituency, under Article 84 of the Constitution, in which case your voters have a right to recall you. Constructive desertion comes about when you persistently depart from their position. The term “constructive desertion” is my own creation.  Therefore, a Constituency has a right at anytime in the five years, to recall you once they think you have violated any of these principles.

THE SPEAKER:  Please finalise your response. We have other matters to handle.

MR MBABAZI:  I have finished, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  Honourable members, in the gallery we have students of Law from different universities of the United Kingdom.  They are here for two weeks on a study visit, to see the political and legal process in the country.  They have come under the auspices of Uganda Christian Lawyers’ Fellowship.  You are most welcome to Uganda and to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)
  
About a week ago, this House handled the Constitution (Amendment) (No.3) Bill, 2005.  This House has handled this Bill at two stages.  The first stage was the First Reading, of the Bill after which it was sent to the appropriate Committee of this Parliament for consideration.  Many of you went to the Committee to express your views on the proposals contained in this Bill.  Subsequently, the Bill came back under the motion of the Minister and Attorney General for the Second Reading.  These procedures are well detailed out in our Rules of Procedure and I have no doubt that each of you is conversant with the contents of these Rules of Procedure.  

But since we completed the second process of Second Reading, which was carried here with 232 for, 50 against and one abstention, I have been intrigued by the reaction not only of people, but surprisingly, even by the honourable Members of Parliament who are supposed to know the procedures of passing the Bill.  

The procedure of passing the Bill, be it Constitutional or an ordinary Bill, have the same stages; First Reading, Second Reading, Committee Stage and Third Reading.  The Bill is considered to have been passed when it comes to Third Reading.  In respect of 	the Constitution Amendment Bill, the Second Reading and Third Reading must be carried by two-thirds majority of Members of Parliament. This Bill, which reached its Second Reading, has 98 Clauses all of which were important in as far as revisiting the 1995 Constitution is concerned.  

I have heard that there are some individuals, including hon. Maurice Kagimu, who have been castigated not only by the outsider members of his party, but even by Members of this Parliament.  He is accused of betraying them simply because he voted a “yes” to the Bill containing 98 Clauses and the 19 Clauses for which he voted  “yes” included; dual citizenship, which majority of you supported, and creation of a post of leader of the opposition.  

If it were the outsiders, I would say maybe they are not -(Applause) I want to take this opportunity to explain to the outsiders, because I need not explain to you since you know the procedure.

If you are opposed to any Clause in this Bill, you cannot delete it at the First Reading; you cannot delete it at the Second Reading, which we completed.  Therefore, this Bill must proceed from the stage of Second Reading to the Committee Stage, the operating table.  That is where you will be able, be it dual citizenship, office of the leader of the opposition, term limits, to delete or include a Clause.  

The public should know that this Parliament has not yet passed this Bill. A Bill is not passed at Second Reading. Jubilation or lamentation should only come at the Third Reading, which will come after Committee Stage. We shall have this stage today. 

So, let us exhibit that we know the procedure and the voting of the Second Reading was a necessary step for us to open this parcel, delete what we do not want and insert what we feel is missing. I felt I had to make this statement because of the misunderstanding, which has caused anguish to some of colleagues.  

MR AWORI:	 Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this elaborate explanation on how we should conduct ourselves during this process of Constitution amendment. It is indeed important and I am glad you have done it the second time.  I requested for it last time and for emphasis, you have again done it.  

I speak as one of those who voted “No”.  We know as you have put it, that it was a procedural stage to enable us tackle the contents of the Bill. Politically, when I stand up and say, “Yes” well aware that the majority of the people support only one aspect of that amendment that is abhorrent to me, I would have betrayal my political position.

I am very familiar with this kind of political environment where people overwhelmingly support a particular position or oppose a particular position for various political agendas of their own.  I understand, let us call a spade a spade, and there was serious mobilisation on the part of the NRM caucus in this august House. That is why we had many people with no place to sit.  This was to ensure that one important aspect of the amendment does not suffer any setback by people expressing contrary view.  

However, my request for your direction is when we come to the Committee Stage.  When a Bill goes to the Committee, and comes back to the House, are members who do not belong to that Committee are supposed to submit any amendments or proposals to the Committee? How does the Committee incorporate those amendments in their report, which eventually comes here for debate and leads us into our various positions? My concern is some of us may not have heard of – (Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, it is not my intention to interrupt hon. Awori but I am surprised that he, a former Ambassador of the 1980s, who bulldozed all MPs in Busoga except one to change from their desired Party, DP to change to UPC, is arguing that it is not good to have democracy of popular support.  Is he in order to start insinuating that when people change from one side to the other and go with a popular will of the people of the day, that it is very wrong and we should put it in the law not to allow people to do that?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Since you said it was many decades ago, maybe time has worked on him and he does not remember. Now that you have reminded him, possibly he will change.

MR AWORI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I hope hon. Gagawala will take into consideration your ruling when he stands up to call me to order.  In accordance to our Rules of Procedure, I cannot talk about your ruling. My concern is that some of us have fresh amendments; can we bring them to your office or bring them to this august House?

THE SPEAKER: I have mentioned this many times and even when the process started, I reminded you of Rule 108(4) which deals with handling of the Bill at Committee Stage. I advised those who had any amendments to take them and discuss with the Committee, maybe the Committee could own or could reject it.  If it rejects your amendment, which you will have submitted under that rule 108(4) I will accept it here and then the Committee of the whole House will consider it.  

At the time we were dealing with the Motion at Second Reading, I advised those who had amendments to submit them so they would be included. You see when you are on the Committee Stage and handling the amendments, you may have a number of Committees. There is an organised way of processing these amendments. If you have not done this, submit them before we start the Committee Stage. Maybe I may take this opportunity because I wanted to say some other things when the Committee Stage starts. If you did not submit your amendment to the Committee, you may not be allowed to submit them here. 

During Committee Stage, which we are about to start as I have said, Rule 108 will apply. The voting will be by simple majority, but it will be preferable that you make two thirds. That is what is expected but I will not decline to hold a Clause standing simply because you do not have two thirds. Two thirds is for Second and Third Reading. I hope this is clear.

Then the other problem is that according to the report, which you debated together with the Motion, there are a number of Clauses, which the Committee advised should be withdrawn from the Bill. According to our Rules of Procedure, each Clause is called; we take a roll call and then tarry. However, the rule gives me discretion to opt for voting by show of hands. I want to suggest that when a Clause is called and the Committee has recommended that it be withdrawn, to save time, we shall not take a roll call.  That is how I intend to proceed, because as you can see, a single question with this roll call takes about an hour. So we will be saving on those Clauses, which we are not pursuing, since they are not controversial Clauses, I hope this has been understood.

 MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, I am not being cumbersome on the procedure of the House this morning, but it is very important.  When we come to certain items, you are going to exercise your discretionally powers on whether we should go two thirds or simple majority. I would like to appeal to you that for the weighty issues, we should go for two thirds and if possible time permitting roll call.

THE SPEAKER:  I would love that, in fact not just two thirds, but 100 percent support.  We shall try our level best but that is not binding. I am only talking about rules that bind me. During the Committee Stage, it is simple majority not the Constitutional two thirds.  But if we get two thirds, fine.

11.18
MR MIKE SEBALU:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would just like to put it on record to thank you for the clarification you have made to the country regarding the process that we are going through because there has been a lot of misrepresentation and yet, what we are doing is within our set rules.  I would like to give an example because I was sharing with the chairman of the committee and we encountered problems along the way.  

There has been a lot of interaction between the Committee and some of the members to have our amendments included. A case in point was where a given tribe had to be included in schedule to be recognised.  However, the member who had engaged the Committee in that respect, voted “No”. So these contradictions send wrong signals and I think it is good that you have been able to put this correct after spending hours with a Committee, someone votes “No” and adds “in principle”. I wonder what principle eliminates you from the Constitution and you are happy about it.  It is good that you have put it correct.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, Let us start the exercise.

MR MWANDHA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I had wanted to appear before the Committee when they were dealing with the omnibus Bill. I wrote to them but never got a reply. I am aware that they never really had any hearings on Bill no. 3. I think the rules permit me to give notice of any amendment that I may wish to give.
  
Secondly, there is an issue of the minority reports. You indicated that these reports would be handled during Committee Stage.  I would like you to give some light on how this is going to be handled.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as I explained, the Motion we had on the Order Paper was a Motion moved by the minister for the Second Reading of the Bill.  There was no Motion to adopt the Committee report. Our rule about Second Reading is that when the minister moves a Motion for Second Reading, the appropriate Committee also submits its report. We do not adopt the report, but use it to debate the Motion for Second Reading. 

The minority reports were also submitted.  In debate, if you brought your ideas in the minority report, you would still use them to debate the Motion for Second Reading. Therefore, when we deal with Bills, and Committees reports, there is no Motion for adopting. We only use it as a material to support or oppose the Motion.  I believe many members who favoured the minority report used it in their debates and consequently in saying “Yes” or “No” when the question was put on the Motion for Second Reading.  

11.21
MR ODONGA OTTO:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for that guidance.  I remember there was a time when hon. Matembe brought a minority report, which was read by either hon Betty Amongin or hon. Alaso.  You made the House vote to dispose of that minority report. But I realise that this specifically -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The matter is distinguishable, in that we are not dealing with the Bill, but with the Motion. Hon. Nyombi’s motion to amend our rules is different; I am talking about Bills with Committee reports. Therefore, the other one cannot serve as a precedent for this because the two cases are different.

MR OTTO: Thank you very much for your guidance.  Secondly, a week ago, I raised the issue of security of members. Today we spent close to 30 minutes discussing the issue of col Bogere.  That is an indicator that it is not very safe to vote openly. It is an indicator, in fact it is a warning signal first of all to all those in the Army that if you ever behave like Bogere you will not like the end result, and it is also a warning signal to members of political parties that if you ever deviate, you will be severely punished. Therefore, I am seeking your guidance, is there a way the Army representatives can vote secretly to save their necks.

THE SPEAKER:  My advice is that rule 50, under which you can move a Motion to amend the rules, is still part of our rules. Any member, because of the circumstances arising, is free to bring that motion so we can make exceptions. 

As for the issue of political parties, I want to say that the Multi-party system works, maybe we have not had this here and people do not know. In multi-party systems, we shall have to introduce an office called, ”A Whip”, which will ensure that one votes as the party has decided.  As of now, there is no Whip, but we shall have them in future when we embrace multi-party system.  

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I think we are using our Rules of Procedure for all guidance.  Motions are brought to Parliament the same way Bills are.  I see no rationale that in making a decision on an aspect in Parliament, we use a certain procedure, and when it comes to another aspect, we amend the Rules of Procedure.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue when hon. Matembe brought the minority report, you allowed another procedure.  When we were coming here on –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see hon. Nandala, marketing grasshoppers is not the same as marketing meat. (Laughter)  I have told you the Committee was reporting on a Motion itself, there was the majority and there was the minority.  However, these reports with the Bills are only to assist us to debate.  We do not say we adopt the Committee report, because we are not obliged to take everything the Committee has recommended.  These reports are only to assist us in our debate.  The other one was whether we should change the rules.  The majority said, “Change”, the minority said, “No”.  That is why we dealt with it the way we did.  

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I have noticed so many things here.  Hon. Janat Mukwaya, wants to call me to order every time I stand up –(Laughter) and she claims I am young.  I am young in body, but intellectually mature. Since you are young in the brain, I am sure you understand this very well.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order, because my Colleague is holding our Rules of Procedure.  In that book he is holding, if he wants to challenge the Speaker, there is a procedure to that effect. Is he in order to stand up and challenge your ruling without following what is laid down in our Rules of Procedure?

THE SPEAKER: My understanding is that he had not clearly understood the impact and I was trying to explain to him.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005.

10.55

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 stand part of the Bill.  Now as you know we are going to have a roll call and you vote this way, “Aye” if you support; “No” if you oppose; “Abstain” if you have no side.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think I recall that when you were in the other Chair, you indicated that where amendments are not controversial, we would vote by show of hands.  Could this be one of the provisions where we could do that to expedite the process?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I said the report, which we also debated, if there is a Clause where the minister and the owner of the Bill says, “delete or withdraw”, that is not controversial, we can vote by show of hands.  No indication has been made to me that they want to withdraw this one.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I think it would be ideal for us to follow what we agreed.  We have amended our Rules of Procedure on what to follow and I would be very happy that we follow them exactly as we proposed.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Exactly as you amended them. They gave me discretion, which is what I am using now.  Order please!

AYES:

Aachilla John Roberts Rex			 	
Aanimu Angupale				
Ael Ark Lodou 
Ahabwe Perez			
Akech Okullu Betty 
Alisemera Jane		
Alonga Othman Haruna 
Amama Mbabazi		
Amuriat Oboi Patrick 
Anang-Odur Lakana Tomson			
Andruale Awuzu		
Angiro Gutomoi Charles
Apuuli Patrick 
Arumadri John Drazu 
Asupasa Isiko Wilson Mpongo 
Awongo Ahamed			
Awori Siryori Aggrey 
Baba Diri Margaret 
Babu Edward Francis 
Badda Fred 
Bagalana Tom Samson 
Baguma Isoke Matia 
Bakoko Bakoru Zoe 
Balemezi Lydia 
Bamwanga Steven 
Basajjabalaba Nassar 
Basaliza Arrali 
Basaliza Mwesigye Steven 
Bazaale Byaruhanga Phillip 
Bazana Kabwegyere Tarsis 
Bbumba Syda Namirembe 
Bikwasizehi Deusdedit 
Bintu Abwooli Lukumu Jalia 
Bitamazire Namirembe Geraldine 
Bitangaro Samuel 
Bulamu Richard 
Bwerere Kasole Lwanga Edward 
Byabagambi John 
Byanyima Nathan 
Byaruhanga Charles 
D’Ujanga Giw Simon 
Dombo Emmanuel Lumala 
Ekanya Geoffrey 
Epetait Francis 
Eriyo Jessica 
Esele John Peter 
Etonu Benedict 
Gaboi Kibaale Wambi 
Gole Nicholas David 
Guma Gumisiriza David 
Hyuha Samali Dorothy 
Kabakumba Labwoni Masiko 
Kafabusa Werikhe Micheal 
Kagaba Harriet 
Kajeke Wilfred 
Kajura Mugwanya Henry 
Kakooza James 
Kalule Ssengo			
Kamanda Batalingaya Cos 
Kamuntu Ephraim 
Kapkwomu Ndiwa			
Karooro Okurut Busingye Mary 
Kasamba Mathias 
Kasirivu Atwooki Baltazar 
Kasule Lumumba Justine 
Katongole Badru 
Kawoya Bangirana Anifa 
Kayizzi Asanasio 
Kayongo Tom 
Kezimbira Miyingo Lawrence 
Kidega Daniel Fred 
Kinobe Jimmy William Reuben 
Kiraso Birungi Beatrice 
Kityo Henry Mutebi 
Kiwagama William Wilberforce 
Kiwalabye Musoke Daniel
Kiyonga Chrispus		    
Kizige Moses			    
Koluo Charles			
Kukwaya Janat			 
Kule Muranga			
Lokeris  Aparite		    
Lokeris Peter 			    
Lolem Micah 
Lubowa Moses			    
Lule Mawiya 
Maate Rogers			    
Madada Sulaiman		    
Magoola Zirabamuzale	    
Makubuya Khiddu		    
Malinga Johson			    
Malinga Stephen 		    
Masiko Kabakumba		    
Matovu David			    
Mayende Simon			    
Mehangye Idah			 
Migereko Daudi		      
Mindra Joyo			 
Mugambe Joseph		      
Mukama Francis		      
Mukasa Anthony			 
Mukula Richard			 
Mulengani Benard 		
Muntuyera Herbert		 
Munyira Rose   		 
Musumba Isaac			 
Mutuluuza Peter			 
Mwandha James			 
Mwesigye Adolf			 
Mwesigye Hope			 
Nabeta Nasani 			 
Namayanja Rose			 
Namuyangu Jennifer 			
Nankabirwa Ruth			 
Nansubuga Sarah Nyombi    
Nayiga Florence Sekabira  
Nduhuura Richard		 
Nkuuhe Johnson 
Nsaba Buturo 
Nshimye Sebutulo		 
Nvumetta Ruth	      
Nyendwoha Mutiti		 
Obbo Joseph 
Ochieng Peter			 
Odit John 
Odonga Otto 
Ogola Micheal 
Ojok B’Leo 
Okot Ogong Felix 
Okumu Ringa			
Okupa Elijah
Olum Zachary 
Omach Fred 
Omodi Okot 
Opange Louis 
Oryem Henry Okello 
Oulanyah Jacob 
Rainer Juliet Kafire 
Ruhindi Freddie 
Rukundo Sarapio 
Ruzindana Augustine 
Rwakimari Beatrice 
Rwamirama Bright 
Sebagereka Victoria 
Sebalu Mike 
Thembo Nyombi 
Tibarimbasa Avitus 
Tiperu Nusura 
Tubbo Christine 
Tuma Ruth 
Wabudeya Beatrice 
Wadri Kassiano 
Wagonda Muguli 
Wakikona David 
Wambuzi Gagawala 
Wandera Martin 
Woneka Oliver 
Wopuwa George William 
Yiga Anthony 
Zziwa Margaret 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is as follows; one member abstained, 171 voted “Aye”. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah):  Mr Speaker, the committee proposes that the entire Clause 2 be deleted and the justification is as contained in the report. It is unnecessary at this time.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, Government accepts this recommendation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. The motion is that we delete. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 3

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that Clause 3 be deleted in its entirety. The constitutional provision as it exists now is sufficient.

DR MAKUBUYA:  Mr Chairman, Government accepts this recommendation. (Applause)

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 4

(Question put.)

MR WANDERA: I have a clarification, Mr Chairman. Clause 4 is talking about Kampala, which is located in the region of Buganda. I would like to understand the meaning of this region of Buganda because when I look at Schedule 4 of the current constitution, Kampala is not in Buganda. I think that it would be best if we dealt with this after we have disposed of the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005. I seek your advice. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, can the minister or the chairperson explain?

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, it is true that although the entity of Buganda is known in legal terminology, it has not yet been entered as a region. I therefore propose that it should read, ‘Kampala located in Buganda shall be the capital city of Uganda’. The ‘region of’ should be removed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, there is an amendment that instead of saying ‘region’, we should say, ‘in Buganda’. I put the question  -(Interruption)

MR MWONDHA: I think hon. Martin Wandera was correct because if we take it as it is, we would be anticipating the passage of the (No. 2) Bill. However, unless in the (No. 2) Bill we shall not be talking about the region of Buganda, you will have two expressions describing Buganda, which are the region of Buganda and Buganda. Sir, I think the neat way of doing it would be to stand over this clause until such a time as when we have a region of Buganda defined in the constitution.
    A. 
THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that cannot work. The two Bills are different so we cannot stand this clause then come back. This is not possible unless we agree to start with defining the region of Buganda in the constitution and then discuss Clause 4. What I think we can do for Buganda is to, first of all, consider the districts of Buganda and say, Mukono of Buganda, Mpigi of Buganda, Wakiso of Buganda. Then all we will have to do is cater for the proposed amendment and have an interpretation. In the interpretation of the area we will say that what we meant by ‘in Buganda’ is the area surrounded by the districts of Buganda. That will solve our problem but postponing it will not.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr chairman, in the First Schedule of the 1995 Constitution, the districts of Uganda are listed and consistent with your explanation, we have district 29 to 36 all of which are grouped together as Kalangala of Buganda, Kiboga of Buganda, Masaka of Buganda, Mpigi of Buganda, Mubende of Buganda and so on. This appears to be consistent with the Attorney General’s amendment that we mention Kampala, which is located in Buganda because Buganda is mentioned in the Schedule -(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I am not up to anything sinister so I request my friends to listen. Article 178(3) provides that subject to Clause 1 of this Article and provisions of this constitution, the districts of Buganda as specified in the First Schedule do not list Kampala among them. What I think is that we should first amend that Schedule, put Kampala among the districts of Buganda, then we can talk of Kampala in Buganda. We must first list Kampala among the districts of Buganda in the First Schedule.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, because this is a new creation, for somebody to understand the geographical location of Buganda it would have to refer to the areas surrounded by the districts of Buganda, which are named in the current Constitution. This does not pose any problem.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, a distinction should be made for hon. Wandera to get it clear, that is a distinction between the geographical location and the administrative status. We are talking of Kampala being in Buganda but not of Buganda.

MR ODUR: Mr Chairman, I seek to ask for clarification. In the constitution as it stands, Kampala stands alone as the capital city of Uganda. Now in the proposed amendment, we want to say it is in Buganda –(Interjections)- yes this is what you are saying in the proposed amendment and it is a fact. However, I doubt whether there is any Ugandan who does not know that Kampala is in Buganda. 

What I am asking is, “What are the legal implications of putting it in the constitution in the way that it is proposed”? Are we saying that Kampala is independent and will be run by the Central Government while at the same time saying that Buganda can have a claim on Kampala because we admit it is in Buganda? I seek this clarification, Mr Chairman, bearing in mind the state of this country. I want us to make a law that we are all clear about so that we can move as a nation and not have to go back and have conflicts on this issue.

THE CHAIRMAN: What I can say in my understanding is that we have Bill No.2 which has come here. This Bill is for the creation of regions and there is a region of Buganda. The formulation by the minister as a result of hon Wandera’s contribution was to delete the word ‘region’ and substitute it with ‘In Buganda’. However, for one to understand this definition, you have to explain what you mean by ‘In Buganda’. This is because ‘In Buganda’ is not the same as the Buganda region. Therefore in the definition we have said that ‘In Buganda’ means the area comprised of the districts of Buganda, which areas are in the constitution.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Article 5 of the constitution as it is states that the capital city of Uganda is Kampala. The First Schedule that has been referred to does not include Kampala in the districts of Buganda. Therefore, the amendment that has been proposed by the minister will still make reference to Buganda. In Bill No.2, we are dealing with the districts of Buganda in cooperation. I wonder whether this will also apply to Kampala. If not, then the entire formulation will be redundant because we would still go back to the old formulation that Kampala shall be the capital city of Uganda and shall be administered by the Central Government.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. I think there must have been a reason why ‘In Buganda’ was included in the amendment. 

MR BITANGARO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the cure for hon Wandera’s concern would be an interpretation section where ‘In Buganda’ and ‘Of Buganda’ are defined and ‘Region’ defined in Bill No.3.

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, Kampala cannot be in Buganda without being of Buganda and the formulation of the Chairman of the Legal Committee states that. I think we should take his formulation. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Chairman and colleagues, the purpose for amending this constitution is because it is everybody’s mirror. It has operated for ten years and there are concerns about it. It is the responsibility of this parliament to recognize each of these concerns so that there is unity in diversity.  

The Baganda have been concerned that Kampala will grow and take over private property. Therefore if we have to have a common facility, it must be demarcated so that everybody knows the boundaries of the common facility without tampering with private property and we have conceded to that. We have also said that we cannot continue with Kampala when it is not planned. Therefore anybody who finds them selves in Kampala must abide by the status, as provided by the State and we have conceded to that. 

There is a fact, and I am happy that hon. Odur recognized it, that this land once and even now still belongs to the Baganda –(Interjections)- yes, but geographical location does not entitle one to status and it does not entitle you to ownership. Ownership will be for the Central Region and for all the people in Buganda. I appeal to you to feel with us and recognize that the capital city is here and it is for everybody in Buganda. 

DR NKUUHE: I think we all want the best for our country, for the people who live in Kampala and also for the people who live in Buganda. We have to be aware and it is in our best interests, to cater for the interests of the people who live in Kampala, in Uganda and in Buganda. It is also a natural thing that Kampala will continue to grow -(Interjections)- yes, it will continue to grow because Kampala has to expand in future. Also, it will be in the interests of the people who stay in Mukono for Kampala to expand because it will increase the value of their property. Therefore, I think that whatever definition we settle for, it should cater for all these things. For instance, I hear that Kampala in Buganda means that it is surrounded by Buganda. If we are to use that same logic, Swaziland which is surrounded by South Africa is in South Africa. But is Swaziland in South Africa because it is surrounded by South Africa?


CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman, the reason for this amendment is to recognise that Kampala geographically belongs to a certain area in this country and that is all. Whatever interpretation is going to give us that legally, is what we are looking for.  

Secondly, Mr Chairman, this is not the first city to have boundaries that are closed. Washington DC has its boundaries closed and all the municipalities around Washington DC have got their own leadership but they work with the leadership of Washington DC. Washington DC has got its own mayor who is financed by the Central Government and the aim of making it the capital city is to get the Central Government to support it. In so doing, it becomes the property of the whole nation. For us who come from Buganda, all we are requesting for is that you recognize that geographically, Kampala is in Buganda. That is all. Thank you very much.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The clarification I want is from the Attorney General. I would like to find out what the difference is between the Kampala in Uganda and the Kampala in Buganda? Thank you.

DR KEZIMBIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Colleagues, I think the argument here is not that of boundary or extent. The argument is that it is being driven by the amendment, which has been moved by the Attorney General. The Chairman alluded to this and made it very clear that a definition would be put into the Schedule, so that we can know how far we have moved over this issue. It is well known and no one can argue with the fact that Kampala is in Buganda. We simply want it documented that Kampala is within Buganda. Therefore colleagues, I am calling upon you –(Interruptions)- the amendment moved by the minister, the Attorney General, (Interruptions)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I am getting extremely concerned by contributions given by colleagues, like hon. Janat Mukwaya, hon. Babu and now hon. Kezimbira.  No body in this House is arguing against the fact that Kampala is in Buganda. What we are trying ascertain is the best way of defining Kampala within the Constitution. 

It is unfortunate that we did not handle Bill No. 2 because we would not be having this problem. But now that we have it, all we need to do is to find a formulation. No body is saying that we want to take Kampala out of Buganda. All we want to do is to find a suitable definition that will not confuse us in future. That is all. These sentiments, which are being brought up by hon. Mukwaya, hon. Kezimbira and hon. Babu are not taking us any where.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us be orderly. When you consider the Bill that talks about regions, we know about the region of Buganda. Somebody has said that this region has not been created, but if you see it this way, then you have a problem. The issue was where the physical location of Kampala is, and it is in Buganda. Why was is said so? Because Kampala is in Kyadondo, which is part of Kasangati, which Kasangati is in Wakiso District of Buganda.  

However, we do not want to say the capital city is part of the region of Buganda because it is the capital city of the country. So how can we go about this? We can go about it by saying that Kampala is not in the region of Buganda. That is how we do it.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, I had proposed another formulation, but having listened to colleagues speak on the matter, I had not thought it had that background. Now that I know, I move to withdraw my proposal and adopt the one moved by the Attorney General. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, there is an amendment by the minister, which you all heard. I am going to put the question to that particular amendment then we shall deal with the clause, if it is amended. Your names will be called, those in favour of the minister’s amendment, say “Aye”, those against say “No” and those abstaining please let us know.

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, the formulation of “In” will end this discussion. I do not see a problem with saying, “Of Buganda”. If you look at the same amendment in (5), the territorial boundary will be defined by parliament. When you say, ‘in Buganda’, this means that Buganda is going to have permanent boundaries and therefore, Kampala cannot grow. But when you say “of Buganda”, Kampala can grow. It does not belong to Buganda because -(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you should understand clearly that sometimes we can have a political capital and a commercial capital. The purpose here is to create a political capital. That political capital need not change, but the commercial capital can change. The concern of the constitution here is for a political capital.

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, before we take a vote, there was a reference to Washington D.C. I think it was a misleading example.  

Two, if you go by any precedent at all international- look at Pretoria, it is the capital of South Africa but you do not say Pretoria of this or that state –(Interjections)- no, you do not. Never!

THE CHAIRMAN: Order! Let us take the roll call now.

(Question put.)

AYES:

Aachilla John Roberts Rex 
Aadroa Onzima Alex
Aanimu Angupale
Abura Pirir Samuel  
Abura Samuel			
Ael Ark Lodou 
Agard Didi 
Ahabwe Perez 
Akaki Ayumu Jovino 
Akech Okullo Betty 
Alisemera Babiha Jane 
Alonga Othman Haruna 
Amama Mbabazi			
Amuriat Oboi			
Andruale Awuzu 
Apuun Patrick			
Arumadri John Drazu 
Awongo Ahmed 
Baba Diri Margaret 
Babu Edward Francis 
Badda Fred 
Bagalana Tom Samson 
Baguma Isoke Matia 
Bakaluba Mukasa 		
Bakoko Bakoru Zoe 
Balemezi Nalubega Lydia 
Bamwanga Steven 
Banyenzaki Henry		
Basajjabalaba Nassar 
Basaliza Araali Henry 
Basaliza Mwesigye Steven 
Bazaale Byaruhanga Phillip 
Bazana Kabwegyere Tarsis 
Bbumba Syda Namirembe 
Bikwasizehi Deusdedit 
Bintu Abwooli Lukumu Jalia 
Bitamazire Namirembe Geraldine 
Bitangaro Samuel 
Bulamu John Richard 
Bwerere Kasole Lwanga Edward 
Byabagambi John 
Byamukama Dora 
Byanyima Nathan
Byaruhanga Charles 
Chebrot Chemoiko Steven 
D’Ujanga Giw Simon 
Dombo Emmanuel Lumala 
Ekanya Geoffrey
Epetait Francis 
Eriyo Jessica 
Esele John	    
Etonu Benedict	    
Gaboi Kibaale Wambi 
Gole Nicholas	    
Guma David	
 Hyuha Dorothy 	    
Kabakumba Masiko   
Kaddunabbi Lubega Ibrahim	
Kafabusa Werikhe  
Kagaba Harriet    
Kagimu Kiwanuka   
Kajeke Wilfred    
Kajura Muganwa    
Kakoko Sebagereka 
Kakooza James     
Kalule Ssengo      
Kamanda Batalingaya 
Kamuntu Ephraim   
Katuntu Abdu	   
Kapkwomu Ndiwa    
Kasirivu Atwooki  
Kasule Lumumba    
Katongole Badhul   
Katuramu Hood     
Kawoya Anifa     
Kayizzi Asanasio  
Kayongo Tom       
Kezimbira Miyigo  
Kibanzanga Christopher	
Kidega Daniel     
Kinobe Jimmy     
Kiraso Beatrice  
Kityo Mutebi     
Kiwagama William 
Kiwalabye Musoke  
Kiyonga Chrispus 
Kizige Moses     
Koluo Charles    
Kule Mulanga      
Lochiam Miligan rose 
Lokeris Paul    
Lokeris Peter   
Lolem Micah           
Lule Mawiya     
Madada Sulaiman  
Magoola Zirabamuzale 
Makubuya Khiddu  
Malinga Steven  
Matte Rogers   
Matovu David Capt. 
Mayende Simon  
Mehangye Idah  
Migereko Daudi 
Mindra Joyo    
Mugambe Joseph 
Mukabeera Anette 
Mukama Francis 
Mukasa Anthony Harris 
Mukasa Muruli Wilson 
Mukula Richard 
Mukwaya Janat 
Mulengani Benard 
Munyira Wabwire 
Musumba Isaac 
Mutuluuza Peter 
Mwandha James 
Mwesigye Adolf 
Mwesigye Ruhindi Hope 
Nabeta Nasani 
Nacha Lorika Rose 
Namayanja Rose 
Namusoke Sarah Kiyingi 
Namuyangu 
Nankabirwa Ruth 
Nansubuga Nyombi 
Nasasira John 
Nayiga Florence 
Ndawula Kaweesi Edward 
Nduhuura Richard 
Nkuuhe Johnson 
Nsaba Buturo 
Nshimye Sebutulo 
Ntacyotugira Philip 
Nuwagaba Herbert 
Nvumetta Ruth 
Nyendwoha Mutiti 
Obbo Henry 
Ochieng Peter 
Ogola Akisoferi 
Ogwel Loote 
Ojok B’Leo 
Okot Ogong Felix 
Okumu Ringa 
 Okurut Karooro 
Olum Zachary 
Omach Fred 
Omodi Okot 
Opange Louis
Oryem Henry Okello 
Oulanyah Jacob 
Rainer Kafire 
Ruhindi Fred 
Rukundo Serapio 
Ruzindana Augustine 
Rwakimari Beatrice 
Sebalu Mike 
Ssentongo Teopista		
Thembo Nyombi		
Tibarimbasa Avitus				
Tiperu Nusura			
Tubbo Christine				
Tuma Ruth				
Tumwesigye Elioda		
Wabudeya Beatrice		
Wagonda Muguli		
Wakikona David		
Wambuzi Gagawala		
Wonekha Oliver			
Wopuwa George William 	
Yiga Anthony			
Zziwa Margaret		
		
NOES:

Anang-Odur Lakana Thomson

ABSTENTIONS:

Awori Siryoyi Aggrey 
Odonga Otto
Okupa Elijah 		

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, thank you very much.

MRS SEBAGEREKA:  Mr Chairman, one time I was read as Sebagereka Kakoko, and another time I was read as Kakoko Sebagereka, which one should I listen to?  I prefer to be called Kakoko Sebagereka.

THE CHAIRMAN:  How do you want us to –

MRS SEBAGEREKA:  Kakoko Sebagereka, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay.

MR MUSUMBA:  Mr Chairman, why doesn’t hon. Alitwala Kadaga, who is the Deputy Speaker, vote when she is not in the chair?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think she is not voting, because anytime, she may be presiding over the same proceedings.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, as a matter of security, Ekanya has a very big stick in his hands, may we be protected from him please?

MR EKANYA:  Mr Chairman, this is a map of Bukedi and Tororo District- these are maps.  A paper is not a stick. (Laughter)

MR MADADA:  There are members in the House, who are not voting.  I can see Elijah Okupa; he has not voted.

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, as I entered, hon. Ekanya was showing the map of Tororo, I was waiting for your ruling before I can give my position.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Would you like to register your vote?

MR OKUPA: I abstain, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Very good.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, I have been taking note of the time that is spent when ones name is called and when one responds and when we go back to sitting; on average, we spend about one minute per person, and if you assume full membership of the House, 305, we will be spending about 30 minutes on every question you put and if you have 98 clauses on which we have to pronounce ourselves, we will to spend something like 29,000 minutes. And when I computed that in hours, we are going to be spending almost three weeks on just pronouncing ourselves on every clause.  

Mr Chairman, I wanted to plead with you, that we should be guided by your discretion in expediting the work of the House; otherwise from the look of it, it is going to be an impossible task to accomplish.

THE CHAIRMAN: I entirely agree with you and actually, the rule itself gives me discretion, which I exercised judiciously, and I have done so.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I am seeking for your guidance with regard to the roll call, especially on this question. I notice that honourable Members: Kawanga John Baptist, Kikungwe Issa, Nsambu, Sebaggala Latif, Lukyamuzi Ken, Sebuliba Mutumba, Musumba Salaamu, Jack Sabiiti, Ben Wacha, Miriam Matembe, Mwondha, Nandala Mafabi, Omara Atubo, Ocula Nyeko and Okumu Reagan (interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I quite appreciate that some are not here and the records will show that.  

Hon. Members I put the question on the amendment by the Minister on Clause 4 and the results are as follows: Abstentions - 3, Nays - 1, Ayes – 169. 

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Members, this was the central issue in Clause 4. Can I use my discretion on the question that the clause as amended stand part of the Bill, so that you do vote by show of hands? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5

THE CHAIRMAN: This is the official language.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that Clause 5, that is the proposal for a second official language, should be deleted as unnecessary. Mr Chairman, the reasons the committee came to this conclusion are these and I would like you to listen carefully: 

The implication of putting in the Constitution that Swahili is the second language is that somebody can stand up on the Floor of this Parliament and speak in Swahili, that somebody can demand –(interjection)– may I finish please?  I am just giving you the reason the committee came to this conclusion. If you could be kind enough to listen, then you would come in to take a decision, but first listen.

So, the committee says that the implication would be odious. The reason that was advanced for this is that of for fast tracking the East African Cooperation.  The committee does not believe that in putting Swahili as the second official language, then it will fast-track because not everybody will immediately learn Swahili to facilitate that process –(Interjection)– Honourable. Members can I finish.

So, those were the reasons that the committee considered in coming to the conclusion that this amendment was unnecessary.  

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, my instructions are to oppose this recommendation of the committee.  Mr Chairman, the Heads of State of Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania have developed a first tracking mechanism for the establishment of the East African political federation. Uganda stands to benefit if Swahili is adopted as the second official language. (Applause)

Secondly, if you look at the proposed amendments 1 and 2, the official language of Uganda is English, and Swahili is recognized as a second official language in Uganda to be used in such circumstances as Parliament may by law prescribe. (Applause) Therefore, you do not just stand up and use it anyhow. You use it in circumstances as Parliament may by law prescribe. There will be some orderly system of using Swahili. So we do not accept the recommendation of the committee and we propose that the amendment as proposed should stand part of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you still insisting on the amendment?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, I have consulted with a few members of the committee who are seated and also going by the chorus vote that I have heard, we have no difficulty conceding this and withdrawing the proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that this clause stands part of the Bill -(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to ask the Attorney-General, if we are to reword it that Swahili should be the second official language in Uganda to be used in such circumstances, blah, blah, blah, would it be not better than this formulation as it is?

THE CHAIRMAN: What is it?  

MR KATUNTU: I thought we would have reworded it as: “Swahili shall be the second official language in Uganda, to be used in such circumstances as Parliament may by law prescribe”.  

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean that you want to delete “recognise”? Can you tell us why? 

MR KATUNTU: What we want is not recognition but we are determining the second official language and that is why we are saying Swahili “shall be”. It is not recognition; it is more definitive and even better craftsmanship, better than it is now. (Applause)

DR. MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether this proposal has been seconded but there are practical considerations to take into account. This is good craftsmanship and naturally one can think of other ways of drafting this provision but the point is that we propose to recognize Swahili as the second official language of Uganda and practical considerations require that we give Parliament power to determine the circumstances in which it may be used and the law will prescribe these. I, therefore, unfortunately cannot agree with the amendment and I oppose the proposal by my very good, honourable, friend, Abdu Katuntu.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Chairman, if you read the amendment proposed by hon. Katuntu, one would have to go further than what he has proposed because if you are saying that Swahili “shall be”, that is mandatory. If you continue with the sentence as proposed by him, “Swahili shall be a second official language in Uganda to be used in such circumstances as Parliament may prescribe by law”. You have created two obligatory elements in the same statement.  

Therefore, since Parliament is going to prescribe the circumstances in which Swahili will be recognized as a second official language or the official language, I want to support the position of the Attorney-General that we retain the provision as it is now and leave the element of defining the circumstances to Parliament. Thank you.

MR AWORI: I am seeking further clarification from the two honourable ministers. The original clause says that the official language of Uganda is English. So to maintain consistency, why don’t we ignore the element of recognition? We have never said that English shall be recognized as the official language of Uganda. Why do you want to derogate the whole idea of recognizing Swahili as the official language? You are subjecting it to further qualification and even reducing the mandatory aspect of “shall”. Why don’t you just say “shall”, without subjecting it to further derogation?  

DR. MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the concerns raised by hon. Aggrey Awori, but you need to remember that the committee had recommended the deletion of this clause and they had very strong reasons for it.   

The chairman has stated that some of you can stand up and just say, “I am going to speak in Swahili”, yet there are no arrangements for this and that, and we said yes. There are two considerations. The first one is that we need to go regional and it is for our own survival. 

Two, you need to specify the practical considerations to be taken into account. You cannot specify them in the Constitution. So, leave it open to Parliament to specify them, and there is no question of derogation because Swahili is not mentioned anywhere in the original Constitution. We are in fact elevating it by recognizing it as the second official language to say that the implementation of which will have to take into account practical considerations to be specified by Parliament. I think this is fairly reasonable. You make it mandatory because if you say that, “on the coming into force of this amendment,” then it cannot. You have to be practical. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: I think I now have a problem with the Attorney-General. We are here to determine the official languages and the consensus of the House is that Swahili is or should be the second official language. Why do we not say so in the Constitution? I find no contradiction in the argument he is raising, saying that this second language can only be used in circumstances as Parliament may by law prescribe. Until Parliament makes such a law, it cannot be used, but it will be the second optional language. I do not see any problem with that.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what he is telling you is that there will be some other circumstances that will determine its effectiveness as a second language. Currently you may not recognize it because we may not have this time to determine all the circumstances but after this, there are conditions that will be attached to it before it can practically serve as the second language. I think that is his explanation.  

Hon. Katuntu is deleting “recognize” and putting in its place, “shall”.

MRS BABA DIRI: I do not know the meaning of this word “recognize”. What does it imply? Can you clarify it, please? The fact that it is the second official language means that it is not going to be used anyhow. The first priority is given to English then the second priority is given to Swahili as the second language. The conditions are given as the minister has stated. I think the word “recognize” is not definite. Can you define to me what “recognize” means? Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I was reluctant to comment on this subject, but I have to. We are making a Constitution, we are not making a statutory instrument, we are not making an Act of Parliament, but a Constitution. The problem that we keep having after we have made our Constitutions is that we keep having grey areas. There is a grey area we need to plug this, there is a grey area we need to plug that, we cannot continue like this. So we must be firm on the direction that we have taken for this country -(Applause)- and the Attorney-General has cleared it. 

In view of the impending formation of the East African community, we need to be firm on where we are going. Therefore, I support hon. Katuntu’s proposal and even in terms of the drafting technique, it has no contradiction whatsoever with what the Attorney-General is saying because it states the principle that we shall have Swahili as the second language. Then the other supplementary bit is the way you implement that principle. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question that we substitute “shall” with “recognition”.

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is as follows: those against are 56 and those for the amendment are 61.  

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to clause 5, as amended and I am going to ask you to vote by a show of hands again –(Interruption)  

MR WACHA: Thank you, Sir. I have a problem pegging the usage of Swahili to the making of a law by Parliament to enable its usage. If we have already stated that it is going to be a second language, I do not know why we should fetter it when we have not fettered the first part of this clause, which is the usage of the word “language” so that it reads: “Swahili shall be the second official language in Uganda”.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Therefore, it means as of tomorrow it becomes a second language?

MR WACHA: Let me explain, Sir. I was in the Constituent Assembly when we provided for the usage of English as the official language. We did not peg a time limit to its usage or enable it to be used. I have sat in two Parliaments so far and I know that up to now there are certain provisions of the Constitution, which have not been enabled by a law made by this Parliament. Supposing Parliament does not make such a law, what will happen? Does it mean that we would have made a useless provision in our Constitution? That is my problem.

DR MAKUBUYA: The provision is that Swahili shall be the second official language in Uganda to be used in such circumstances as Parliament may by law prescribe. It should, however, read: “Swahili shall be the second official language in Uganda to be used in such circumstances –(Interjections)- I am talking about – please, can we understand one another? So if –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: My honourable colleague, the Attorney-General, is repeating a position we have already defeated by vote. Why is he re-introducing it?  

Secondly, it is a well-known fact that in the army, prisons and the police we are already using Swahili –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You are now contributing; let him finish.

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, the new sub-clause, which we have now written reads: “Swahili shall be the second official language in Uganda to be used in such circumstances as Parliament may by law prescribe.” Hon. Wacha is saying: “Swahili shall be the second official language.” I do not accept it. I oppose this additional amendment because we should talk practically. If you are to say, on the day this amendment Bill becomes law Swahili shall be the second official language, you are not being practical. We should be making a Constitution that we can enforce and we will have resources for.  

At this point in time if you are to say you begin on Swahili – I know that the Army is using it but what percentage of the population is the Army? I know that Prisons is using it, what percentage of the population is Prisons? Where are you going to get the teachers immediately; where are you going to get the learning materials from immediately? This Parliament should maintain its dignity, its respect and its leadership. As far as I am concerned clause (2) as it now reads is practical and it should remain because arrangements have to be made: administrative, financial, practical and management before you can actually implement Swahili as the second official language. I oppose the hon. Wacha’s amendment.  

MR NASASIRA: Mweshimiwa mwenyekiti. (Applause) The feeling in the House is that we need Swahili as a second language. Our interest in Swahili should not be so much that when we pass this Constitution we cause confusion in the country. A Constitution is supposed to be built step by step. We should know where we are in Swahili as a country. This is why I started with a phrase in Swahili. My understanding is that if we take hon. Wacha’s amendment there is nothing that will stop me from speaking Swahili in school, in Parliament, in public rallies or at any official gathering because constitutionally we would have been empowered. But you can imagine the confusion that we would have. In my own opinion we should accept the word “shall” and leave the rest of the clauses as they stand. So, I oppose hon. Wacha’s amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, shall I put the question?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is amendment by hon. Wacha, which stops at the word “language” in the first line. You put a full stop after the word “language” and delete the rest of the formulation. I put the question to hon. Wacha’s amendment. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members the position is: those abstaining are one, those for the motion are 17, and those against are 107. The noes have it. 

(Question negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to clause 5, as amended. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is: abstentions are nil, those against are one, and those for the motion are 136. The ayes have it. Thank you.

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.48
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker 
presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.49
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya Khiddu): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered clauses 1 to 5 of the Bill entitled the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 and passed all the five clauses, with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE 
OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.00
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the Whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a convenient time to suspend the proceedings, until 3.30 p.m. 

(The proceedings were suspended at 2.02 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.20 p.m._)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005

Clause 6

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, can you explain the significance of this clause 6? Clause 6 intends to repeal paragraph (a) of current Article 14, which says that: 
“A person may be deprived of his or her citizenship if acquired by registration, on any of the following ground –
(a)	Voluntary acquisition of citizenship of another country.” 

That is what they want to delete.  

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I had put in a request at the time when the debate was on that I would move for an insertion before clause 6, and that concerned the aspect of national interest. My arguments then were that within our Constitution’s guidelines and directive principles, section XXVIII talks about foreign policy and other issues of national interest, but that is not within the justiciable arrangement. 

When my Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs had a seminar in Mukono, we were told of the difficulty of deriving the issues of national interest with regard to the Constitution. That is why I moved this amendment and I beg that it is considered. I had an opportunity to talk to the chairman. Although of course he said that it should have come in at the time of the committee meetings and it is unfortunate that it did not come in then, it can be looked at, at this juncture.

THE CHAIRMAN: But the Article, which we completed before we suspended proceedings, was in chapter II, which talks about language. And in Article 6 the official language is English. Now you want to bring in another Article in chapter II?

MRS ZZIWA: Yes, I wanted to have a new Article on national interest, to come in under “the Republic” in chapter II after Article 8 in the current Constitution. In the Bill it should come after clause 5.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you given copies of your amendment to honourable members?

MRS ZZIWA: We circulated copies, and others are being circulated.

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, I am not in position to take a position on the matter. I have not seen the proposed amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: We should perhaps give ourselves time and come back to this. Give the copies to members, discuss it with the minister and chairperson, and we shall come back to it.

On clause 6, before I put the question to it, it is to delete the provision that somebody’s citizenship can be taken away from him on voluntary acquisition of the citizenship of another country. Is it clear? Should we use the roll call or it is not controversial?   
 
MR WACHA: Sorry, we are having some problems because of a lot of talking going on. We cannot hear well.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are on clause 6 of the Bill, which calls for the amendment of Article 14 of the Constitution, that is, deleting paragraph (a) of that Article. It is clear. 

MR KIZIGE: Since it is not controversial, I beg that we vote by a show of hands, in the interest of time.

THE CHAIRMAN: Shall I call out the names? I think you do not understand this. Maybe you are not conversant with the provisions of the Constitution. We are talking about citizenship -(Interruption)- yes, let me explain. I would advise in future that since you are amending the Constitution, when you come here, you should come with a copy of your Constitution so that you can clearly understand this.

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, we are dealing with clause 6 of the Bill. Article 14 of the Constitution specifies the conditions under which a person may be deprived of his or her citizenship, which was acquired by registration. The first ground is voluntary acquisition of the citizenship of another country. As we progress through the Bill you will notice that we are now allowing citizens of Uganda to acquire the citizenship of other countries without losing their citizenship. In brief, we are allowing dual citizenship, or we are proposing to allow it. 

Therefore, if you are going to allow a citizen of Uganda to hold the citizenship of another country, Article 14(a) automatically goes because it bars you from acquiring it. So what we are saying in clause 6 is that you amend Article 14 of the Constitution by repealing Article 14(a). When you vote “yes”, you are voting for the repeal and when you vote “no”, you are voting for the opposite of repeal.

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Chairman, when we repeal this article in the next section, which will come, is the Attorney-General assuring us that it will not be possible for a man to be a citizen of eight, six, four or five countries? We can repeal this but if we do not build in a factor whereby there must be a limit to a number of passports you can carry in terms of countries, then we are opening a Pandora’s box about citizenship.  

I would like to be clarified whether there will be that protection as we repeal this because if it is dual citizenship, then Article 14 should not be repealed. Instead we should call it voluntary acquisition of being a citizen of more than three countries. This Article sort of extends and it will be compliant with the situation.

DR MAKUBUYA: The concern raised by hon. Gagawala Wambuzi is a legitimate one, but this is the first time we are talking about dual citizenship in Uganda. We have no precedent on it. I am sure Chapter 18 will remain there so that the Constitution can be amended. 

My approach would be that, first of all, you authorize citizens of Uganda to be citizens of other countries and you see how it goes. Should the future generations find that they do not need it, they will take care of it. But I think if we pursue this we are going into anticipating the kind of problems that may arise. Our rules say we should not legislate on the basis of anticipation. I thank you.

MR AWORI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. There are two concerns here. One, while I support entirely the purpose and intention for the import of the motion to grant Ugandans of various categories double citizenship wherever applicable, I do oppose completely the element of granting a non-Ugandan by whatever arrangement, by marriage, by blood or by whatever system we put in place as long as it is based on money. This is why I am opposing the inclusion of Article 7 in the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, we are on clause 6, not 7.

MR AWORI: I am sorry, I have moved a little bit faster than –(Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question honourable members.

MR ONZIMA: Mr Chairman, while I agree with the Attorney-General that we have not been introduced to this before as a country and there is no precedent in Uganda, I also know that most of the laws we make in this country will normally get the input of other countries. So I beg the Attorney-General to cite examples of some countries in the region, those that have already adopted dual citizenship. He should tell us what their experiences is so that it puts my mind to rest.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this clause 7 is only removing that condition that may cause somebody to lose his citizenship. When we come to dual citizenship, it will be addressed when we come to clause 7. That is where you will raise all these issues. This particular clause provides that this is no longer ground for you to lose your citizenship. I hope it is clear.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, it would be procedurally prudent to stand over this clause and we deal with the next one, which is a substantive provision on dual citizenship. This clause can be amended after we have finished this one.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. I do not think it is necessary.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to differ with the opinion of my colleague hon. Ruhindi because this particular clause seeks - it is only talking about conditions of losing the Ugandan citizenship if one voluntarily acquired citizenship of another country. In principle we support the issue of dual citizenship and this voluntary acquisition of citizenship of another country should not cancel one’s citizenship in Uganda. I do not see any reason why we should stand over this clause. We could clear it right away and proceed to clause 7.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you should also look at the arrangement of the current Constitution. We started with clause 14 then we came to the issue of prohibition of dual citizenship. Even in the Constituent Assembly we started with clause 14 and then we came to clause 15. You look at it.

MR WACHA: What hon. Ruhindi is saying in another format is that supposing the concept of dual citizenship is rejected, you will have done away with the element, which prohibits any other person to hold another citizenship. I agree with him. Although the sequence in the Constitution is that we should deal with the issue of dual citizenship first, if it passes consequentially this will just fall by the wayside. Hon. Attorney-General, this makes a lot of sense. Why are you just looking at me?

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, I am not persuaded that we should change the logic which the Constituent Assembly followed in dealing with this matter. There is a good reason for starting with clause 14 as it was realised. This is not a mistake to begin with clause 14 and then you go to the substantive provision barring dual citizenship. This is a preamble to the actual, substantive provision. I am not convinced that we should change this logic because we are just introducing one element and we are not changing the basic structure of citizenship. I disagree. We should proceed with clause 14(a) first.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us vote on it.

(Question put.)

AYES:

AACHILLA JOHN ROBERTS REX
AADROA ONZIMA ALEX
AEL ARK LODOU
AGARD DIDI
AHABWE GODFREY PEREZA
AKECH OKULLO BETTY
AKWERO ODWONG JANE
ALASO ASIANUT ALICE
ALI MOSES 
ALISEMERA BABIHA JANE 
ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA
AMAJO MARY MAGDALENE ORIEKOT
AMAMA MBABAZI
AMONGI BETTY ONGOM
ANANG-ODUR PATRICK
ANDRUALE AWUZU
ANGIRO GUTOMOI	CHARLES
ARAPKISSA YEKKO JOHN
ARUMDADRI JOHN	 DRAZU
ASUPASA ISIKO WILSON MPONGO
AWORI SIRYOYI AGGREY
BABA DIRI MARGARET
BABU EDWARD FRANCIS
BADDA FRED
BAGUMA ISOKE MATIA
BAKALUBA MUKASA PETER
BAKKABULINDI CHARLES
BALEMEZI NALUBEGA LYDIA
BAMWANGA STEVEN
BANYENZAKI HENRY
BASALIZA ARAALI HENRY
BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS
BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE
BESISIRA IGNATIUS
BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT
BINTU ABWOOLI LUKUMU JALIA
BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE
BULAMU JONNY RICHARD
BUTIME RWAKAIKARA TOM
BYABAGAMBI JOHN
BYAMUKAMA DORA
BYANYIMA NATHAN
BYARUHANGA CHARLES
BYENKYA NYAKAISIKI BEATRICE
D’UJANGA SIMON
DOMBO EMMANUEL LUMALA
EKANYA GEOFFREY
EPETAIT FRANCIS
ERIYO JESSICA
ETONU BENEDICT
GUMA GUMISIRIZA DAVID
HYUHA  SAMALI DOROTHY
KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO
KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL
KAGABA HARRIET
KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE
KAJURA MUGANWA
KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA 
KAKOOZA JAMES
KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL
KAMANA WESONGA EDWARD
KAMUNTU EPHRAIM
KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKOMU
KASIGWA HARRY
KASIRIVU ATWOOKI BALTAZAR
KATONGOLE BADRU
KATUNTU ABDU 
KAWANGA JOHN BAPTIST
KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA
KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO LAWRENCE
KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA ISRAEL
KIDEGA DANIEL FRED
KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM LEUBEN
KITHENDE KALIBOGHA APOLINARIS
KITYO HENRY MUTEBI
KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE
KIWALABYE MUSOKE
KIYONGA CHRISPUS WALTER
KIZIGE MOSES
KOLUO CHARLES PETER
KUBEKETERYA JAMES
KULE MULANGA JOSEPH
KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI TOMSON
LOCHIAM MILIGAN ROSE
LOKERIS APARITE PAUL
LOKERIS PETER AIMAT
LOLEM MICAH
LUBOWA MOSES PAUL
LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN
LULE MAWIYA UMAR
LWANGA MUTEKANGA TIMOTHY
MAATE ROGERS
MABIKKE MICHAEL
MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN
MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE BEATRICE
MAKUBUYA KHIDDU EDWARD
MALINGA STEVEN OSCAR
MATOVU DAVID 
MBABAZI KABUSHENGA HAMLET
MIGEREKO DAUDI
MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA
MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA
MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL
MUKULA RICHARD
MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT
MULENGANI BENARD
MUNYIRA WABWIRE OMUSOLO ROSE
MUSUMBA ISAAC ISANGA
MUTULUUZA PETER CLAVERRI.B
MWANDHA JAMES ELIEZER
MWESIGE ADOLF
MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE
MWONDHA PATRICK JOHN
NAMUSOKE KIYINGI KYAMA SARAH
NAMUYANGU KACHA JENIPHER
NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU RUTH
NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI
NASASIRA JOHN
NDUHUURA RICHARD
NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE
NSUBUGA NSAMBU
NTACYOTUGIRA PHILIP	 MARY
NUWAGABA HERBERT MUNTUYERA
NVUMENTA LUTAYA KAVUMA RUTH
NYEKO OCULA MICHAEL
NYENDWOHA MUTITI JONATHAN
OBBO HENRY JOSEPH
OCHIENG PETER PATRICK
ODIT JOHN
ODONGA OTTO 
ODONGO JEJE
OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL
OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY
OKOT OGONG FELIX
OKOT SANTA
OKUMU RONALD REAGAN
OKUPA ELIJAH
OKURUT KAROORO BUSINGYE MARY
OLUM ZACHARY
OMACHI MANDIR JACHAN FRED
OMODI OKOT
OPANGE LOUIS
ORECH DAVID MARTIN
OULANYAH JACOB
OWORI AMOOTI OTADA
PAJOBO BRUNO
PATAKI AMASI
RAINER KAFIIRE JULIET
RUHINDI FREDDIE
RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY
RUZINDANA AUGUSTINE
RWAKIMARI BEATRICE
 RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE BRIGHT
SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY
SEBULIBA MUTUMBA RICHARD
SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA
TIBARIMBASA AVITUS
TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE
TUBWITA BAGAYA GRACE
TUMA RUTH
TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO
WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE
WACHA BEN
WADRI KASSIANO EZATI
WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN WILSON
WAKIKONA WANDENDEYA DAVID
WAMBUZI GAGAWALA NELSON
WANANZOFU SIMON PETER
WANDERA MARTIN
WANJUSI WASIEBA SYLVESTER 
WONEKHA OLIVER
WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM
YERI OFWONO APOLLO
YIGA ANTHONY 
ZZIWA MARGARET NANTONGO

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the results are as follows: the abstentions are nil, those against are nil, and those for are 175. Therefore, the paragraph is deleted.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 7

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I see clause 7(a) as a duplication of clause 7(c), and since the Act of Parliament would describe all the details involving this issue, it would be appropriate to leave either (a) or (c), but I would recommend (c).  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, is it true that you are a Member of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee?

MR ODONGA OTTO: I was formerly.

THE CHAIRMAN: Did you submit your amendment to the committee as prescribed by rule 108(4)?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, no.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, under what circumstances should I accept your amendment?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Sir, on humanitarian grounds. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: On humanitarian grounds? Let me ask the minister or the chairperson to explain. 

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, I am not sure how to deal with this matter because there is no amendment to respond to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, I put the question. There is no amendment –(Interjections)- you see, the minister has explained and I have accepted. So, I do not have any amendment.  I put the question to clause 7. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the results are as follows: the abstentions are nil, those against are nil, and the ayes are 156. The ayes have it.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee has recommended that the whole of clause 8 be deleted the reason being that there is already in existence a board and this will simply be reinstating the same thing. 

Secondly, in view of the kind of schedule we have, this would not be a very necessary amendment because there is already a board in place.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, the position is clear –(Interruption) 

DR MAKUBUYA: The Government does not accept the recommendation of the committee regarding clause 8. The amendment is necessary to facilitate the restructuring process in the Immigration Department. We have been receiving numerous complaints about the Immigration Department, the process of restructuring has started and the amendment is required for it to continue. If this clause is not adopted the process of restructuring in the department will stall. I would, therefore, recommend to Parliament that we do not delete this clause; rather we retain it.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we have to be very creative now because the objections that are being raised were only received this morning. I have had to devise a system of consulting members in the House right now and my consultation says there is no point in resisting since our objections are catered for.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Let me explain. Originally we had this provision, it went to the committee, the committee said, “Because of time, it is not necessary”. But now the Chairman has said he has conceded that we consider the clause. That is the position, so I put the question to clause 8. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members the position is: abstention – 1, those against are nil, and those for are 131. The ayes have it.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee had recommended a similar recommendation to the previous one and by the same token that objection to dealing with that clause now also falls by the wayside. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 9 stand part of the Bill.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to seek some small clarification from the committee chairman. What other national duties and obligations do we envisage if we have this as part of the Bill?

MR OULANYAH: It is such other national duties and obligations as Parliament shall determine.

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, I really find this one very ambiguous considering that there will be penalties attached that are being proposed in the Bill. It should be good for us to understand as Parliament what obligations we envisage because what exist in Article 17 of the Constitution are all national duties and obligations. Which other ones do we envisage?

THE CHAIRMAN: May I venture and say in future you may think that there is a function this board should assist the Electoral Commission or another body, that is the kind of national function. If it is not there, Parliament may say, “On top of what you are doing please, also carry out this one,” in the wisdom of Parliament. This is the kind of situation I envisage.

MR KASIGWA: Basically Article 17 is talking of duties of a citizen, so what other duties do we envisage because it is already in the Constitution?

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, one of the complaints raised against the Constitution is that it goes into a lot of detail and what we are trying to do this time round is to avoid putting too much detail in the Constitution. We prescribe a general principle and Parliament at leisure will go into the details. I think this is a reasonable approach, rather than to prescribe all details in the Constitution. A Constitution should normally be a statement of general principles, giving it room to grow against the background of practice and so on.  This is why we cannot foresee every national duty that may arise and you leave it to Parliament to prescribe.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, it is like when you incorporate a company and set some functions, but then you end up with a clause that is so wide that it operates in a situation you might have not envisaged. This is the same thing. In future we may think that there is another duty we overlooked, which we think a citizen should have. That is to enable such a thing to happen without coming back to amend the Constitution. It is just enabling a situation like that.

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, the Attorney-General is talking about another detail because including Clause (k) is another detail, and if you look at an additional sub-clause (3), there are penalties. It leaves a lot of questions to be answered. I do not find this import really being very friendly.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we put the question to these amendments?

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The responsibilities of a citizen must be very clear to any citizen. For us to say that Parliament from time to time may expand the duties of a citizen is subject to abuse. I have looked at Article 17 and it spells out what an ordinarily citizen may do. Now, what is it that we want to put there? 


Then the Attorney-General has said that Constitutions should not be full of details. I think we already have too much detail and there is no need for more detail. On the question of penalty, you need not to state it here; other laws will be made. I want to support the position of the committee that this clause be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: The committee is not standing by that position.

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, “To perform such other national duties and obligations as Parliament may by law prescribe,” is a provision to enable Parliament to examine the circumstances of the day and to say “we need to add this on the catalogue of duties”.

On the matter of penalties, so much the better that there will be an enabling law – this is a provision to enable Parliament to prescribe penalties, otherwise where will you get your authority to prescribe penalties for breach of duties?  

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I would like to know from the Attorney-General whether the Constitution has provisions on all penalties that exist in all laws? They are not there! So I do not find that –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the provision here does not prescribe a penalty. It gives Parliament the power to make a law to prescribe penalties.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me put the question to this, honorable members. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is as follows: the abstentions are three, those against are six, and those for are 129. The ayes have it.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

THE CHAIRMAN: This is about personal liberty.

MR RUZINDANA: In clause 10(b) I would like to amend the 60 days to become 30 days. Sixty days is already too long.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is just two months. You think within two months a clash would have taken place really?

MR RUZINDANA: It is an improvement on the existing Constitution, but I think 60 days is still a bit too long.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I was trying to follow up what hon. Ruzindana has just put forward. I second his proposal of reducing the days from 60 to 30 because the prosecution authorities should have already gathered all the evidence so that the person can be given an expeditious trial. If left the way it is, it is subject to abuse.

THE CHAIRMAN: But don’t you address the reaction of the people? Somebody has committed a serious offence and then within 30 days you release him? Don’t you address that? We have to know our court systems. We have to address the people we are investigating, but one month!

MR OULANYAH: Thank you hon. Ruzindana and hon. Kassiano for raising this. The step that has been taken by this amendment is to actually reduce the number of days, which were originally 120. So it is reducing it to 60 days now and for bigger offenses, it is reducing it from 360 to 180 days, which I think is a major step in that direction. (Applause) It is all about statutory bail; it is not about anything else. If the state processes that can hold you in prison or remand and so on and so forth fail, within 60 days you are entitled to automatic bail. To reduce the automatic bail to 30 days might lead to other things, like mob justice. When somebody goes for 30 days and he is out on the streets on statutory bail, it complicates matters instead. That is why we agreed with the Government position that 60 days should be sufficient. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Shall I put the question? Those in favour of 60 days put up your hands.

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the results of the voting are as follows: abstentions, nil; those against are 4, and those for are 131. The ayes have it.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

THE CHAIRMAN: For those who do not have the Constitution, this is about the rights of the family. There is no amendment, therefore – yes, hon. Katuntu.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am sorry I did not circulate this amendment but eventually I have written to both the Attorney-General and the chairman of the committee. I thought clause 11(2)(a) should be re-written to make it prohibitive and I had suggested that instead of as it is now, regulating marriages only if entered into between a man and a woman, it should read as follows: “Marriage between people of the same sex is prohibited by this Constitution”, and we just make a prohibitive clause. (Applause)

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, when you say marriage between people of the same sex, you are actually assuming that there can be a marriage between these people. There cannot be a marriage between these people -(Interruptions)

MR KATUNTU: I fail to appreciate the Attorney-General’s argument when in his own clause he is also saying, “marriage is lawful”. You get it? This is only allowable. What we want is to prohibit this. That is what we want; constitutional prohibition.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the formulation is this: “Marriage is lawful only if entered into between a man and a woman.” It is lawful “only” - that is important but the policy is the same. This question of improving the –(Interruption)

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, this formulation leaves room for unlawful marriage between a man and a man, and a woman and a woman. The other formulation does not leave room for that. Whereas this one says it is lawful, meaning you can have unlawful one –(Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: And in addition, when you say, “marriage is lawful only if entered into between a man and a woman,” this one would relate reasonably to obligations and rights of those people who are supposed to be marrying each other, such that none of them can now seek a remedy. They say, “No, you were in an unlawful marriage, therefore, you cannot come for example to court and seek any right or responsibility”. This is what it will entail. It, therefore, allows a non-lawful marriage if for example there is no conflict between them. But what we are seeking is to prohibit that.

THE CHAIRMAN: To make it punishable?

MR KATUNTU: Exactly.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Chairman, I want to submit to you that there can never be a marriage unless that marriage, or the union of two persons, is lawful. There can never be something called a marriage unless the law of that country recognises the union of those two people -(Interruptions)- this is a lawyer’s submission.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think the policy behind hon. Katuntu’s formulation is to help the simplest person to understand that once you do that particular union you are committing an offence. Because when you prohibited that, it goes with a sanction. That is helping everybody to – I do not know. But what harm does it do?

MR ANTHONY MUKASA: Maybe hon. Katuntu can help us because some months back, this happened in the Parliament of America where they wanted to define marriage of reunion. It was the 20th amendment, where they also had a complication of defining marriage between man and man and also a woman and a man. How do we go about it? If that one is prohibitive then it goes with our moral culture, which should not be compared to theirs.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Chairman, I want to conclude my submission by saying that if it is gay marriages or relationships we are trying to prohibit – homosexuality - then we must be explicit about it because we should not just end at marriage. We should talk about co-habitation, which is not marriage; we should go further and prohibit a sexual relationship between people of the same sex. If we are going to adopt hon. Katuntu’s amendment, I think then we have to go further than what he is proposing. That is my submission.

MR KATUNTU: I can make myself a little bit clearer for the last time on this. When you read what is provided for in the Bill, it only seeks to recognize a marriage entered into between a man and a woman. It is the only import of this clause as it is or as it seeks to recognise in law. But that is not what we want. What we want is to prohibit something. This one is just seeking to recognise in law that this is the only marriage we recognise and if you have this sort of marriage, we do not recognise it. That is what it is. 

My amendment will have the implication of criminalising these relationships and that is what I think the country and this House wishes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, let us vote on this. There is a formulation in the Bill, there is an amendment by the member and the member is prohibiting any marriage, which is not contracted between people of different sexes. You have heard the minister make his contribution. We do not want to make this Committee Stage really another general debate. So, let me put the question to it. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is as follows: abstentions are three, those against are 17, and those for are 111.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 11 as amended  –(Interruption) 

MR MWANDHA: Sorry to take you back but do we stop there or do we not go further to provide for penalties or at least to say that Parliament –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Penalties? Acts of Parliament will deal with that.

MR MWANDHA: But then we should say that Parliament will enact a law to provide for penalties otherwise if we leave it as it is, in my view we would have done half the job although the voting was very telling.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it should be appreciated that we are amending existing Articles of the provision, which is in the Article. When you look at Article 54 it says; “Parliament shall make laws for the enforcement of rights and freedoms under this chapter.”  So, that provision can take care of this particular provision, which falls under the said chapter.  

I put the question on clause 11 as amended. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is as follows: abstentions - 1, those against are nil, and those for are 129. The ayes have it

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee has proposed an amendment to the proposed sub-clause (3) of clause 12 and it reads as follows: “There shall be a Commission called the Equal Opportunities Commission whose composition and functions shall be determined by an Act of Parliament.”  

The reason the committee came to this conclusion is that the existing formulation in the Constitution has led to this commission not being established for the last ten years. We should, therefore, proceed just like it is with the Uganda Human Rights Commission and other commissions where they are expressly establishing in the Constitution and details are worked out in Acts of Parliament. So we propose that the Constitution should now establish the Equal Opportunities Commission.

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, the Government has no problem with this recommendation of the committee except that we would like to add sub-clause (4) in which we say:  “The Equal Opportunities Commission shall be established within two years after the coming into force of this Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Act.” It must be established not later than two years after the passing of this amendment. We are just prescribing a timeframe, rather than leaving it open.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I want to thank the committee as well as the Government for restating the need for an Equal Opportunities Commission. I do not have any major reservations as to the position of the committee or that of the Attorney-General but when you look at Article 32, this is one of the very few clauses in the Constitution, which begins with the words, “notwithstanding anything in this Constitution”. The interpretation is that this very Article overrides any other in the Constitution.

And when you look Article 32(2), it says: “Parliament shall make relevant laws including laws for the establishment of an Equal Opportunities Commission for the purpose of giving full effect to clause 1 of this Article.” It means that the principle of affirmative action has not been given full effect because we lack the enabling laws and have lacked an Equal Opportunities Commission for the last ten years. This, therefore, undermines the very first words of this Article, which I believe the author has put in place knowing that the people of Uganda, especially those who are marginalised on the basis of age, gender disability or any other reason created by history, would need immediate attention as well as affirmative action to remedy whatever circumstances they may be in. 

I would, therefore, like to plead with the Government and this House that instead of waiting for another two years, we should reduce this to a period of one year, Mr Chairman. Thank you. (Applause)

DR MAKUBUYA:  Sir, I appreciate the sentiments expressed by hon. Dora Byamukama and in the spirit of give and take, I accept one year. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU:  Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. In the unlikely event that this commission is not in place within a year and the period has already been provided for under the Constitution, what happens?

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, I do not think that question should really be put. If it is a constitutional requirement then you are breaching the Constitution, and the matter will be addressed.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The Attorney-General had stated on the Floor of this House that as a general principle we should avoid putting too much detail in the Constitution, including time frames. By putting a time frame of two years or one year, are you now implying that once this is done then the Constitution will have to be amended to make this irrelevant because it is accomplished? I want a clarification from the Attorney-General.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, is it in order for Prof. Kamuntu to continue deliberating on a point upon which we have mutually agreed? This is not the first time we have put the time limit. For example we have put the time limit on the Land Act, and I think this helped us.  

THE CHAIRMAN: We have to be positive. We should not be negative and think that we shall fail. We have put this in the Constitution; a timeframe has been given to avoid breaching it, why should we assume that the Government is going to breach the provision of the Constitution? Let me put the question to this really – it has been amended to being put in place within one year.  

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position, after the voting, is as follows: I only have ayes, which are 141, that is, in support of the amendment. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: So I now put the question to clause 12, as amended.

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the results are: no abstentions; none against, and the ayes are 145. So the ayes have it.

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee had proposed deletion of this clause but having passed clause 12 as it is, it will not be necessary to delete clause 13. So we propose that it should be adopted.

THE CHAIRMAN: We maintain it?

MR OULANYAH: Yes, we maintain it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question. Is it clear?

HON. MEMBERS:  No.

THE CHAIRMAN: Originally the committee had proposed for clause 13 to be deleted but they are saying let us maintain it. (Applause) There is no amendment. The committee has abandoned the recommendation to have it deleted. Therefore, we are voting on the clause as it is in the Bill. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is as follows: there are no abstentions; none against, and those for are 143. The ayes have it. (Applause)

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose that clause 14 be deleted and the justification is that the proposed amendment for the function of the Uganda Human Rights Commission is unnecessary, and the constitutional provision is sufficient. Besides, the functions should be contained in an Act of Parliament.  

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, the Government accepts this recommendation.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question to it. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is as follows: the abstentions are nil; there is none against, and the ayes are 149. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 15

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes the deletion of the Clause 15. The justification is similar to the one we have just discussed.  

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, the Government accepts the recommendation of the committee on clause 15.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you. I put the question.  

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is as follows: the abstentions are nil, those against are nil, and those for are 141. The ayes have it.  

Clause 16

MR OULANYAH: The committee proposes the deletion of the whole of clause 16. The reasons are the same but we also take into account the time difficulties that we face.  

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, the Government accepts the recommendation of the committee that clause 16 be deleted from the Bill.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question.

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is as follows: the abstentions are nil, those against are nil, and those for are 144. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 17

MR OULANYAH: The committee proposes that clause 17 be deleted. The proposed amendment is unnecessary. The constitutional provision as it is is sufficient to handle the situation.  

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, the Government accepts the recommendation of the committee that clause 17 be deleted from the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you. I put the question.

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is as follows: the abstentions are nil, those against are nil, and those for are 143. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 18

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 18 stand part of the Bill.

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is as follows: the abstentions are nil, those against are nil, and those for are 141. The ayes have it.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR OULANYAH: The committee adopts the proposed new Article 63 and proposes that they insert the following phrase, in Article 63(3): “Except that no constituency shall fall within more than one county.” The justification is, to avoid a possibility of gerrymandering.

DR MAKUBUYA: The Government accepts the recommendation of the committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I would like to get explanation from the Attorney-General as to why we should amend Article 63 at all. The existing provisions cater entirely for what is proposed, and have some other things that deal for example with location, geography, communication and other things; and it is specific on the issue of population quotas. This is important because we have been talking about the size of Parliament and the costs of public administration. I do not see the purpose of this amendment.

DR MAKUBUYA: We are providing a framework for limiting the constituencies rather than leaving it entirely open to the Electoral Commission. 

Secondly, we concede to the recommendation of the committee - hon. Wandera may be lucky that he has not been a victim of this practice called gerrymandering. The history of elections here shows that these things are possible and we are trying to plug the loopholes so that the democratic process is not a mockery. There is justification for this amendment as part of our learning process from the bad history.  

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I have listened very attentively to the Attorney-General but he has not left me any wiser. The amendment that hon. Oulanyah gave about the county is provided for in Article 63(2), which says: “Except that no constituency shall fall within more than one county.” Therefore, the new clause is intended to remove certain things. I find the old one more comprehensive in terms of determining how constituencies are formed. I want the Attorney-General to tell me why we must replace the existing Article with the one proposed in the Bill, and the difference between the two sub-sections.
  
MRS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to know where the districts fall. Are they constituencies? It is not in any way reflected under this Article.  

MS NAMUSOKE: I would like clarification because I also believe that the provision of Article 63 in the Constitution itself is more detailed. I would especially want to refer to Article 63(5). The amendment he is proposing says, “Parliament shall determine by law the criteria for the demarcation of constituencies, and the Electoral Commission shall from time to time review the demarcations of constituencies.” 

I really think that this is a very dangerous thing to have, saying that the Electoral Commission shall from time to time make new demarcations. That is something, which will give opportunity for whoever is in charge to make arrangement that may be fitting to certain categories of people. Yet the one that we are trying to replace says; “Subject to clause (1) of this Article, the Commission shall review the division of Uganda into constituencies within twelve months after the publication of results of a census of the population of Uganda and may as a result re-demarcate the constituencies."  This is related to the population and the other factors that have been mentioned in the other sections of this Article. So, I really do not think that we need to replace this Article. Thank you.

MRS KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, considering the demarcating of the constituencies by population, I would like to know where we are putting the geographical size of a constituency and where it is located. All that does not seem to be provided for may get into a crisis, where some populations cannot reach 200,000 or whatever it is.

THE CHAIRMAN: What I see is that the number of issues that you are raising here should have been raised during the general debate, but I am not blaming you. What I can say is that you need time to go and compare the proposed amendment of Article 53, to the existing provision. Maybe when we come back tomorrow we may continue from there, but I will appeal to honourable members that when you are reading this Bill, you also read your Constitution. You will have to be with them both. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.53
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, 
presiding_)

5.55
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses 6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17 and 18 of the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 and finalized consideration of them, with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.56
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I must thank you for the work you have done. I did not expect to reach clause 19, but we have –(Applause)- so, be vigilant. Tomorrow we shall continue with the same speed and we shall be able to accomplish a lot. Therefore, this brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 July 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)








