



Tuesday, 2 June 2020


Parliament met at 10.28a.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to the 56th Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session. Today marks the final meeting of the Third Meeting. We have a very long agenda. So, I would like to implore you that we move expeditiously through it. In particular, I hope that the ministers, who I do not see now, will be available shortly to handle the very important pending issues that the country would like to know, for example, the update on: the COVID, plans to evacuate Ugandans, effects of the floods, bridging the electricity gap and altering a number of boundaries. 

There will be no matters of national importance today. We shall use the time from the statements to allow members to raise issues. I now call for item 3 on the Order Paper. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE 64TH COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE HELD IN UGANDA FROM 22 – 29TH SEPTEMBER 2019


10.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE CPA UGANDA BRANCH (Ms Jalia Bintu): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following documents: 
    1) The report of the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference Organising Committee on the achievements, challenges and lessons learnt. 
    2) The 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference Monitoring and Evaluation Report. 
    3) The report by Uganda’s delegation to the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference 2019. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chair. An appropriate time will be arranged for us to debate the contents of those reports. Thank you very much. 



BILLS’
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

10.36
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you will recall that we had dealt with the bulk of this Bill and we were handling the schedules; that is where we stopped last time. 

Schedule Two

10.37
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose an amendment to insert a new schedule between schedules 1 and 2. This amendment is under section 1, which is basically a definition of the currency point and it says, “A currency point is equivalent to twenty thousand shillings.” 

The justification is to renumber the schedules and enable the conversion of Ugandan shillings into currency points, as is the practice of the statute book. 

Madam Chairperson, I am requesting that, that amendment is inserted between schedules 1 and 2. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will it be a separate schedule and the renumbering can be done later? 

MR BYARUHANGA: Yes, Madam Chairperson. The renumbering will be done later. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, can you state the proposal? 
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that under Schedule 1, we insert the words, “A currency point is equivalent to twenty thousand shillings.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that a new schedule be introduced into the Bill. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, agreed to.

The new schedule

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the new schedule do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New schedule, agreed to.

Schedule 2
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, we have an amendment in Schedule 2. 
(a)Part A. Chief Justice -
(i) To substitute paragraph 1 with the following: "1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a sitting Chief Justice. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Chief Justice for life."
(ii) Insert immediately, after paragraph I, the following: "2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Chief Justice multiplied by five and the years of service."
(iii) Delete paragraphs 5, 7, 9, 10 and 1l.

The justifications are as follows: 
    1. The substitution of paragraph 1 of Part A in Schedule 2, is to similarly reflect the language used i.e. "retirement benefits" under clause 21.  
    2. To make provision for payment and computation of a lump sum retirement benefit payable to retired judicial officers. 
    3. The deletions in Schedule 2, in reference to Part A, under paragraphs 5, 7, 9, l0 and 1l are to remove the proposed allowances.
THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that all?

MR BYARUHANGA: That is all as far as Schedule 2 Part A, pertaining to the Chief Justice, is concerned.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question -

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The Attorney-General moved an amendment, which involved providing for currency points. However, when you go to the schedule, we are maintaining paragraphs 12 and 13, which are actually giving figures in Uganda shillings as Shs 2 million and Shs 235,000. What I seek clarification on is, why have these figures not been reflected in terms of currency points rather than in shillings? 

The effect of the amendment he made was such that the provision should be reflecting currency points other than Uganda shillings in absolute forms. Therefore, I think it should be amended such that we reflect these figures in terms of currency points rather than the figures.

10.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Chairperson, we would concede to that proposal by hon. Lubogo and I believe that the Attorney-General is harmonising to give the equivalent of what the currency points would be. We will do away with figures - I believe the Attorney-General is coming up with it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, currency points are currency points. You cannot change them with different bills.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, I think the purpose is simply to conform to the statute book and once you change into currency points then it means that all the designations in shillings shall be converted into currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But do the currency points change with different statutes?

MR BYARUHANGA: No, they are the same across the statute books.

MR OKUPA: I wish the Attorney-General would tell us what we are really considering. The chairperson of the committee said that he was trying to harmonise and come up with that such that it is a standardised way. Can we stay over it and we move to the next as they harmonise so that we move with the same, like we have done with other Bills - going with the currency points?

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, I have not understood the question. The effect of introducing the currency points is to standardise across all the statute books. That means that if, at a future time, we are amending, for example, penalties, they will now be designated in currency points. It is just how it is across the statute books.

MR OKUPA: I think the concern here, which the honourable raised, was about the retirement benefits not the fines. These are two different things.

MR BYARUHANGA: No, that amendment is separate. It is not talking about the retirement benefits.

MR LUBOGO: What I want to make clear is, as long as we are maintaining the figures in Uganda shillings, it means should there be a time when probably these figures are devalued, we have to amend these particular schedules because these are absolute figures – Shs 235,000.

Therefore, if we are providing for currency points and at the same time we are putting these figures, it means we cannot adjust with the currency points as it is adjusted because the figures are absolute. They are clear that it is Shs 235,000. Therefore, if we converted it to currency points, when the currency point is revised, it means we do not have to amend the law.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, it simply means that the shilling components will consequentially be amended into currency points. That is what it means and the purpose is to standardise it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we stand over that and move to the others, because I have not understood the rationale for that amendment?

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, I had already made my amendment for Schedule 2 Part A, under Chief Justice. I had finished the last justification, which was the deletion in Schedule 2 in reference to Part A under paragraphs 5, 7, 9, 10 and 11, to remove those proposed allowances. That is the third justification, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that for the Deputy Chief Justice?

MR BYARUHANGA: No, Chief Justice, Schedule 2A.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2A, as amended, agreed to.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, we have similar changes for Part B. Shall I go through them, Madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR BYARUHANGA: Okay. Under Part B, for the Deputy Chief Justice:
    a) To substitute paragraph 1 with the following: “1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a sitting Deputy Chief Justice. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Deputy Chief Justice for life.”
    b) To insert immediately after paragraph 1, the following: “2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Deputy Chief Justice, multiplied by five and the years of service.”
    c) We are proposing to delete paragraphs 5, 7, 8 and 9.

The justification is: 
    1) The substitution of paragraph 1 of Part B in Schedule 2 is to similarly reflect the language used. That is to say, retirement benefits under clause 21.
    2) To make provision for payment and computation of a lump sum retirement benefit payable to retired judicial officers.
    3) The deletions in Schedule 2 in reference to Part B with reference to paragraphs 5, 7, 8 and 9 are intended to remove the proposed allowances. 

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, I just need to understand the rationale of the amendments that the Attorney-General is moving. When I look at it, whereas I have no problem with the lump sum payments, we are talking about paying a retired judicial officer, the same amount of money, which a serving judicial officer earns. The retired judicial officer earns the same salary for life and a serving one also earns the same salary for life. 

One of the arguments, which I would like the Attorney-General to clarify to this country, we have got a lot of gaps in the bench and we do not have enough judges. The reason we are being given why we do not have enough judges is because there is no money to hire judges. Now, you have money to pay a retired judge for life and you have got a lot of gaps in the Judiciary. The reason why we have cases piling up is because we do not have enough judges.

Therefore, I would like the Attorney-General to make me understand the rationale of this amendment he is proposing to the country. That you cannot hire a judge, we have cases piling up in courts because we do not have money to hire enough judges but you are now proposing to pay the retired judges for life. I would like to understand this.     

MR SILWANY: Thank you, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, my concern is on motivation. When we say, we pay a sitting judge the same amount that is going to be paid to a Chief Justice who has retired - what I am talking about here is motivation. Where will the other person who is in office get the morale from seeing that somebody who is retired is getting the same salary? 

I think what should be proposed is a slight difference between a sitting judge and somebody who is retired. If you say that a total sum for this one should be the same amount of money for the person who has retired, I think it would kill the morale of the people who are working and it will be a law that favours the person who has retired than the one still serving. It may even make people to rush to retire; people will be falling sick and even if the sickness is not serious, the person will say, “Let me go for retirement” after all, it is the same salary.

Therefore, for us to encourage impetus and momentum in making people to work, I think we should put a small variation for purposes of motivation. I propose that the salary comes to 70 or 80 per cent of a sitting judge but not 100 per cent. 

Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I know this Bill has taken time. However, I recall that in the general debate, we had more or less come to a conclusion that we go to 80 per cent; we had left the 100 per cent.     

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, if my recollection is correct, when we were handling the retirement benefits for the President and the Vice-President, I think we agreed on 60 per cent. Why don’t we harmonise it at that level? There is no way we are going to have junior civil servants having a higher percentage than a retired President. Why don’t we harmonise it? 

However, the Chairperson of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs may want to clarify on this. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for reminding us, where we were last time. Of course, it does not follow that there should be nobody that earns higher than the Executive and it is a matter of fact, that as we speak now, there are people working for the Government who earn higher than the Executive.

Madam Chairperson, the arguments for the Judiciary, Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice, is simply about the vocation of these people. The lifestyle that they lead, the restrictions that affect them long after they have ceased to hold office, the sedentary lifestyle that they lead, sitting long hours to hear cases, they engage in detail research, they write long judgments and generally they are more prone to lifestyle diseases.

However, that apart - we must also not forget that they retire beyond 65 and 70 years, when they are too old and even stopped from pursuing any other employment in order to cater for their needs. I also wish to point out that this particular proposal is also another way of enhancing integrity and independence in the Judiciary; a goal that both the Executive and this House also share.

Madam Chairperson, it would therefore, be a stretch for me to submit that the judicial officer who is perennially worried of his or her medical or fuel bills after retirement, would be a liability to the country. The assurance of a decent life after he leaves office would also help to immunise them against temptations because of the kind of office that they hold. 

Members will agree with me that they hold in their hands great power in terms of both life and death decisions that they make every day; they make economic decisions that can impact on the country. 

So, I think that it is only fair for this honourable House to allow them to retire with their benefits. In any case, the pension is given for life to every public servant even as we speak now, under the Pensions Act.  
 
MR OKUPA: Thank you, Attorney-General. To start with, the issue that there are people who are earning more than the Chief Executive; yes, that is true and judges are some of them. That is why they should have had a lower percentage than a retired President, because a President, who is earning Shs 3.5 million per month, gets lower than what the judges get. 

We provided for the retired President to earn 60 per cent. So, those who are earning more than the President should actually get lower than that because already, their salaries are higher than that of the Executive.

The arguments you are advancing are outside this; also they could – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that the principle of giving them a good settlement is not in dispute. The issue is the quantum.  
   
MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I agree that they need to retire decently and they need a good package. However, when we talk about a good package, it should be relative. Who does not want that package whether a doctor, or a nurse of all the cadres we have in Uganda? My proposal is, the moment you retire from active service, and get dormant, you should not get that big sum of money. I propose we give them 60 per cent. That is enough. 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think there is one aspect that the Attorney-General has either ignored and this is the fact that people may decide to retire early before they even attain the mandatory retirement age. After all, they will continue to earn the same amount of money like when they were in active service. 

Now, for us to prevent this from happening, I would like to propose that we add a clause that is deterrent to that kind of behaviour. Otherwise, we shall have a haemorrhage of people seeking early retirement. Let us probably propose that these benefits will only accrue to those who retire after the mandatory retirement age. Otherwise, we will have people retiring at 40 or 50 and it will be a huge cost to the country. I beg to move.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I can infer from the spirit of the Bill that we do not have a serious financial problem in this country. We are being very generous and one can say “very lavish”. I would like to declare my interest that I come from the east – and Bulamogi County – where the former Chief Justice, Wako Wambuzi, comes from and also the eastern region where the former Chief Justice, Benjamin Odoki, comes from.

When we were making a law here pertaining to the pension of Members of Parliament, the law was given effect to apply, even, to Members of Parliament who had left Parliament at a certain cut-off time - backwards, I think 2002. Therefore, as we debate the percentage, it is my humble appeal that you allow me to move that, eventually, this provision shall apply to the surviving former chief justices who are there today. 

I mean – the Bill shows that we have money in the country. Why should others who even served for very many years live certain miserable lives while others are just coming up and taking a lot of money? It should apply to people who are surviving – (Interjection) – If it is there, it is settled. If it is not there, I intend to move it. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we had made a case for that earlier. Maybe the Attorney-General can update us on that particular issue.

MR MACHO: Madam Chairperson, I thank you for the good chairing. I would like to agree with the Attorney-General. I am blessed to be from a family where I have seen judges - the late Justice Alikipo Ouma and Justice Odoki. The lifestyle of some of these people is totally isolated from ours. The way they carry out their duties after retirement, you would think that they are more Catholic than the Pope. 

With that factor, I believe that for these people to survive and live longer – I do not know why all judges have long illness after retirement. I support that these people should be given a package of 80 per cent so that it can help them retire well.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I thought I would answer two questions, starting with the one from hon. Centenary, which was talking about you retiring early in order to access the benefits. This is not possible because the threshold has been preset. If you go before, you cannot access it. Then, of course, we had introduced the one of the medical board – if you recall, the last time we were here – that unless you are sick and are incapable - and of course that would have been a matter of proof.

As for the concern raised by hon. Kenneth Lubogo, we took that into consideration. Madam Chairperson brought this up last time and this has already been catered for in clause 27, which will take care of all the retired judges who are alive and even those who have passed away.

Madam Chairperson, if you guide, the point that I will be willing to concede to is for the retirement benefits to be 80 per cent. We would concede to that.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you. In the first place – (Interjection) – Colleagues, if you could listen! The chairperson in a very gentle way has guided this House, without shouting, that it would be – [HON. MEMBER: “Order!”] - She has guided in a good way. I am in order. She had guided in a good way that it would be very appropriate. 

Given how far we have come – this Bill has been on the agenda for almost two years. Given the Attorney-General’s concession – I have also talked to the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Compromising and giving retired judicial officers, especially the Chief Justice, 80 per cent of his salary as he retires, would be a good compromise. I would urge members to accept the amendment that has been proposed. Thank you.

MS NABULINDO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I come from where the Principal Judge Ogola and where the Chief Justice Odoki, come from. When these people are elected to be judges, they just concentrate on their work. They are not even allowed to be on the board of any organisation. Therefore, I think at least 60 per cent would work for them. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, this matter has attracted a lot of protracted debate. The principle was resolved. The quantum – during the debate, this matter was fully discussed. 

The Attorney-General - and, actually, this being a Government Bill, the committee had a completely different position. Getting the Government to come down to 80 per cent – honourable members, how many Chief Justices who have retired do we have in Uganda? I know three: Justice George Masika from Mbale, Justice Wako Wambuzi from Busoga and Justice Benjamin Odoki from Bukedi. Actually, eastern Uganda has got more retired Chief Justices than any other region. 

Through the guidance of the Chairperson, a proactive decision was made to make amendment for retrospective application of this Act. Nothing better than that could have ever been got from Government: 80 per cent. Who has ever seen Justice Masika in Mbale? Do you know what he is doing? He is running some guest house. A former Chief Justice of Uganda; number four in this country! 

Therefore, when we are comparing judicial officers who are purely technical people with political positions like President - being President is not a technical position; being Prime Minister is not; being Vice President is not but being a judicial officer is.

So, the committee reconsidered and we support this position at 80 per cent. Madam Chairperson, this is the best hope we can give to this country, that the judicial officers working in this country will work with one heart and hope that when they retire, they will not be throwing their CVs to be district service commission chairpersons like Justice Musoke Kibuuka in Masaka; they should be beyond that. That way, retirement would be more meaningful and I implore colleagues that this matter be resolved. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. (Applause)

MR KAHIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I concur with the Government position that these judicial officers render dedicated services to the country and in the event that they retire, they deserve to be honoured. 

Therefore, it is really incumbent upon us to support this motion so that when these judicial officers retire, they continue with the dignity with which they will have been serving the country.

However, when you consider other schedules that talk of other judicial officers other than the Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice and the judges - because this schedule stretches far up to magistrate grade two, including registrars. 

In lieu of the fact that there are a number of these judicial officers, I want to say that we should support 60 per cent for them so that we do not drain the treasury of the country. That is my submission.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to persuade Parliament and the Attorney-General, who has made a concession, to leave the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice at the original proposal of retiring with their salaries. First of all, not only because of their numbers but also because of their offices.

Someone retiring from the office of a Chief Justice will have been enjoying many privileges but also the office is so important that we do not want to subject it to the same standard like – and I don’t intend to demean any judge – an ordinary High Court judge.

I have seen it in Tanzania, for example. One time, I had the honour to host a former President. I would like to say that even the pledges he makes are met by the Government. We had former President, Hassan Mwinyi visiting us at Makerere as students but the money he promised there was immediately and swiftly paid by the embassy.

My view is that if we put the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice at the same percentage of 80 per cent with other judges will be under looking those two offices. 

I, therefore, would like to persuade Parliament and the Attorney-General that we leave the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice at the salary they are earning and subject the rest of the judicial officers at 80 per cent. I would like to thank you.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I did not know that the day would come when I would say that hon. Ssemujju has made the best proposition – (Laughter) – that I have ever heard. I wish to commend him for his very insightful proposition and even the maturity that he has shown, by giving a better proposition than actually the one I had.

Madam Chairperson, I beg that we do as he has proposed and isolate the two - the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice. 
I also would like to remind members – and I think hon. Oboth spoke about it when he went into a little more detail about former Chief Justice, George Masika, and I think hon. Centenary had also spoken about it – to please also take into consideration the fact that we are going retrospective, so that we give some dignity to the people who have served in these high offices.

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, on the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice, do you want to increase beyond 100 per cent? 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to amend the proposal moved by the learned Attorney-General. The Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice both usually sit in the Supreme Court. So, I would like to propose that judges of the Supreme Court also be included.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no, no, do not go there yet. Honourable member, do not go there yet. Let us deal with the Chief Justice.

MR WALUSWAKA: It is okay and much obliged.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice are not many people. They will never be too many to hurt the Treasury. Therefore, I would like to put the question that the retirement benefits of the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice be at 100 per cent, as proposed by the Attorney-General.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall also have to deal with the other categories; the justices of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal.

Before you move, I put the question that schedules 2A and 2B, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedules 2A and 2B, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 3
MR BYARUHANGA: We have no amendment to Schedule 3, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Schedule 3, agreed to.

Schedule 4
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, we have an amendment in Schedule 4. Under Schedule 4, Part A, Justice of the Supreme Court –
    1. We propose to substitute paragraph 1 with the following: “1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a sitting Justice of the Supreme Court. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Justice of the Supreme Court for life.”
    2. Insert immediately after paragraph I the following: “2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Justice of the Supreme Court multiplied by five and the years of service.”

Madam Chairperson, the justification is to reflect the language used i.e. “retirement benefits”, which is the language we have used under clause 23. 

The second justification is to make provisions for payment and computation of a lump sum retirement benefit, payable to retired judicial officers.

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 4 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 4, as amended, agreed to.
Schedule 5

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know, Schedule 4 has –

MR BYARUHANGA: Two parts –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, there is Part A on the Supreme Court and Part B on the Court of Appeal. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, should I proceed to Part B? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR BYARUHANGA: I thank you. Madam Chair, Part B pertains to the Justice of the Court of Appeal. The amendment proposed is to substitute paragraph 1 with the following: 
    1) “1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a sitting Justice of the Court of Appeal. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Justice of the Court of Appeal for life.”
    2) To insert, immediately after paragraph 1, the following:
“2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Justice of the Court of Appeal multiplied by five and the years of service.”

Madam Chair, the justification is the substitution of paragraph 1 of Part B in Schedule 4, to similarly reflect the language used i.e. “retirement benefits” under Clause 23.

The second justification is to make provision for payment and computation of a lump sum retirement benefit payable to retired judicial officers. 

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t this where we agreed on 80 per cent? 

MR BYARUHANGA: Yes, I will concede to 80 per cent, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Propose the amendment.

MR BYARUHANGA: Therefore, Madam Chair, for Part B, we propose 80 per cent of the monthly salary. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Part A and Part B cannot be equivalent to the Chief Justice. 

MR BYARUHANGA: In Part A and Part B, we would like to propose 80 per cent, Madam Chair. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members -

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to plead with the Attorney-General that as we go down, the numbers are increasing. I am also alive to the fact that the different levels of administrators in the Judiciary earn different levels of salaries, depending on the positions they hold. 

The percentage provides equity and I would propose that we go with 60 per cent across the board so that if a Principal Judge is earning Shs 30 million, for instance, and the High Court Judge is earning Shs 20 million, the 60 per cent will give them some level of equity; you earn a percentage of what you have been earning. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had not yet gone to Schedule 5; we are still on Schedule 4. Let us finish with Schedule 4; Part A and Part B where we have agreed on 80 per cent. Isn’t it? 

MR BYARUHANGA: Yes, Madam Chair. We have agreed on 80 per cent. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I would like to appeal to colleagues. Like in the spirit we have had for the others of 100 per cent, let us move and concede to 80 per cent. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I –

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry if I did not hear properly. I am comfortable with even varying the percentages. The Justices of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal are few but usually, they are also of advanced age. I am speaking from my experience as a journalist. If you look at the Supreme Court’s retired judges, if they do not die in the next five years - If you count, they are not there. (Laughter) I am talking about something that has happened so even if you do not want to hear it, it has happened. Just tell me how many retired Supreme Court Judges are there. 

Therefore, I am comfortable with 80 per cent at the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal and then 60 per cent at the lower –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 4, Part A and Part B be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 4, Part A and Part B, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 5
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chair, I had not finished. Under Schedule 4, you will recall that when we were here last time, we also spoke about security. Under Part A, the amendment would be for the Justice of the Supreme Court where security is to be provided by the State or an allowance of three hundred currency points per year payable in lieu of security. 

The justification, Madam Chair, was to provide for security or a security allowance for a retired Justice of the Supreme Court. 

Under Part B, for Justice of the Court of Appeal, we were providing the amendment that security is to be provided by the State or an allowance of three hundred currency points per year payable in lieu –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Attorney-General, do you want the Judge to go and get a man with a bow and arrow for security? No, the State should provide the security. 

MR BYARUHANGA: That is fine, Madam Chair. Would you be saying that we remove the aspect of “in lieu of” and we just maintain Government security?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. 

MR BYARUHANGA: I would concede to that, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 4, Part A and Part B be further amended as proposed by the Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Attorney-General, are there any other amendments on Schedule 4?

MR BYARUHANGA: No, Madam Chair. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 4, Part A and Part B, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 4, Part A and Part B, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 5

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chair, I propose an amendment to Schedule 5 under Part A; the Principal Judge-
    (i) To substitute paragraph 1 with the following: 
“1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a sitting Principal Judge. The retirement benefits shall be paid to the retired Principal Judge for life.”
    (ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
“2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Principal Judge multiplied by five and the years of service.” 

The justifications are the same: 
    • The substitution is to reflect the language, which is “retirement benefits” under clause 24. 
    • Also, to make provision for payment and computation of a lump sum retirement benefit payable to retired judicial officers. 

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that where we have agreed to move to 60 per cent? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I have a piece of information that I thought I could share. Regulation 4 of the Pensions Regulations, Cap. 286 – The legal regime that exists now gives anybody in Public Service, in consideration of the years of service and the salary of the individual subjected at 2.4 per cent, beyond 60 per cent. 

When we legislate for judicial officers here and put it at 60 per cent, we are going to disadvantage them. I would like us to know that the Administration of the Judiciary Bill is meant to enhance the welfare of judicial officers while working and after. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what is your proposal, honourable chairperson?

MR OTHIENO: Thank you hon. Oboth for giving way and allowing taking this clarification. Madam Chairperson, hon. Oboth is submitting on the issue regarding 2.4 per cent and so on. However, the issue at hand is the monthly benefits and not the lump sum one-off.

We are not debating the lump sum one-off or varying it all. That one we are saying that it remains as it is which is 2.4 per cent of the annual salary. What we are discussing and debating is the monthly salary and not one-off and it is not an issue here.

Therefore, the clarification I would like to seek from you is that whereas we are discussing the monthly salary - this one we are leaving it as it is. Therefore, the clarification I am seeking is why you are now confusing members when they are considering sub section (1) which is the lump sum. We are saying that it is 60 per cent and then you are bringing in the issue of the statutory regulation yet we are not touching that one yet.

MR OBOTH: First of all, Madam Chairperson, I am not in the business of confusing Members of Parliament; that is not my business. My business here is to share information from which I thought the member wanted clarification.

Honourable member, I am with you on that. What we are talking about is the quantum of the percentage of the monthly. And I am justifying that right now; when you have served for a particular period of time, mostly, you would get 50 per cent. However, there are people who get more than 50 per cent monthly in the pensions.

Therefore, this is a law that we would like to be self-contained. That is why we have already repealed and dis-applied the Pensions Act. Therefore, when we are talking about this, we should maintain - by the way, 80 per cent would serve better even for the junior officers.

There are people, for some reasons known or unknown, they would retire as Magistrate Grade II; I know some. There are those who would retire as Magistrate Grade I. Therefore, for us to be fair for the computation of this amount, we should be able to have that 80 per cent running from high court to the lowest cadres. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we were still dealing with the Principal Judge and that is where we were. Did you circulate the amendment?

MR BYARUHANGA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson for guiding us. It is always important to have somebody to bring us back on track. On the amendments that I have proposed for the Principal Judge, again, in light of the seniority of the office and for the reasons that I had elaborated, I humbly request that members accept the 80 per cent and we move on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 5 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Any other amendments?

MR CENTENARY: Madam Chairperson, I have an observation and this may cut across all the schedules. Schedule 5(2) talks about a monthly housing allowance equivalent to the housing allowance payable to the sitting Principal Judge or one pay off of Shs 350 million payable in lieu of the house.

Alive to the fact that a shilling today is better than a shilling tomorrow, I am not comfortable with us attaching a nominal value to the lieu of the house. Because in the event that we are faced with a situation that happened in Zimbabwe, where the inflation hit those ridiculous figures, it means that Shs 350 million may not even pay rent for a Principal Judge.

I would like to propose that we amend this to say, “If Government wants to purchase a physical house for the Principal Judge then they offer that physical house instead of cash or, they provide a monthly allowance equivalent to an amount payable to the Judge.” So that we remove “or the one-off payment” and we leave it open.

The same applies to a chauffeur-driven car or one-off payment of Shs 160 million. Here also we risk giving the judge money and he decides not to hire a driver, then you see him collapsing in the traffic jam because he wanted to save Shs 160 million.

I would also like to propose that we provide a chauffeur-driven car and we delete the one-off payment of Shs 160 million payable in lieu of a car. I beg to move.

MR OKUPA: I intend to agree with hon. Centenary. Because, Madam Chairperson, if we are talking in terms of giving money; even if we had decided to give money even today, a car of Shs 160 million is a second hand car. A car of 2013 model, four-wheel drive is more than Shs 160 million. 

Therefore, unless we are saying that we are providing a second hand car to this important person, which I think is not the case. Providing a chauffeur-driven car and a house is better. Let the person sell the car and house if he wants money.

MR BYARUHANGA:  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I can understand the sentiments of hon. Centenary and hon. Okupa about the question of some risk factor of giving somebody money in lieu of items. 

However, in my view, that would be going too far. It is the same as saying, “A civil servant working in the Attorney-General’s Chambers has got a housing allowance of Shs 500,000.” It would be pertinently unfair for you to say that you want to be sure that he is in a house worth Shs 500,000.

The presumption must be that that officer shall take care of themselves. Because if you say that why is he getting half a million shillings whereas he is in a house for Shs 200,000, that would be going deep into the personal life of the individual. That is what I think. 

I beg that we maintain that position and, Madam Chairperson, you were half way asking for the 80 per cent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal under schedule 5A had already been made to 80 per cent. I now put the question that schedule 5 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 5, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about part B?

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, under that schedule for both parts A and B - first of all, under part B, I would like to say that the same request for the security provided by the state without the issue of allowance just to complete the one of the Principal Judge for the amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Is the security and allowance amended for both of them? 

Honourable members, I put the question that the allowance be amended to 80 per cent for Parts A and B. Also, an amendment be made for the State to provide security for the Principal Judge and the Judge of the High Court in retirement, as proposed by the Attorney-General. 

I put the question that Parts A and B of schedule 5 be amended as proposed. 
(Question put and agreed to.)
Schedule 5A and B, agreed to.
Schedule 5A and B, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 6 
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, these are the amendments: 
Part A pertains to the Chief Registrar 
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Chief Registrar. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Chief Registrar for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
 “2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Chief Registrar multiplied by five and the years of service."

Madam Chairperson, should I just go with Parts (B), (C) and the rest? Under Part (B), I have Registrar and (C) has the Deputy Registrar. Should I read them and then we debate at ago their monthly retirement benefits, with your permission? 
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. Present all of them. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you.
Part B Registrar:
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Registrar. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Registrar for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
 “2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Registrar multiplied by five and the years of service."

Part C Deputy Registrar:
(i) Substitute paragraph I with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Deputy Registrar. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Deputy Registrar for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
 "2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Deputy Registrar multiplied by five and the years of service."

Part D Assistant Registrar:
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Assistant Registrar. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Assistant Registrar for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph I the following:
"2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Assistant Registrar multiplied by five and the years of service."

Part E Chief Magistrate:
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Chief Magistrate. This benefit shall be made to him for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
"2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Chief Magistrate multiplied by five and the years of service."

Part F Senior Principal Magistrate Grade One:
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Senior Principal Magistrate Grade One. This benefit shall be paid to the retired Senior Principal Magistrate Grade One for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
"2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Senior Principal Magistrate Grade One multiplied by five and the years of service."

Part G Principal Magistrate Grade One:
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Principal Magistrate Grade One. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Principal Magistrate Grade One for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
"2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Principal Magistrate Grade One multiplied by five and the years of service."

Part H Senior Magistrate Grade One:
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Senior Magistrate Grade One. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Senior Magistrate Grade One for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
"2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Senior Magistrate Grade One multiplied by five and the years of service."

Those would fall under that whole section of Schedule 6. Madam Chairperson, I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you abandoning Part I and Part J? 

MR BYARUHANGA: I am sorry. It is Part I; I thought it was 1. I apologise, Madam Chairperson.
 Part I Magistrate Grade One:
    (i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Magistrate Grade One. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Magistrate Grade One for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
"2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Magistrate Grade One multiplied by five and the years of service."

Part J Senior Principal Magistrate Grade Two:
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Senior Principal Magistrate Grade Two. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Senior Principal Magistrate Grade Two for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
"2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Senior Principal Magistrate Grade Two multiplied by five and the years of service."

Part K. Principal Magistrate Grade Two
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
“1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Principal Magistrate Grade Two. The retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Principal Magistrate Grade Two for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
"2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Principal Magistrate Grade Two multiplied by five and the years of service."

Part L. Senior Magistrate Grade Two
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Senior Magistrate Grade Two. This retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Senior Magistrate Grade Two for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
"2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Senior Magistrate Grade Two multiplied by five and the years of service."

Part M. Magistrate Grade Two
(i) Substitute paragraph 1 with the following:
"1. A monthly retirement benefit equivalent to the salary payable to a serving Magistrate Grade Two. This retirement benefit shall be paid to the retired Magistrate Grade Two for life."
(ii) Insert immediately after paragraph 1 the following:
"2. A one-off lump sum retirement benefit equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the annual salary of the retiring Magistrate Grade Two multiplied by five and the years of service."
Justification: 
    • The substitution of paragraph 1 of Parts A-M, in Schedule 6, is to similarly reflect the language used i.e. "retirement benefits" under clause 25. 
    • To make provision for payment and computation of a lump sum retirement benefit payable to retired judicial officers.

In Schedules 2, 4 and 5, we are converting the figures expressed in Ugandan Shillings to currency points.

Justification: 
    • To enable the conversion of Uganda Shillings into currency points as is the practice on the statute book.

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I think what we need to agree – 

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, my apologies. I would like to also propose the amendment of security by the Government. I kindly beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it not for all of them? 

MR BYARUHANGA: The request, Madam Chairperson, is to provide security for all the judicial officers under Schedule 6 from Parts A-M. That is my proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do grade two magistrates have security now?

MR BYARUHANGA: They don’t. Madam Chairperson, I would be happy to concede that the aspect on security applies to those who have security as of now. I would concede to that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think what we need to agree on now is the quantum.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, I want just to give practical information that all judicial officers have security even at work or places of residence. So, I think since it is the duty of the State to provide security to all its citizens, I do propose that we give security to everybody because it a general obligation on the part of the State.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Chairperson, I think let us leave security to the category that we have finished. Otherwise, you have heard Police complaining that VIPs have become too many. Currently, they are not even able to provide security to all those who are entitled; they keep complaining. Now you want to add them those in retirement? That would be too much for the State to provide. I would like to persuade the Attorney-General. The categories under this schedule should be left out of security.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, Attorney-General, your proposal, which you sent to me, has the High Court judges, the Principal Judge, Judges of the Court of Appeal and Supreme Court; that is what you presented. Therefore, I do not –

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We know that by virtue of their jurisdiction, the courts we are talking about right now, magistrates grade two and one, these are courts which handle small matters. They award light sentences. 

Therefore, I do not really think that it should be a burden to the State to give security to these people until they die. After all, at every level of their work, the cases can be appealed against at another level. Anyway, most important is the fact the cases they handle are actually small matters, which do not go beyond, and deserving security. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the question is that Schedule 6 be amended as proposed - I am trying to capture the category. As with regard to security, it should be provided to the Judges of the Supreme Court, Judges of Court of Appeal, Principal Judge and the retired High Court Judges. I put the question to the amendment as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the quantum?

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to implore members to go by the initial proposal of 80 per cent for two basic reasons. One, the lower cadres in the Judiciary earn peanut as compared to their bosses in the higher courts.

Secondly, even in terms of enjoyment of benefits, even when they are in active service, these benefits are so limited on their part. I, therefore, suggest and implore members to go by the initial arrangement of 80 per cent.

MR KAHIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When it comes to this category of the judicial officers, the number increases. In addition, I would like to inform the House that we will be setting a precedent for other public servants. Therefore, in consideration of how the Government is always constrained with resources, I want to propose that this category of judicial officers be subjected to 60 per cent.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I think the former judicial officer has given us his live experience but also from other submissions, surely, these lower cadres’ pay is low. Therefore, if we put it to 60 per cent, that would be very low. 
My view - of course, it is because we have already put the others at 100 per cent - earlier on was that these ones be at 100 per cent. Anyway, now that we had proposed that, let us give them at least 80 per cent. I think let members support and agree to 80 per cent because of what they earn. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This is a Government Bill and so, the House need not to be worried about where the money is going to come from. I would like to propose - (Interjection) - yes, when Government was proposing these figures and formulae, they knew where the money would come from.

Therefore, I would like to propose that you immediately put the question to the 80 per cent proposal for all the lower cadres of the Judiciary so that we expeditiously dispose of this Bill. I beg to move.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand to support 80 per cent. Madam Chairperson, we have to be fair and equity here is very important. Court cases usually start from these people. It is only fair that we put them at 80 per cent rather than 60 per cent. After all, we are trying to make their lives better, Madam Chairperson. I implore my colleagues to support the 80 per cent.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This is very contradicting. We have given 100 per cent to people who earn more but now to those who earn less, we are giving them 80 per cent, which should have been the other way round. I propose that we approve 100 per cent. There is no justification for us to give those that earn more, 100 per cent and those who earn less, 80 per cent; it cannot work, members.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you were not here when we were debating the rationale. We agreed that the Chief Justice and the Deputy are very few; they would not constrain the Consolidated Fund. The second category you are talking about are really many.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, you realise the schedule we are debating is part of a Bill concerning the administration of the Judiciary. The centre of democracy lies on how empowered the Judiciary is, to be saved from any temptations. We must empower the Judiciary and in doing so, the officer serving must feel comfortable after they have left. That way, they cannot be bribed on the basis of need because their future is secured.

Consequently, colleagues, I appeal to you that once a serving officer at this rank expects going with 80 per cent of his salary, this would give him a sense of confidence and he would not be tempted to be planning for his future when it is now provided for by the 80 per cent we have given of his sitting salary.

I am sure, with the Attorney-General and Chairman, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we would be comfortable with the 80 per cent being given to the serving officers. Thank you very much. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Yes, I concede to 80 per cent for these other judicial officers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the monthly quantum be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: It applies to all those categories. I now put the question that Schedule 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 1
THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there any new amendments to clause 1; interpretation section? We had stood over it. Are there any changes to clause 1?
 
MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 1 interpretation –
    1. We propose to replace the definition of the word “committee” with the following:
“Council” means the Judiciary Council established by Section 4. 

    2. We also replace the definition of “Judiciary staff” with the following:
“Staff of the Judiciary” means all judicial officers, administrative and other staff appointed by the Judicial Service Commission to perform judicial, administrative and other functions of the Judiciary. 

    3. To insert a new definition as follows:
“Currency point”, which has the value assigned to it in schedule 1. 

The justification, Madam Chairperson, is –
    • To define a currency point.
    •  To provide for the substitution of the word “committee”, which is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment of clause 4, and 
    • The replacement of the word “Judiciary staff” is to be consistent with the term, which is actually used in the Bill. 

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move. 

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I thought we could also properly define the term “Lower Bench” because in the Bill, it is defined as, “Lower Bench” means a “Magistrates Court or other lower than the High Court.” I propose that we define “Lower Bench” to mean – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that?

MR MUGOYA: Lower Bench to mean a” Magistrates Court or other courts established by law.” For example, the LC courts are captured by that phrase.

MR OBOTH: Whereas the honourable member has made some proposals, the LC courts - Madam Chairperson, when I speak with this bed sheet on my mouth, I don’t think that I am audible but I hope I am. The LC court cannot qualify as a bench because we all know, including hon. Okupa, what a bench and a bar is. A bench is where a judicial officer sits. The LCs are not qualified enough to be - I would like to suggest that if you can modify it to cover “other” - If there are lower courts below the Magistrate’s Court, that would be occupied by a judicial officer and it would be much more appropriate. 

However, as it stands, the committee was of the view - and the member here is a member of the committee and –

MR MUGOYA: Madam Chairperson, I was just giving an example. However, we have, for example, courts that fall under the judicial system. If you look at our Constitution, without necessarily restricting ourselves to the magistrates’ courts, we have also courts, though not in offing yet, but they fall under the judicial establishment like the Kadhi court. 

Therefore, I would think that in order to leave it quite wide, that is the reason why I propose that we say, “The Lower Bench” means “magistrates courts or other courts as established by law.” 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I would like to implore hon. Mugoya to concede that the Kadhi courts and all other courts established in Uganda are well defined by appointment and constitution of that court. If it is the presiding officer or the person who will be in that Kadhi court, is he a qualified judge? If it is the Industrial Court, we have the prescription. I think there is an attempt to go in the minute micro definitions and we shall be diluting this Bill and the meaning of a “Lower Bench”. We shall be calling it something else and that is my fear, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, since there are no amendments to the Interpretation section, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Amended by who? To the interpretation?

MR OBOTH: Yes, there was amendment of the word “committee” by the Attorney-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that the Interpretation clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.05
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.06
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 and passed it with amendments:
    • Schedule 2 parts A and B was considered and passed with amendments. 
    • Schedule 3 was passed. 
    • Schedule 4 was passed with amendments. 
    • Schedule 5 was passed with amendments.
    • There has been insertion of a new schedule between schedules 1 and 2 and it has also been passed. 
    • Clause 1 has also been passed with amendments. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
12.07
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

12.08
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion to recommit two items. One of them is the item that we omitted when we were discussing the issue of security. Whereas we conceded on the lower cadres, we omitted to provide security for the Chief Registrar. The justification for providing security to the Chief Registrar is that the Chief Registrar is at the level of a Permanent Secretary (PS) and, normally, at that rank, he enjoys Government security.

THE SPEAKER: Proposal for recommittal. 

12.09
MR RICHARD OKOTH-OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to recommit –

THE SPEAKER: Let us first deal with the other ones. Are there those against recommittal?

12.10
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, the reporting of the Attorney-General has been accurate, except in that respect: we did not omit the Chief Registrar. That is the decision that we have taken, that all in that category will not be provided with security. 

Actually, you have scored in your own net by saying he is equivalent to the PS. Permanent secretaries are not given security when they have retired. You are going to make everybody who works in the Judiciary look like a judge of the Supreme Court. You are about to propose even for sweepers. 

Therefore, I am opposed to the recommitting. We made this decision deliberately that we will not provide security to that category of judicial officers. We are providing for those that we provided for. I would like to invite and persuade the Attorney-General to concede.

12.12
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I do support the proposal by the Attorney-General because the office of the Chief Registrar, for all purposes and intents, works like a fulcrum of all the activities of the Judiciary. The Chief Registrar is the custodian of all property and documents of the Judiciary, in addition to existing registries of other courts. I would, therefore, propose and support that the Chief Registrar be given security.

THE SPEAKER: We need to know that actually, that amendment was not moved. He moved amendments on the Supreme Court, Court of Appeal, Principal Judge and the High Court. Therefore, it is not that we did not listen: he did not move it.

12.13
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Madam Speaker, yes, it is true the Attorney-General did not move that amendment but he has come back to us to say that in the course of the debate and consideration of this Bill, there was an oversight.

Madam Speaker, there is only one Chief Registrar in this country. Being one, members should not stretch it. 

I implore colleagues that since the Chief Registrar is at the heart of the administration of justice in this country, it is also important that we put him on the same pedestal with the colleagues. I would find no problem with just one office bearer in the name of the “Chief Registrar”. It would do no harm. I beg to support.

12.13
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I do not understand what my colleagues are talking about. We are talking about the Chief Registrar who has left service. We are not talking about somebody who is still serving. If the one who is sitting has security, that is fine. We are talking about someone who has retired and left service. Therefore, it is not the question of “he has been at the heart, he has been in charge of records” and so on. He is a person that has gone.

That said, Madam Speaker, I think the main reason we are considering security for these people is because of the decisions they take when they are on the bench. It is because of those decisions that we think that these people deserve to be secured when they move out of the Judiciary. I do not think the Chief Registrar should qualify for this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Chief Registrar is the one who decides whether your matter will come on the calendar or not or whether it is late: it is a serious job. 

I put the question that the schedule be recommitted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Othieno, what did you want to recommit – we will have to go down to the Committee Stage but I want to hear what he wanted to recommit –(Mr Byaruhanga rose­_)– on Schedule One? Okay.

12.15
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that schedule one of the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 be recommitted. 

Madam Speaker, on 28 May, 2020, when we were last here on this Bill, Parliament passed schedule one of the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 which was entitled: “Staff of the Judiciary is to be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.”

Schedule one of the Bill was introduced by clause 13(3) of the Bill. As you will recall, Madam Speaker, on the 19th of February, this clause 13 was passed with an amendment. Parliament substituted for clause 13(3) a new sub-clause 13(3) and that new sub-clause rendered the schedule unnecessary.

Clause 13(3) as originally introduced provided as follows: “The staff of the Judiciary specified in schedule one, shall be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.” Parliament amended that clause in February by substituting for clause 13(3) a new sub-clause which now reads: 
“All staff of the Judiciary, other than those appointed by the President, shall be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission, in accordance with the approved structure of the Judiciary.”

In effect, therefore, that Schedule 1 which was there before was rendered redundant.

As there is now no specification of staff to be recruited by the Judicial Service Commission, in those circumstances, Madam Speaker, I propose that Schedule 1 of the Bill should be consequentially deleted from the Bill, having been rendered redundant by that amendment that we made of clause 13(3). 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again, I must say that the motion to delete was not made. If it had been, we would not have passed Schedule 1. So, honourable members, let us go back to Committee Stage. Hon. Othieno, what was it you wanted before we go back? (Ms Ogwal rose_) Did you give notice of your recommittal? Let us hear hon. Othieno first.

MR RICHARD OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I beg to recommit clause 30; reason being that the way it is now, clause 30 has the effect - the way we passed it – of amending Article 128(5) of the Constitution. 

In Article 128(5), the expenses that are directly charged on the Consolidated Fund are listed. The way we are putting it here - and when you look at it - they are basically recurrent expenditures; the recurrent costs. However, the Judiciary has both recurrent and development costs.

The way we have passed clause 30 is to the effect that all the charges or expenses of the Judiciary, including development, will be directly charged on the Consolidated Fund, which, in effect, will be amending Article 128(5), which lists the particular items that can be charged directly on the Consolidated Fund.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my reason for recommitting is to comply to operationalise  Article 128(5) of the Constitution. We know how to amend the Constitution; it is very clear. If you want to amend the Constitution, you bring a motion specifically for that. We have learnt that you do not amend the Constitution by infection.

THE SPEAKER: What is the mischief you are trying to cure? State the proposal that is offending you and then we look at it. Read it so that we know what the problem is.

MR OTHIENO: The proposal I want to make?

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no; the one which is offending the Constitution, according to you. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, the way it is now, it says:
“All monies approved by Parliament to defray the expenses incurred in the discharge of the functions of the Judiciary or in carrying out the purpose of this Act shall be a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund.”
Madam Speaker, what I am saying here is that the expenses are of two natures; there are those that are of development and then there are those that are recurrent. But the Constitution only provides for recurrent to be charged on the Consolidated Fund.

This one is even providing for the development fund because when we are budgeting here, we simply supply the ones that are charged on the Consolidated Fund. The other ones are the ones that we appropriate.

So, Madam Speaker, the reason why I am bringing this up is that the way it is now, it is combining everything to be charged directly on the Consolidated Fund. The effect is that, for instance, when we are budgeting, it means all the money for the Judiciary, whether development or recurrent, shall simply be supplied; when the actual practice and provision of the law is we only supply those that are of recurrent nature, as provided for in Article 128(5) of the Constitution and then the other ones which are development – for instance, they want to put up a building. They want to buy items or build offices; those are development expenditures – and are normally not part of Article 128(5) of the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chair, Oboth?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must thank hon. Othieno Okoth; it had to come from Tororo anyway. This matter on the citation he provided under Article 128(5); the sole purpose of the Administration of Judiciary Bill - and for the first time – is to make sure that they have independence.

What has been the situation is when they bring their budgets, you find it could be subject to some deductions and some other dictates. I am giving information as the relevant chairperson who processes the Judiciary budget.

Just like Parliament; Parliament has Administration of Parliament Act. So, the Judiciary thought about itself making sure that they do not be seen begging around for monies because it interferes – and I use the word “begging” – with their independence. 

So, if it is a question of law that is established under this Act, it would make it appropriate for them to do proper budgeting and then have a legal covering here. It is not necessarily that the Attorney-General or Government would bring an Act to amend the Constitution.

I tried to persuade my brother, hon. Othieno Okoth, privately. This is a matter that he feels very passionate about. Some of the things we passed here are new things but it is happening in other regions. It only delayed; we delayed it here. This is the first Bill and just a few minutes to come –

Hon. Othieno Okoth, I do not want you to be seen that you are standing in the way. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General? (Mr Othieno rose_) No, no; you have made your proposal. Let other people speak about it, please. You have made your proposal; let us hear other opinions. Hon. Othieno, sit down. Let us hear the views about your proposal.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you very much for asking hon. Othieno to actually define what he thought was offending him.

I have read very clearly Article 128(5) of the Constitution and there is no offence at all. The clause does not offend it at all. In any case, the development expenditure of the Judiciary is still appropriated by Parliament, so there is no offence whatsoever, Madam Speaker. I am opposing the recommittal.

THE SPEAKER: Any other views on the recommittal?

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, in view of the spirit of the Bill and having listened to many amendments that have been raised and accepted by the House, I am seeking clarification and also a proposal, if the clarification is not satisfying.

Under Schedule 4, we have made a provision for benefits payable to a retired Justice of the Supreme Court in Part A and in Part B, Justice of the Court of Appeal. 

However, in Schedule 4, we have left out requirements for funeral arrangements. Although medical allowances and all the other arrangements are there, funeral arrangements are not provided for. 

Madam Speaker, I am saying this because we have buried some judges in the last couple of months, and some of us were extremely depressed at the manner in which the funeral arrangements were handled. So, I am just seeking clarification on whether this has been provided for elsewhere in the law. If not, it is appropriate, at this material time, that we create a provision to cater for funeral arrangements as well. I beg to propose.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, your schedule 3 only deals with the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. That is what has been provided for. Across the three Arms of Government, the funeral expenses are provided only for the leadership. In this case, it will be only the Chief Justice. 

I, therefore, humbly request that on the basis of the provision that has been made for the spouse and the dependents in the preceding clauses, we leave out the one on the funeral because it was not envisaged. In any case, as I said, the estate of the officers will be the recipients of all the pending retirement benefits.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, you know I have been complaining about how dead people are managed at different levels. There was a day a family of a judge brought the body of the judge here thinking it was automatic for that body to be brought to Parliament, yet we were not ready for them. So, what do you do with a Supreme Court Judge? Does he just go casually? Even if he goes casually, I think let us be clear how to handle the funerals of such people.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is something we have been grappling with not only for the judicial officers but also for former Members of Parliament and ministers. At one time, you did ask the Ministry of Public Service to bring this issue to Parliament. They said they would do that within one month. It is about eight months now. I remember it was in October last year, but up to now, nothing has happened. 

Today, we have an opportunity. So, I would like to appeal to the Attorney-General, to avoid this embarrassment, it is not asking for too much. I remember when they brought here the body of a former judge, Justice Arthur Oder, it was so embarrassing. The blame comes to Parliament and in particular, the Office of the Speaker of Parliament, and the area Members of Parliament where such a person may be coming from. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think this is not asking for too much. Now that the Ministry of Public Service did not come back to the House, and since they are providing for the others, there should be a provision to cover the judges too.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you do not know – it is because I do not say everything that happens, but when these people die, the calls come to me, then I start wondering whether to contact the Prime Minister to see what to do; it is not good. 

MR BYARUHANGA: In lieu of that, Madam Speaker, we are ready to concede to the inclusion – because the provision has already been made for the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice - of the Principal Judge and the Supreme Court judges. That is the concession.

THE SPEAKER: So, they can get similar –

MR BYARUHANGA: Yes, for the funeral – that would go under schedule 4, and if it is all right with you, Madam Speaker, we could make the amendment to schedule 4 now. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go back to the committee stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

Schedule 1
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose the deletion of schedule 1. I also propose an amendment to Schedule 3 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No; let us do one at a time. Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 1 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Schedule 1, deleted.

Schedule 4
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chair, under schedule 4, I propose an amendment to include the security provided to the Chief Registrar.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are we moving the Chief Registrar from schedule 6 to schedule 4? 

Schedule 3
MR BYARUHANGA: For schedule 3, Madam Chairperson, we would like to propose an amendment to include the funeral expenses for the Principal Judge and the judges of the Supreme Court. So, we propose an amendment to schedule 3 to include the funeral arrangements for the judges of the Supreme Court and the Principal Judge. That is the concession we made.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 6
THE CHAIRPERSON: The Chief Registrar is under schedule 6. Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 6, part A be amended in relation to the security for the Chief Registrar.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 6, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.38
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.39
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I would like to report that the House has deleted Schedule 1 and amended schedules 3 and 6 to the Bill.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.39
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

12.40
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY ACT, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes.

12.41
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the whole House for their participation and bipartisan presentations in this discussion. I need not remind this House for how long this Bill has been on the table. I most sincerely thank every Member of this House, from both sides of the aisle, and especially you, Madam Speaker, for the patience you have had with me and my colleague, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I thank you very much.

I must make special mention of the participation of members from the other side of the aisle, specifically hon. Ssemujju, hon. Okupa, hon. Cecilia Ogwal who was very informative, and all the other Members. On this side of the aisle, of course, you have all helped very much to enrich the Bill. I thank you all.

Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you very much for us finally passing the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Where shall we meet after here? (Laughter)

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I was very eager for us to meet somewhere not far away for here after this. My only problem is the restrictions of COVID-19. I beg to move.

12.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must congratulate this Parliament. Let me thank all the Members of this Parliament for the participation. I congratulate the Parliament of Uganda for passing the Administration of Judiciary Bill, 2018, one core piece of legislation that is relevant in the administration of the Judiciary and that gives effect to the doctrine of separation of powers. Congratulations, Parliament of Uganda.

I must thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Without you, members, we would not have this Bill and the success registered today. I would like to thank each one of you. I also would like to thank hon. Othieno who has been very useful, hon. Mugoya, hon. Abdu Katuntu, hon. Niwagaba, hon. Waluswaka - I cannot mention you all. Hon. Waluswaka had first opposed the Bill before he read it well but after reading it well, he gave tremendous support; I thank you.

I would also like to congratulate the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs because this is their maiden Bill. For the Attorney-General, to my recollection, this is the first Bill that he has processed to success. Congratulations, learned Attorney-General. Thank you, everyone.

Attorney-General, you said that the restrictions of COVID-19 have meant all our mouths are covered. Time will come when our mouths will not have those masks; let us hope that you have just carried this forward. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Attorney-General, in the meantime, you know we passed the law on mobile money, so you can – (Laughter) Let me also take this opportunity to thank you very much, honourable members, especially our committee -

MR OBOTH: I am at pains, Madam Speaker. I do not usually do this but I would like to thank specifically, hon. Veronica Bichetero who stood in for me when the jam was holding me up on Jinja Road. She stood in to process some clauses of this Bill. Hon. Veronica Bichetero. Hon. Bichetero, without you is without me; thank you. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me also thank our committee and all the members for the support. However, I need to put it on record that this is one Bill that has been subject to misinformation, misunderstanding, anger, etcetera. However, a lot of it was due to the failure by the minister in charge to come and process the Bill. Our report was ready in 2019. I would like that to be on record. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much. I hope that now the Judiciary, which has been waiting for this Bill for several years, will sleep better. All this has been possible because you are able to come and do your work, honourable members. I would like to thank you very much. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join the Members to thank the Attorney-General and everybody. I remember when we started on this Bill, the Attorney-General thought I was not supporting his amendments. He wrote me a chit saying, “Why do you hate me to that extent?” It was not that I hated you; I simply wanted a better Bill. 

Madam Speaker, the President has been talking about improvement of the payment or remuneration to the scientists. May I now ask the Attorney-General this question, because sometimes Parliament is blamed for delaying things. Now that the Attorney-General and the Minister of Public Service are here, can you state on record when we are going to better the payments of the scientists? You are the ones to implement this, and the President has spoken about it a number of times. Therefore, we would like to extract a commitment from you. 

Honourable members, you have seen the wonderful work the scientists are doing and still continue to do to save our lives; theirs, is to save lives. Hence, I would like to know from the Attorney-General when he is bringing that next Bill because we are done with the Judiciary today. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, hon. Okupa is talking about the scientists. Related to the administration of the judiciary is the welfare of the state attorneys.

Madam Speaker, I have a copy of a petition addressed to your good self with attachments from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Minister of Public Service and Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

We have just passed this Bill, which is very attractive, but the temptation we are going to have is that the lawyers working in Government will try to transfer their services to the Judiciary. A bench is not fully constituted when there is no bar. Can we make a commitment and get to hear it? When are you enhancing the salaries of the state attorneys? This is in the fight against corruption. We did this for the Judiciary; how about the state attorneys, who would be asking for “kitu kidogo” because they do not have much? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to just echo what hon. Oboth has said. I even received a delegation of officers under the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP). I think they have been patient. They went on strike but they were convinced to come back to work, but I think the Minister of Public Service has still not delivered. Honourable minister and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I do not know what you can say.    

MS AMEEDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill has been passed in the spirit of improving service delivery and the welfare of public servants. I am aware that a committee was set up to improve the salaries and welfare across the entire public service and it is ready. However, this has not been implemented because Government claimed it has no money. 

Madam Speaker, it is my humble wish that the Minister of Public Service comes here and tells Parliament when salaries and remuneration for the entire public service will be improved. It is not right to have classes within the civil service. I am standing here as a retired civil servant and I know it takes a chain to produce good work. Therefore, can the honourable minister come and tell us why they are not implementing this report? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a lot of activities today. I would like the Minister of Public Service to come and tell us what to do and them we close this. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, do you still want to speak? 

MR GASTER MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, as much as we have ably handled the retirement benefits of the judicial officers, we also have another category in the Judiciary that performs a lot of donkey work, and these are the court clerks, process servers, drivers and many others. 

If you look at what these people earn and the magnitude of their work, you will sympathise with them. I will give you an example; court clerks, process servers – it is good I have seen the Chief Registrar – earn around Shs 320,000 a month. The lunch given to them is less than Shs 6000. That is it. 

When we are complaining and talking about corruption in the Judiciary, they say it stems from this category of workers. Therefore, as the minister concerned appears before us here today, I would like to hear from him about when we should expect a pay-rise for this category of donkey workers in the Judiciary. I thank you. 

12.54
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker and honourable members, the concern of Members regarding salary enhancement for various categories of public servants is noted and is quite genuine.

Madam Speaker, you recall that in 2017, Cabinet passed the pay enhancement principles. One of the principles was that there will be enhancement of salaries, but in phases, which will largely be influenced by the availability of funds from the Treasury. Accordingly, there was an enhancement of salaries for certain categories of public servants in 2018 and then in the subsequent year, there was some enhancement as well. Now, in the next financial year, there is going to be some enhancement, particularly for people teaching in public universities. 

We would have really wished to enhance salaries for a large category of public servants, but there were concerns of the budget, availability of funds and other unforeseen expenditures that have come in largely because of natural disasters, and a number of other priorities which were set and are key to the running of the economy and the security of this country. It has, therefore, not been possible to have salary enhancements across the board or in bigger phases as we had promised.

Madam Speaker, what I can say, with absolute certainty, is that salary enhancement has been adopted as a principle. Therefore, we shall go ahead to carry out the enhancement, including the enhancement of scientists’ pay, as promised. After this coming financial year, we shall pick up the strands from where we have left them and move towards the long-term pay targets which were set in 2017. Thank you.

MR ROBERT KASULE: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for insisting, but I would just like to seek clarification from the Minister of Public Service. Now that we have created some enhancement and some sort of bonanza in the Judiciary, will this law encompass the retired Chief Justices like my Old Boy (OB), Wako Wambuzi?

THE SPEAKER: You are wasting our time. You came late. We finished considering the Bill and we have already handled that.

MR ROBERT KASULE: Okay. Madam Speaker, let me ask this in another way: Can the Minister of Public Service -

THE SPEAKER: Please, take your seat. 
Honourable members, we have other business on the Order Paper, but it is now lunch time. I will suspend the House for one hour. We shall resume at exactly 2.00p.m. and work very fast.

(The House was suspended at 12.58 p.m.)
(On resumption at 2.24 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE PROPOSED AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT TO PROVIDE FOR A VIRTUAL PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to alter the Order Paper to include reports from the Committee on National Economy. I do not know whether we shall have time to handle them but let them just be on the record. 

I would also like to address one issue. In the proceedings of 7 May 2020, reference was made to the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker. I have had the opportunity to look at the contents and I am of the view that I should exercise the authority of the Speaker, under rule 226 of the Rules of Procedure, to expunge from the records the reference made to the Deputy Speaker. Thank you.

2.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Kenneth Ongalo-Obote): Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the proposed amendments of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to provide for a virtual parliament. Allow me to lay on the Table a copy of the report and copies of minutes of meetings pertaining to the same. 

Madam Speaker, on 21 April 2020, the Rt Hon. Speaker tasked the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, in accordance with its mandate under rule 172 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to amend the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to provide for a virtual parliament. A virtual parliament refers to conducting parliamentary business through a designated digital platform that enables Members of Parliament and staff to attend meetings remotely.

This task emanated from the necessity to comply with the public health requirement of social distancing to limit the spread of COVID-19. This came after the realisation that given the number of Members of Parliament and staff required to attend each parliamentary meeting, the available space in the meeting rooms within the parliamentary buildings, both for plenary sittings and committee meetings, cannot meet the requirements for social distancing. 

The Parliament of Uganda is made up of 457 Members of Parliament and each committee consists of a maximum of 35 and 30 Members of Parliament for standing and sectoral committees respectively. In addition to the Members, there are a number of support staff required to attend such meetings too. 

Against this background, it was deemed imperative that the Parliament of Uganda adopts a virtual parliament, so as to ensure parliamentary business is not interrupted or paralysed by the COVID-19 pandemic or any other exceptional circumstances and emergencies as determined by the Speaker, from time to time.

The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, in accordance with its mandate under rule 172, and as stipulated below, proceeded to propose amendments to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and now wishes to present its report to the House for consideration.

For the record, rule 172 states, in the relevant part, that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline shall, by order of the House - “…(c) review these rules from time to time and make such recommendations to the House for amendment as the committee considers necessary for the satisfactory functioning and efficient transaction of the business of the House and its committees;
(d)…examine and advise the House on amendments proposed to these rules, by Members or other committees of the House; and

(e)…carry out such other functions as are conferred by these rules or as the House may assign it.”

Methodology
The committee conducted the task as follows:
1. The committee received briefs from the following departments of the Parliamentary Commission on the stated subjects: 
i) Information and Communications Technology on how a virtual parliament works; and 
ii) Research services on the experiences of virtual parliaments around the world.

2. The committee examined the Rules of Procedure with a view to identifying areas that required amendments for the smooth running of a virtual parliament and introduced new Rules of Procedure, where need arose.

Preliminaries
The committee was informed that there are two categories of virtual parliaments, namely -
i)Complete virtual parliaments where the whole House/committees conduct parliamentary business through a designated digital platform; and

ii) Hybrid virtual parliaments where some Members of Parliament are physically present at a meeting while others participate in the same meeting through a designated digital platform.

Observations and Recommendations
Committee observation
The committee observes that the communications infrastructure at Parliament and in Uganda today is inadequate. There are currently challenges of having every Member of Parliament logged onto a virtual parliament at the same time. The committee, therefore, notes that as Parliament pilots a virtual parliament, the hybrid approach is a more feasible approach.

Committee Recommendations
The committee recommends as follows:
1. Parliament should adopt a hybrid virtual Parliament; and 

2. The following amendments to the Rules of Procedure should be adopted to provide for a virtual Parliament.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I will now present the proposed amendments for adoption by this august House. The committee proposes that we amend the following rules:

Rule 2, Interpretation
In rule 2, we propose to substitute the definitions of the words “House” and “Table” with the following, and insert new definitions:
“‘House’ means a sitting of Members in the Chamber of Parliament and Members virtually present in the House.” 

“‘Member virtually present in the House’ refers to a Member participating in the proceedings of Parliament outside the Chamber of Parliament through a designated digital platform, having obtained leave of the Speaker and registered with the Clerk to so appear at least 12 hours before the commencement of a sitting.”

“‘Table’ means the Clerk’s Table or a virtual table designated by the Speaker from time to time and accessible to all Members.” 

Justification: to make provision for online participation of Members and online tabling of documents; and further, to protect online processes by parliamentary privilege.

Rule 9, Sitting Arrangement in the House 
Insert a new sub-rule to read as follows: 
“(4) A Member virtually present in the House shall stand or sit against a background that maintains the decorum of the Chamber of Parliament at all times.” 

Justification: to ensure that the surroundings of the Member appearing on a digital platform maintain the decorum of the House.

Rule 24, Quorum 
Insert a new sub-rule to read as follows: 
“(6) For the avoidance of doubt, a Member virtually present in the House shall form part of the quorum of the House.” 

Justification: to clarify that Members on digital platforms are also entitled to form quorum.

Rule 31, Laying of Papers 
Insert a new sub-rule immediately after sub-rule (1) to read as follows: “(1)(a) Notwithstanding sub-rule (1), a Member may, with leave of the Speaker, lay a paper on a virtual table designated by the Speaker and accessible to all Members.” 

Justification: to provide for electronic laying of documents.

Rule 32, Mode of Laying of Papers 
Substitute sub-rule (1) with the following: 
“(1) The Clerk shall ensure that any paper to be tabled is distributed to all Members before it is laid.” 

The justification is that documents relating to the sittings of the House are now electronically distributed.

Rule 69, Time and Manner of Speaking 
Substitute sub-rule (1) with the following: 
“(1) A Member desiring to speak shall –
    (a) in the case of a Member physically present in the Chamber, rise and face the Chair of the Speaker; or 
    (b) in the case of a Member virtually present in the House, raise his or her hand up; 
and shall not speak until he or she catches the Speaker’s eye.” 

The justification is: to provide for how Members on a virtual platform shall catch the Speaker’s eye.

Rule 92, Questions to be Decided by Majority 
Insert new sub-rules immediately after sub-rule (1) to read as follows: 
“(3) Notwithstanding sub-rule (1), a Member on leave of absence may appoint another Member to vote on his or her behalf using the prescribed proxy form in Appendix H.” It is on page 11 of the report.
“(4) The proxy form shall be submitted to the Clerk within 12 hours before the commencement of the sitting to which it relates.” 

Justification: to provide for voting by proxy and circumstances under which a Member may vote by proxy.

Rule 95, Voting 
Under sub-rule (2), insert a new paragraph to read as follows:
“(f) voting by show of hands” 

Insert a new sub-rule (3) to read as follows: 
“(3) The Speaker may, where necessary, designate a specific voting method for a Member virtually present in the House, where the Member is unable to vote through any of the voting methods specified under sub-rule (2).” 

The justification: to include voting by show of hands and further permit the Speaker to designate a voting platform for Members.

Rule 200, Meetings of Committees 
Insert new sub-rules immediately after sub-rule (6) to read as follows: 
“(7) A Member may attend a meeting of a committee of Parliament through a designated digital platform.

(8) The rules governing the participation of Members in the proceedings of Parliament outside the Chamber of Parliament through a designated digital platform shall, with necessary modifications, apply to participation of Members in meetings of a committee through a designated digital platform.” 

Justification: to provide for virtual committee meetings.

Part XXIX, General 
Insert a new rule immediately after rule 236 to read as follows: 
“236A. General application of rules to digital parliamentary processes 
(l) Except where these rules provide otherwise, the rules shall apply to all digital parliamentary processes online and to a Member virtually present in the House or committee.
 
(2) A requirement for written notice to the Speaker or Clerk under these rules may be satisfied where a Member submits the notice by email to speaker@parliament.go.ug; clerk@parliament.go.ug; and any other digital platform designated by the Speaker. 

(3) Any document relating to committee meetings and sittings of the House may be distributed by any electronic means to which members have access. 

(4) For the avoidance of doubt, the rules relating to the participation of a Member in the proceedings of Parliament outside the Chamber of Parliament through a designated digital platform shall only take effect upon a proclamation made by the Speaker.” 

On page 11 of the report, we have the new appendix. Insert a new appendix immediately after Appendix G to read as follows:
“Appendix H, Rule 92(3)
Parliament of Uganda
Voting Proxy Form

I………………Member of Parliament representing………………do hereby appoint………………Member of Parliament representing………………to vote on my behalf on questions put to the following matters before the House…” The Member will then list the matters to be voted on by proxy. The form will indicate the date and signature.

“…Verification by the Clerk to Parliament
This proxy was received on………………at………………hours.
Mode of delivery………………
Clerk to Parliament.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this report be adopted by the House.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, members of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I was only hoping that you might address rule 81 on the dress code. Someone might come in a swimming costume to - (Laughter)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Madam Speaker, the dress code is actually addressed under the new general rule, part XXIX. Sub-rule (1) of that new rule says, “Except where these rules provide otherwise, the rules shall apply to all digital parliamentary processes online and to a Member virtually present in the House or committee.” This is intended to inform the Member participating on a virtual platform that they are still bound by our Rules of Procedure, which includes the dress code and discipline.

2.44
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification from the chairperson on the proposal where a Member can make a contribution by catching the eye of the Speaker through a virtual system. Why do we again want that Member, when it is time for voting, to appoint another person, yet through the virtual system they can say, “I vote yes” or “I vote no” and their vote is recorded? 

The committee says they are introducing a system where a Member can appoint somebody to vote for them. I need some clarification on that.

2.45
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get some clarification from the chairperson. 

This virtual system is very good, but don’t you think some Members, who may not be in this Tenth Parliament, may develop a tendency not to be in their constituencies or here in Parliament, and decide to stay in London, for example, and attend Parliament virtually? Won’t we create room for people not to go back to their constituencies and to come here to Parliament? Somebody may decide to be in London and attend House virtually. Honourable members, I want to get clarification because somebody can decide that after being sworn in, they go with their iPad and get lost.

I think you should put a provision where permission is granted for that Member to be physically away for that particular time by the Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, even for someone to go to London, I would have to be notified and I would have to give authority.

2.47
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With the advancement of technology, a virtual parliament is most welcome. However, the clarification I would like to seek pertains to proxy votes, in the case of being procedurally compliant with confidential votes. In the case of voting secretly, how will these proxy votes be made confidential?

2.48
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report. 

I seek guidance and maybe later I will seek to amend one of the proposals. You have said that a Member will need at least 12 hours to be invited for a virtual meeting. With the system we have seen now, I think it takes the IT team between two to three hours to invite me for the meeting. Now, if you are talking of 12 hours, isn’t this on the high side? Why don’t we go with maybe six hours? That is my point of clarification. Thank you.

2.49
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the chairperson on the rule where a Member must not be away for more than 15 sittings. I believe it still stands, even though we shall have this. So, even though a Member - as hon. Waluswaka was getting worried about - participates using a virtual platform, in 15 days, the Member of Parliament must at least appear – (Interjections) – Which sitting? That is from the chairperson.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when it comes to voting, at times you may try to reach out to your office or to the Clerk-at-the-Table during the voting process but the easiest person to get in touch with is either the secretary to the Clerk or someone else. I would like to get clarification from the chairperson. As he said, somebody signs and sends the communication that, “I, Kibalya, appoint hon. Solomon to vote for me”. If I ask the secretary to the Clerk to write what I have sent, on my behalf, or if I write a WhatsApp message to one of the Members and they bring the message and show it to someone, can that also qualify to be my information? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a stop-gap measure for the COVID-19 situation. I expect that when things improve, we shall go back to the old system. It is only that we do not know when we shall have a normal sitting in our Chamber, - that is the problem - yet work must continue.

2.51
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on two issues. 

One, whenever we are taking a decision on a particular matter here, you normally take a roll call. That is the basis on which you then take a decision on whether the House should proceed to take a decision on a particular matter. In the circumstances that the chairperson has actually listed, that is, the digital platform, our internet connection is usually unreliable; it breaks. Even here in Parliament, the internet connection sometimes breaks and we fail to proceed.

Madam Speaker, with the proposal that the chairperson has made, I feel that when it comes to voting, we should maintain what is already in the Rules of Procedure. This is because there are no mechanisms that the chairperson has proposed that will actually mitigate the gaps that I have mentioned. 

I feel that proxy voting will most likely be manipulated. I am still of the view that if you are to make a decision as a Member, come physically and be seen. You must be seen to be taking a decision on behalf of your constituents, instead of being kept there. As the honourable mentioned here, you cannot say that you are going to adopt secret voting and then you adopt a system of proxy voting. In circumstances where it is secret voting, how do you mitigate that? The chairperson did not come out with clear proposals on how to handle that. 

2.53
MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is with proxy voting. Last week, I remember you sent people to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline because there was a matter to do with alleged forgery. Madam Speaker, with proxy voting, how are we going to be sure that there won’t be forgery? Some people are likely to forge other people’s signatures; for example, hon. Nambeshe is my friend and I could say he asked me to vote on his behalf. 

Madam Speaker, with a virtual parliament, are we not likely to see people hacking into our system? In your communication last time, you even mentioned that people smuggled something onto the Order Paper. One would then imagine that something can be smuggled in when people hack into the system. Aren’t we going to see people hacking into our system to claim that they are standing in for other Members? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, could you respond please?

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Honourable members, let me say from the outset that these are our Rules of Procedure, and we have laid the proposals before you to so that you adopt them wholly or modify them. 

I will answer the questions that were raised, starting with hon. Waluswaka’s concern about the absence of a Member for 15 days, and whether this cannot be abused. In our proposed amendment to rule 2, we clearly state that a Member virtually present in the House refers to a Member participating in the proceedings of Parliament outside the Chamber with leave of the Speaker. This ensures that a Member cannot just log into the system anyhow. It also helps because, as the committee has observed, our internet system may not be able to sustain more than a certain number of Members online at a given time. 

Therefore, seeking leave of the Speaker, and also having the 12 hours, would ensure that we get the maximum number of Members that the system can hold. The Clerk will, therefore, have sufficient time to notify the Member. If the Member is notified that they cannot be put on the digital platform, it will give the Member time, if he or she so wishes, to drive to Parliament and appear in person. This is why we thought the 12 hours should be the limit. A Member may be very far and he or she calls the Clerk and wants to be put on the digital platform but the Clerk says the platform is full; within 12 hours, the Member can drive to Parliament and appear in the House in person.

Hon. Patrick Nsamba asked why a Member should appoint a proxy when they can vote virtually. We thought this was important to do because when we were voting for cities here, we noticed that there were Members who wanted to vote virtually but they were let down by the failure of the network at that time. Therefore, if a Member knows that he or she is going to be in a place where the network may not be strong but they wish to have their vote reflected in a matter that will be on the Order Paper, they can appoint a proxy to vote on their behalf; this was done when we voted for cities.

We are only introducing this to ensure that a Member who is already – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to get clarification on two items. Firstly, the virtual way of debating as a Parliament is very okay, but I would just like to seek clarification. I know that our rules cater for our being here, even before COVID-19. So, would it not be okay to state that this rule only applies in the instance of the COVID-19 pandemic or any other emergency? After that, the rule can be suspended. That is the first clarification I seek.

Secondly, I seek clarification on the rule that says that during debate, you have to stand up and raise your hands. In our rules, we have many other forms of raising issues. I am wondering how that is going to apply in a situation where I am raising a point of order and the Speaker needs to give it precedence. How do I just raise my hand when it may not help much in such a parliamentary sitting?

Honourable chairperson, I just need clarification on those two areas. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Madam Speaker, the Member’s concern about the applicability is adequately addressed in our proposed new rule 236A (4), which states clearly that this will only take effect upon a proclamation made by the Speaker. As much as these are part of our rules, the Speaker has the discretion - as already exists under rule 8 - to decide that because of an emergency, or because there has been a storm for 24 hours and we need to proceed nonetheless, we will have a virtual sitting. That rule can only be effected by a proclamation of the Speaker. 

Honourable member, you still – (Interruption)

MR ABALA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Madam Speaker, I would like clarification from the chairperson of the committee. I remember when we were being sworn in here as Members of Parliament, we came as individuals. This means that whatever decision we are taking, we are doing it as representatives of the people who sent us here.

When you talk about proxy voting, if I ask my senior minister, hon. Kasaija, to vote on my behalf, assuming he does otherwise, will that help me and Uganda? Will I have done my job as per my vote? That is one thing I would like you to help me understand. I am sure people change. 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Madam Speaker, I would request my colleagues to keep in mind, at all times, that these are not going to become our standard Rules of Procedure. These rules will only apply in extreme cases as decided by the Speaker. The Speaker can decide, as the Speaker decided when we were voting for cities, that all Members will be physically present in Parliament to vote. So, I request that we keep in mind, as we continue to adopt these rules, that they are not going to become our standard daily rules of procedure but rules that come into effect during exceptional circumstances, at the discretion of the Speaker. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us now go to the specific rules. I put the question that rule 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Rule 2, as amended, agreed to.
Rule 9, as amended, agreed to.
Rule 24, as amended, agreed to.
Rule 31, as amended, agreed to.
Rule 32, as amended, agreed to.
Rule 69, as amended, agreed to.
Rule 92, as amended, agreed to.
Rule 95, as amended, agreed to.
Rule 200, as amended, agreed to.
Rule 236A, agreed to.
Appendix H, agreed to.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as the chairperson ably informed you, we are not replacing the old rules. These are just stopgap measures for using during emergencies. 

You recall that during the voting on the cities, there were Members who telephoned to make their choices but we could only record them; we were not able to include them in the vote because they were not here. Therefore, this is just a stopgap measure; we are not replacing our rules. Thank you very much.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Permit me to quickly say just two things, Madam Speaker. One, let me thank my committee members and staff; this is unchartered territory and they worked very hard to bring this report to fruition. 

Most importantly, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that out of all the countries that you listed for us to study, so that we can see how to adapt virtual rules to our Parliament, none of them had adopted a virtual system before the 21 April 2020. Therefore, all of them copied from what you had already implemented here. All I would like to say, Madam Speaker, is that I have never been prouder to have you as my Speaker when I realised that all these countries were copying from what you had already done. (Applause) Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. We continue to lead in the Commonwealth.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE WEEKLY UPDATE ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE NATIONAL TASKFORCE ON COVID-19

3.08
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to give you a message on COVID-19. However, as I had already communicated to you, there are a number of very urgent matters -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you first allow the Prime Minister to say what he wants to say? 

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The Prime Minister is the chairperson of the national task force on COVID-19. Recently, His Excellency gave a directive that whenever we appear in public, we must always wear a face mask. Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to come and address this august House, especially on issues concerning COVID-19, without wearing a face mask? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, I must reluctantly rule you out of order. You are not dressed well before this House. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I must salute the honourable member for the vigilance and alertness, and all of us should emulate this very good example; that is the way to defeat this pandemic.

As I was saying, Madam Speaker, we have a number of very urgent matters to address and the first is the repatriation of stranded Ugandans abroad. There will be a statement by the honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs on this. Secondly, we have an urgent statement from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the economic response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We also have four urgent loan considerations, which include the budget for the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. 

Therefore, I want to propose, Madam Speaker, that you allow the Minister of Foreign Affairs to make a short statement on the repatriation of Ugandans stranded abroad. Thereafter, you allow another short statement from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the economic response to the pandemic and to talk about the proposed loans.

The statement I was due to make this afternoon was partly covered by His Excellency the President last night. Further statements on the matter will also be made in the course of the week. If it is agreeable, I propose that the order of doing business be adjusted as I have requested.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the issue of the economic impact on the population requires time and we have been waiting for it for almost two months. I do not want it to be stampeded; we can discuss it in the Fifth Session as one of the earliest activities.

What I can agree to adjust is the item on the loans - Kampala-Jinja Express Highway – (Laughter) - budget support, and it is also important that the Minister of Foreign Affairs advises Ugandans and their relatives on what is going to happen. Therefore, if we could quickly take 45 minutes for the statement - How long is your statement? Is it a short statement?  

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister said the President made his address yesterday and that is enough for now, but we have a lot of issues. You will realise that two of our Members of Parliament were arrested yesterday and were only released this morning. We also have community cases of COVID-19 on the increase, especially in Elegu and parts of northern Uganda. 

Besides that, COVID-19 has become so political. Even when Members on the national task force try to attend the meetings in State House, they are not cleared. Even when they have official invitations, they are not let in, hence they stop on the way. 

Therefore, we need a clear statement from the Prime Minister. He cannot tell us that what the President addressed yesterday is enough for now. We would like to hear more on COVID-19 and to know how to expand our participation. 

In addition, when funding is remitted to the districts, they have to make supplementary budgets. How about the donations at national level; how are you dealing with them when some of these items go to the districts? I would like to give an example of Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. When they talk of 50 pairs of bed sheets, only four pairs were sent to Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. The ambulance that was donated only worked for one day and broke down. We do not have ambulances at the regional hospital, which is supposed to have up to four ambulances. 

Madam Speaker, it is very annoying that the Prime Minister cannot make proper statements on this. We would like to have a proper statement. Since last week, we have been requesting for a quarantine centre in Elegu, as a border point, and also the management of truck drivers to be addressed. 

Madam Speaker, we are not happy with the way resources are being used. We need a lot more statements from the Prime Minister. We are not going to be satisfied with what he has just said. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I do not agree that what the President said substitutes what you are supposed to have said here. Members represent the people here, so they have many policy issues. You may say that you can postpone but to say it is enough – no! You must come back and give Members an update– Honourable members, I am trying to sort out your issues. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you can say that you are postponing your presentation but do not block the opportunity for Members to ask questions and raise issues. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, can I propose that I make my statement, which is ready, anytime during the course of this session? I have no problems at all; I actually came to make this statement. Therefore, there is no problem at all. I am available to make the statement as the Speaker shall direct. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us quickly go to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT’S PLANS TO EVACUATE UGANDAN CITIZENS STRANDED OVERSEAS AS A RESULT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

3.19
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to brief this august House on the situation of Ugandans stranded abroad due to the airport and border closures following the outbreak of – (Interjections) – It is not possible to close my mouth and speak. (Laughter) - Maybe I can cover it. 

Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MR KUTESA: Government has taken the decision to allow Ugandans who have been stranded abroad due to the closure of the airport in Entebbe and our borders to return home in a phased but orderly manner. This decision was taken after careful considerations that are meant to balance the need to bring home these brothers and sisters of ours and also ensure the safety of our people at home.

On 11 March 2020, the World Health Organisation declared the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) a global pandemic. In his statement, the Director-General of the World Health Organisation expressed concern about the severity of the outbreak and the relative inaction by many countries around the world to try and halt the spread of the disease.

In this regard, as a measure to forestall a possible outbreak of the pandemic in Uganda, His Excellency the President, on Saturday, 21 March 2020, announced the immediate closure of Uganda's borders and Entebbe International Airport, effective midnight on Sunday, 22 March 2020. These closures were informed by an assessment done by the National Taskforce on COVID-19, which concluded that imported cases posed the highest possible source of an outbreak of the pandemic in this country.

Honourable members, while these closures were timely and done in the best interest of the country, they also created a parallel problem whereby several Ugandans who had travelled abroad on short visits for business, medical treatment, tourism and other valid reasons got stranded either in the countries that they were visiting or in transit countries as they travelled back home. Additionally, many Ugandan students who had completed their studies abroad where not able to return home on account of these travel restrictions.

In the Middle East, where many migrant workers got laid off from their jobs due to economic slowdown brought on by COVID-l9, many Ugandans were unable to return home despite obtaining air tickets from their former employers.

Indeed, Government has been aware of all these resultant problems. However, like we have argued before, it was of strategic importance to first secure the homeland - the base - as we plan for the return of our fellow citizens who got caught up abroad. 

Honourable members, we know that many of these stranded Ugandans have now run short of money and are largely dependent on either the goodwill of their hosts or donations from friends. Government agrees, therefore, that this situation is no longer tenable and that it is time for them to start coming home.

In arranging for their return, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs undertook to identify and register all the Ugandans who got stranded abroad on account of the airport and border closures. So far, our missions abroad have registered close to 2,400 individuals who are stuck in 66 countries across the world. The list of these Ugandans and the countries where they are is herewith attached as Annex 1.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Government has carefully reviewed this problem and taken note of the following:

1. The country has now built considerable domestic capacity to manage the COVID-19 pandemic in terms of structures, human resources and citizen awareness;

2. The numbers of our stranded citizens who intend to return home are fairly manageable (2,400), although they are spread across many countries - 66; 

3. In arranging for our citizens to return, there is need to ensure that both the personal safety of the returnees as well as that of the communities they are coming to join is assured.

In this regard, Government has agreed, in principle, to allow all the Ugandans who got stranded abroad on account of the closure of the airport and borders to begin returning home in a phased manner, starting with those who are in dire need. The exercise will be done within a framework that ensures both personal and public safety.

Madam Speaker, our view is that the first phase of these returnees should be Ugandans who are stranded in distant places such as Europe, the Americas, West Africa, Eastern Asia and the Middle East. The reason for this being that they are more likely to be in dire need of help than those ones in our region. Besides that, many of them already have air tickets, which they were traveling on before they were stopped, and they would simply need to revalidate those tickets. 

Additionally, honourable members, managing their arrival through the controlled environment of the airport will also give us valuable experience on how to deal with even larger groups that may come through the land borders. In implementing this exercise, we should be cognizant of the capacity of our health authorities to safely manage the numbers involved. 

The next phase will then be for those in the neighbouring countries who are most likely to come by car or on foot through the borders. By the time we embark on this next phase, the necessary structures and safeguards will have been set up at the border crossings.

Honourable members, in this regard we have already started on the following implementation activities: 

The concerned departments of Government are now setting up the specific requirements that they will need to ensure a safe and smooth implementation of this exercise;

My ministry has already held discussions with some of the airlines which still operate a wide network of routes around the world, such as Ethiopian Airlines, regarding the modalities by which they can pick our people from the different locations and bring them to a more central place, such as Addis Ababa, from where we can further arrange for special flights to bring them home. 

We have also held discussions with the United Nations (UN), which still operates many humanitarian flights across Africa, to consider placing some of the stranded Ugandans on these flights as they transit through Entebbe or as they bring in their UN personnel. As you are aware, the airport in Entebbe is a UN logistics base and the UN continues to operate several flights in and out of Entebbe. 

Madam Speaker, today, there is a meeting going on, organised by our ministry, between the United Nations and Uganda Airlines. United Nations wishes to hire Uganda Airlines’ aeroplanes to be operational within the region so that they can bring in their staff alongside our own Ugandans. As you know, Uganda Airlines’ aeroplanes are all sitting at the airport and I think this would be a good business opportunity.

The World Food Programme will also be operating some humanitarian passenger flights in the region, which we can take advantage of to return some of our people. 

We have, additionally, met with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), who have agreed to consider assisting particularly our migrant workers who are stranded in the Middle East to return home. We are awaiting confirmation of their offer from their regional offices.

The IOM has also agreed to support Government of Uganda in completing the ongoing modifications of the arrival area at Entebbe Airport. These changes are meant to make the facility complaint with WHO and Ministry of Health social distancing standards.

I wish to also inform you that the Department for International Development (DFID) of the Government of the United Kingdom has donated to Government of Uganda a large tent, which we will use to expand the arrival space at the airport. We are very grateful for this offer by the Government of the United Kingdom.

We have also engaged with the Government of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) about assisting our migrant workers who have lost their jobs due to the economic effects of COVID-19 and now wish to come back home. In this regard, the UAE has agreed to arrange –(Interruption) - This gentleman is telling me that with the Speaker’s permission, I can speak without a mask. I cannot breathe well. So, I ask you, Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, lower it a bit.

MR KUTESA: I will lower it a bit and I will not face you. (Laughter)

We have also engaged the Government of the United Arab Emirates about assisting our migrant workers, who have lost their jobs due to the economic effects of COVID-19 and they now wish to come back home. In this regard, the United Arab Emirates has agreed to arrange for at least three flights to bring these Ugandans home. As soon as the Ministry of Health is ready to receive them, this offer will be utilised. Fortunately, many of these migrant workers already have air
tickets, which were provided by their former employers.

Finally, on these arrangements, the Indian Community in Uganda has also proposed to arrange for a special flight to bring back both the Ugandans who are stranded in India and also some members of the Indian community who hold Ugandan resident permits but got stranded while visiting their relatives in India. We are examining this proposal.  

Honourable members, I wish to clarify that by allowing Ugandans to return home, Government is not re-opening the international airport to regular passengers or passenger flights, because the risk of imported cases is perhaps even higher now than before.

The Government will, therefore, permit Ugandans to return only on specially arranged flights, which will be cleared for that purpose. All the returning travellers will be required to meet the costs of their own travel back home, as it has been international practice for many countries. We have since established that many of our returnees already have air tickets, which they were travelling on at the time of closure of the airport, and they would now simply need to update these tickets with the airlines.

Ugandan travellers returning will be required to provide proof of negative COVID-19 test results before they embark on their journey. This will help to avoid having them infect each other while on transit or on the plane itself. You may also wish to know that each country has instituted specific testing requirements prior to international travel. In the United Kingdom, for example, a passenger must test for COVID-19 at least 10 days before they can be allowed to travel through Heathrow, and in the United Arab Emirates, their timeline is six days. 

As for those who test positive to COVID-l9, they will have to first undergo treatment in their present locations before they can be allowed to travel back to Uganda at a later date.

On arrival in Uganda, the returnees will again be tested for COVID-19 and then taken to mandatory quarantine for a minimum of 14 days in a Government-designated facility.

The Ministry of Health will ensure that by the time they are released into the communities, they would have been certified as healthy. 

This exercise of returning our nationals will focus only on those who got stranded abroad due to the closure of the airport and borders and not anybody who just wants to come and visit, because even the visiting will not be useful. If you want to come and visit your relatives and you have to spend 14 days in quarantine, it may not be worth it. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall the recent situation in China, where we got several distress calls from some Ugandans who were being thrown out of their houses and denied services. This was mostly because the Chinese local authorities, especially in the province of Guangdong and the city of Guangzhou, had become very strict on testing for COVID-19 before anyone could access basic services.

We all clearly remember the loud calls for their evacuation which, of course, we would not undertake due to the lockdown worldwide. However, I wish to report that through our diplomatic intervention with the Chinese Government, we were able to secure some reprieve for these Ugandans. The feedback that we are getting now from them is that they are very relieved and going about their business as usual. Additionally, we have agreed with the Chinese Government that this reprieve will continue to last at least throughout this period of the pandemic.

Now, there are many Ugandans in China. Some are there completely legally while others are there not very legally. This registration and testing for COVID-19 brought out so many of them. However, through our negotiations, we have said that in spite of anybody’s immigration status, they should be looked after and given the necessary assistance and then the legality of their stay can be discussed when this COVID-19 pandemic is over. 

You will also recall the issue of our students in Wuhan and the desperate calls by their relatives for evacuation. The fact is that these students’ problem was not necessarily about them returning home but the rising cost of living during the lockdown and the understandable fear of contracting the disease. Government took the bold and wise decision not to evacuate them but to provide a small financial package that has sustained them to this point. The feedback from these students in Wuhan is that none of them contracted the disease and they are all safe and have resumed their studies. We, therefore, consider this a matter successfully resolved.

We will, therefore, continue to work closely with the Ministry of Education and Sports to monitor the situation of all our students abroad and to give them all the consular support that they may need while out there. It is true that there has been some delay in remittances of their stipend, but the Ministry of Education and Sports is working hard to rectify this position. Additionally, I wish to call on the parents and guardians of the students who are privately sponsored to provide them with adequate moral and financial support during this very difficult time.

Honourable Members, I must re-emphasise that for us to succeed in safely returning our nationals who are stranded abroad, we need to prepare adequately for this exercise. In this regard, I will request honourable members to fully support the Ministry of Health, the other frontline agencies, and my ministry to arrange for an orderly and safe return for many Ugandans who are stranded abroad.

Madam Speaker, I wish to conclude by first thanking all Ugandans who are stranded abroad and their families for being very patient, just like all our people at home here who have been patient, as Government deals with this very difficult and unprecedented situation. 

Additionally, I wish to say that Government is fully committed to ensuring the welfare and safety of all Ugandans, both at home and abroad, and will continue to act both rationally and responsibly with regard to this pandemic.

All Government interventions in the fight against COVID-19 are being made after careful analysis and in the best interest of the country as a whole.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We do not have a lot of time. Hon. Adeke and hon. Amoding are the ones who first raised the issue; do you have any supplementary questions?

3.44
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker, permit me to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs, on behalf of my colleague and on my own behalf. We thank you as Members who raised this matter before the House.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the report that the minister has given to the House is very comprehensive. It gives hope to any Ugandans out there, who are listening and stranded in any of those countries, that there is something happening and that their Government is doing something to respond to their challenges. 

Madam Speaker, I just want to emphasise one issue to the minister. When we were handling this matter, we received many messages from Ugandans who need this kind of assistance. In terms of the phased approach the minister has given to the House, I pray that the minister prioritises people who are sick. 

There is a category of Ugandans who happen to be sick. In many of these countries where Ugandans are working, especially in the Middle East, Ugandans are not catered for by the respective health insurance schemes in those countries. Even before COVID-19 occurred, whenever a Ugandan fell sick while in those countries, they would be referred back to their country for treatment.

Madam Speaker, when the COVID-19 pandemic occurred, the situation worsened because many Ugandans who have some illnesses could not access the services of the health systems in those countries. I would like to give you the case of a one called Juliet Kagoya Hilda who died last Sunday. She had fibroids, which is a condition that cannot kill somebody – (Interjection) – okay, let me restate it; it is a preventable death. 

We should have saved her life had the minister and his team organised for the evacuation of these Ugandans in time. She died last Sunday because there was no way for her to come back to Uganda during this time. Such cases are many, and these are the cases we would like you to make a priority, not just for Ugandans in the Middle East alone but also in other countries – (Interruption) 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, colleague, for allowing me the opportunity to give information as you talk about Ugandans in the United Arab Emirates. 

Madam Speaker, as the minister rightly said, the biggest number of our people in UAE and Qatar received information that they were going to be picked on the 6th. They got the communication from the UAE. Unfortunately, I think they again received communication this morning that they cannot be picked on the 6th, yet some of them had arranged everything and even left most of the rooms they were staying in. They were on the streets waiting to be picked on the 6th but now they are not going to be picked on that date. We do not know what will happen.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the minister did not talk about Mr Eddy Kenzo, yet we expected him to say something about that musician. Possibly, when he comes to respond, he will.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, we just want to thank you for giving us the opportunity and the minister for bringing this much needed and urgent report to the House. We only pray that you expedite the process so as to save lives. All Ugandans have been waiting for this statement; I am sure they are ready to return to Uganda. We thank the Government for this gesture.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have been receiving letters from Ugandans in Mauritius and I told them to wait for Tuesday, but I do not see them featuring anywhere. I do not know which of our missions takes charge of Mauritius. 

MR KUTESA: Madam Speaker, as I mentioned, we are working, on the African continent, with the United Nations’ flights. We would like to coordinate those ones together with the ones in South Africa, and there are even two people in Madagascar. Therefore, we are trying to bring them as a cluster from that region. 

I have seen your letters, Madam Speaker. You have been writing to me. However, let me say this just for the record; nobody is keener to return these Ugandans than we are. We are all concerned. However, it is important that we prepare ourselves well. 

Where they first come to in Entebbe, you will find – I thank God that yesterday, His Excellency the President postponed the return of students to school because some of the quarantine areas that we are thinking of are schools. If the children had returned, it would have complicated our exercise and further delayed it. 

It is important that we have reception centres where these people are going to be quarantined. Everybody is going to be quarantined; it is very important that we do that. We are keen to bring them back as quickly as possible but we cannot make it faster than the facilities to receive them can accommodate.

Mr Eddy Kenzo will be part of the people who are coming from West Africa. He is stuck in Ivory Coast. I am aware of his situation. Actually, he may not be as desperate as those you are talking about in the Middle East. However, we are trying to bring them back. We are thinking that we could make Abuja the hub for West Africa and we airlift them together – (Interjection) - It is impossible to pick each from every country; it is a logistical nightmare. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to thank you and the Government for responding to the demands of the population. Keep us updated. I do not know when you can come back next – in a fortnight. 

3.51
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs, I would like to thank my colleague on the other side. 

However, I would like to bring to the attention of this country that the situation is not as rosy as reflected in the minister’s presentation. Ugandans are stranded all over the world and I think it would be unfair for the Minister of Foreign Affairs to focus or narrow this to those in Arab countries. We are fully aware that we have fellow citizens stranded in Kinshasa, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and even South Sudan here. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it has come to your attention that we have Ugandans that are stranded in a place called Elegu. It is branded and marked “no man’s land” and they are stuck there.

When it comes to quarantine, there is a fundamental question as to whether these people will be quarantined in Uganda or in South Sudan. What will be the fate in terms of welfare for our fellow citizens in that place? 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has not done much in as far as giving citizens access to Consular and Mission information. I think it would be better for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to serve Ugandans a comprehensive list of all of our Missions and Consulates so that families can try to reach these Missions and Consulates oversees to find a way of trying to help and reach their dear ones. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to help the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Many Ugandans living abroad do not want to be associated with the Uganda Missions there. Yes; tell your constituents that it is important for them to register but they hide. When there is a problem, you have to look for them.

3.54
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, as we speak, a member of staff in the ICT Department of this Parliament was caught up. She had gone for training in Nairobi.

THE SPEAKER: Or Ghana.

MR OBOTH: The honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs – With your permission, can I remove the bedsheet?

THE SPEAKER: You have been using it during the morning.

MR OBOTH: Yes, I want to look sides to – (Laughter) Madam Speaker, can the Minister of Foreign Affairs clarify? There was an advert in Tororo about the Ugandans who are stuck in Kenya. I think it was issued by the Ugandan High Commissioner in Nairobi.

Well, now people are calling; they have gone to the High Commission offices but they have not gotten any help. They are now calling us, members of Parliament and this is the only opportunity for us to speak on their behalf. People who are stranded there would simply need a bus. There are blame games - including a member of staff here.

Honourable minister, you put the announcement through your Commissioner in Tororo. Why have you refused to repatriate those people because the announcement ran in Tororo saying, all those who are stranded with relatives in Kenya should let us know. I am sure the Member of Parliament from Tororo County South knows for sure. I can take additional information from him - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Very briefly, border man.

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information that I would like to give hon. Oboth is that it is true that there are very many Ugandans who are stranded in Kenya and who would have loved to move by bus and come back home. However, because the advert that run has not helped them, many have resorted to walk on foot and many have walked and reached the border. Those are the people I have been complaining about time and again; who are using the porous borders to cross back home. That is the information that I wanted to give you.

MR OBOTH: Thank you very much for that report. Those are the new cases we are receiving. When they are from Kenya, we call them Kenyans yet they are actually Ugandans. Something needs to be done. I think it is not only Tororo but the whole country. Honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs, clarify.

3.58
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs. I think he has given us a very comprehensive report. I have looked at the table attached with the list, country per country and the regions. I think the most important thing is for us to encourage people to let us know, which place - Like in West Africa, I know it is Abuja that handles those in other countries like Ivory Coast. Sierra Leone can connect to the central point. I think that is very important for them to know.

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Appointments approved the Deputy Governor, Dr Atingi Ego, who is in Washington, DC. May we know what arrangements there are to deliver him to Uganda to take up the position that Parliament approved? I know it is a very important thing. Now that we are in this economic situation, we need a substantive Deputy Governor to handle issues regarding monies.

I have tried to look at that list and last time, the King of Acholi, Rwot Acana was also mentioned here that he was stranded in London. When I look at the list of those in the UK, I do not see his name. I think it is very important for the Kingdom of Acholi to have their King with them. 

The other issue – (Interjections) – Please, can I conclude with what I have and then I can give you an opportunity, if the Speaker allows? The other one is the proprietor of Forest Mall. Mr Isiagi called me yesterday that he is also stuck in Washington or Boston. I think these are some of the people you need to get to. 

Dr Okuku - you know the role he plays in the Uganda Cancer Institute – is stuck in Somalia. I think we need him because there are a number of patients he has been handling. I have one of the patients who was under his care; we are now stranded.

Finally, Madam Speaker, there is also a staff of Parliament stranded in Ghana -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the list is here. The staff member we mentioned is in Ghana. Please, why don’t we simply encourage the minister to move quickly so that our people come?

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to give my honourable colleague information, in relation to what he has said. The honourable minister has talked about Ugandans who are supposed to be repatriated from India and he also mentioned Indians of Ugandan origin, who are supposed to be repatriated.

Madam Speaker, don’t you think that there is a likelihood of smuggling some Indians into the country under the guise that the minister informed Parliament about this?

Lastly, the minister talked about private students and he said that the onus is on their parents to think about them – (Interjections) – No; do not misinterpret. My concern is, why are they only thinking about Government-sponsored students? Why shouldn’t they think about all the students? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have listened.

MR KUTESA: Can I make one promise, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Just make a promise, honourable minister.

MR KUTESA: I would like to say that I will be returning to this House in a fortnight to give you an update. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister. There is some hope now. Next item.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE EFFECTS OF FLOODS ON UGANDA’S ROADS NETWORK

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Works and Transport here? He is not here.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON BRIDGING THE DEMAND SUPPLY GAP THROUGH ACCELERATED RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROJECT (BDSGAREP)

THE SPEAKER: Before you go there, the Prime Minister has requested to make two changes for the Jinja-Kampala Express Highway. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Chair of the Committee on National Economy –

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $229.47 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) AND €90 MILLION (EQUIVALENT TO $105 MILLION) FROM AGENCE FRANCAISE DE DEVELOPMENT (AFD) TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF KAMPALA-JINJA EXPRESS HIGHWAY PROJECT

4.04
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Even before presenting the report –

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Allow the chairperson to present the report. 

MS BBUMBA: Even before presenting the report, it has passed already. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $229.47 million from the African Development Bank and €90 million from the Agence Francaise de Development (AFD) to finance the construction of Kampala-Jinja Expressway Project.

Madam Speaker, a request was presented to this House, and it was committed to our committee on 11 March 2020. We followed the normal procedures –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are many meetings going on while the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy is on the podium. 

MS BBUMBA: We followed the normal procedure of analysing the loan. We had meetings, we looked at the documents and we also had field visits to some of the sites of this road.  

Madam Speaker, by way of background, we all know that the Jinja Expressway is our umbilical cord to the rest of the world. It is the main route for our exports and imports. In 2011, the Government of Uganda identified the Kampala-Jinja Expressway project among others as the key strategic project to leverage with Public Private Partnership. The project addresses chronic urban congestion facilities moving between the two largest economic centres in Uganda. 

The road-user experience is generally unsatisfactory as a result of high vehicle operating costs and high accidents and mortality.  This road has got the highest mortality rate in the country. 

The proposed Kampala-Jinja Expressway aims to address the above issues from a sustainable stand point. 

Madam Speaker, this project is well aligned with the Planning Framework, the Uganda Vision 2020, the Road Master Plan and the National Development Plan. In addition, the project anchors on the 15-year National Transport Master Plan. It is also aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals. 

When analysing loans, we normally look at the performance of the ministry on other loans. The performance of the Ministry of Works and Transport has not been good because of slow absorption of borrowed funds. This is mainly due to lack of counterpart funds to match the borrowed funds.

Project Objectives, Impacts, Outcomes and Outputs
This paper was uploaded on your iPads, and the project objectives and impacts are covered under Paragraph 7. The outcomes and the expected project outputs are also covered under the same paragraph.

The Kampala-Jinja Expressway Project is a Public Private Partnership consisting of 95 kilometres with limited access tolled expressway between Kampala city and Jinja city, and it passes through four districts: Kampala, Wakiso, Mukono and Buikwe.

Project Components
The project has five components, which are infrastructure development, project management, audit, corridor development plan and livelihood restoration programme. Those are the five components that make up the project.

The Project Cost 
The total estimated cost for the project, net of taxes and customs including financial contingency is at $1,547.38 million. Madam Speaker, the details of that are well covered under Paragraph 9.2.

The Financing Arrangement 
The project financing structure is presented in Table 4. 

The Loan Terms, Economic Financial Returns and Budgetary Implications
The ADB and AFD will provide $229.46 million and €90 million respectively to finance the construction of the project on a Design, Build, Finance, Operate, Maintain and Transfer basis. 

The project structure, under the terms, is indicated in Table 5.

The Loan terms are as follows:
The $229.46 million has a maturity period of 25 years with a repayment period of 17 years with a grace period of eight years with front-end fees of 0.5 per cent of the loan, and a commitment fee of 0.5 per cent on undisbursed amounts. 

The loan from the Agence Francaise de Development of €90 million has a maturity of 20 years with a repayment period of 17 years after a grace period of eight years. The interest is tentative 1.5 per cent Euribor for six months. Right now, the Euribor is at -0.418. So, for purpose of coefficient, it is considered to be zero. The commitment fee is 0.5 per cent. 

Loan Conditions
The loans have got the following conditions:
    1. Availing certified true copies of the approval of the loans by Parliament;
    2. Submission to the bank of the Attorney-General's legal Opinion; and
    3. Letter to the bank authorising persons to sign withdrawal applications together with specimen signatures.

Madam Speaker, the loans are concessionary. 

Budgetary Implications
The project is part of the approved Public Investment Plan, and it is also included in the Financial Year 2020/2021 draft estimates for Uganda. 

Economic Return
The Economic Rate of Return is estimated at 12 percent, which is quite good for road projects. 

Project Implementation Arrangement
On the implementation arrangement, UNRA is the executing agency for the project. 

For Kampala-Jinja Expressway, the Government of Uganda, through UNRA, will enter a concessional agreement for a Special Purpose Vehicle of over 30-year period, and UNRA, as the primary contractual counterparty, will be responsible for monitoring performance of the project. The PPP Committee, supported by technical the team will be working under UNRA. 

Madam Speaker, the current debt situation is at 37 per cent of GDP and despite the increase in sovereign debt, at that rate the loan is still sustainable. The loan got a very good score in complying with parliamentary assessment guidelines of 53 per cent. 

Observations and Recommendations
The project compliance to PPP related approvals; the committee recommends that Government should ensure that all measures are undertaken to ensure that this project complies with all the requirements of the PPP Act, 2015 to enable it deliver with successful project and will provide a model of Government of Uganda institutional contemplating PPPs. 

Capacity constraints of UNRA
Government recommends that the capacity of UNRA should be strengthened to manage PPPs since this is going to be the pilot PPP for them to manage.

On counterpart funding to fully implement the resettlement action plan; the committee recommends that the funds for land acquisition should be ring-fenced to enable completion of the compensation payments prior to commencement of construction works. In addition, Government should expedite putting up central utility corridors to avoid multiple compensations whenever public infrastructure projects are being constructed. I am happy that Madam Speaker is here; we have made very many recommendations regarding this whenever we present infrastructure projects and we will be happy to see Government coming up with a policy on this. 

Cost and time overrun
The committee recommends that UNRA should ensure that the cost and time overrun risks due to this PPP project are adequately mitigated. Usually, infrastructure projects suffer cost overruns, which make them very expensive and cause delay in mitigation. 

The committee strongly recommends that Government agencies should desist from making commitments on behalf of Government before seeking approval from Parliament. We have been rushed on a number of times when appraising infrastructure projects because commitments have been made in advance before getting parliamentary approval. 

On the local content; the committee recommends that Government should further assist the local contractors to enhance their capacity, especially in acquisition of heavy duty vehicles and road construction equipment at affordable rates to enable the effective and efficient participation of the local construction industry in the PPP project. 

Madam Speaker, we were informed recently that under the private window of the Islamic Development Bank, such facilities on support of Government can be accessed by the private sector. 

The committee further recommends that the implementation of an appropriate monitoring strategy for the project will be important to ensure that existing management measures are effective to detect and analyse environmental and social trends, to ensure relevant environmental legislation and to be a measure on performance of environmental and social management measures, and to provide early warning of potential impacts and determine the extent of anticipated impacts. 

Madam Speaker, before I conclude, I would like to lay the following documents on the Table: 
    • A copy of the report which I have read.
    • A letter from the President approving the project.
    • A letter from the President guiding on the sources of funds for the project.
    • A parliamentary Government brief which was submitted to Parliament.
    • Clearance of financial implication of the project.
    • Consistence with the planning frameworks.
    • Copies of minutes of the meetings which we held.
    • A loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the African Development Bank (ADB) and the project appraisal report of the Kampala-Jinja Expressway project; 
    • The Ministry of Works and Transport tolling policy; and
    • Performance of externally financed projects of UNRA. 
I beg to lay these documents on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank members of the Committee on National Economy and the officials who worked very hard to analyse this project. This is the first PPP we have examined so far and because of their good input, it has come in well. 

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow $229.47 million from the ADB and $90 million from the French Development Bank to finance the construction of Kampala-Jinja Expressway project be approved subject to the legislations herein.
 
Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members of the Committee on National Economy. 

4.19
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the committee for the report. Mine is simple; given that this is the first PPP project and yet it is a loan, I implore the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Privatization Unit to make sure that no delays are caused in the process of handing over this land for this project. 

With PPPs perpetually - once you make delays, the cost overruns will come in and it will become impossible for us to finish the project because of cost overruns. 

Madam Speaker, the people on the way where the Kampala-Jinja Expressway is going to pass must be compensated and land given to the project implementers in time so that we do not cause cost overruns on this project. Otherwise, I recommend that we pass this loan even without much debate. 

4.21
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee members for this report. I would like to implore members to recognise the fact that this is an already ongoing project and this road is not only good for international trade but even for our local trade; for, good road access will boost our domestic and international trade. 

Madam Speaker, this loan will help to bring to completion of the already ongoing project. This is one of the major routes where our bulky exports and imports either exit or enter the country. Therefore, it is very important that we pass this loan so that we can improve the access of our goods both in and out of the country. 

However, Madam Speaker, I would like to implore the Ministry of Works and Transport to take into consideration and fast-track the rehabilitation of the railway line from Kasese to Pakwach through Tororo and Gulu. That will help in decongesting our roads. 

The fact that some of these goods end up in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), South Sudan and the Czech Republic of Africa, we do not need to bring them all the way to Kampala. Some could actually end up in Tororo via Gulu and Pakwach. Therefore, I would like to implore Government to fast-track the rehabilitation of the railway lines. 

It is also important to note that most of these goods enter the country as merely transit goods and end up in South Sudan and the DRC. Therefore, it is my humble appeal to Government that we do not only look at the Jinja-Kampala Expressway. As we prepare to rehabilitate the railway line, we are still going to use the roads. Most of these goods go through the Karuma-Pakwach Road. 

If you happen to travel on this road one of these days, you will realise that it is really in an appalling situation. As we look for funds for the Jinja-Kampala Express Highway, we need to bear in mind other roads that help in boosting our economy. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do we really have to take a lot of time on this loan?  

4.24
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the very good report presented. The report has brought out the terms of the loan above the necessities of this road.
Much as it is called Jinja–Kampala Express Highway, this road is an international gateway to Uganda for trade, investment and other purposes. I, therefore, would like to implore members to fully support Government since this is one of the loans coming with very good terms.  

Having said that, I have some concerns that I would like to ask Government to address. This is one road, whose route has been changed several times. People have been inspected and some are not sure whether they are going to be within the course of that road. Therefore, their hands have been left redundant. We need to deal with it to get away with those uncertainties.  

We have had impediments with many of these projects before, where loans are procured before negotiations with the land owners are sorted. We had this with the Katosi–Nyenga Road. The road was delayed because some of the land owners were still resisting. Therefore, we need to deal with that in order to avoid such problems coming through with this much more desired road that we needed yesterday. I would like to implore you to support this loan to let this project take off.
 
4.26
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the quick work done. However, there has to be some kind of clarity as to what they mean by the word PPP. Are we going to pay for the road? Let us know. I know the poor people that use the roads need to simply use the facilities without any impediments. Therefore, is it a PPP that needs a tollgate for people to pay? 

Madam Speaker, counterpart funding has always been a big issue – (Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. The justification for the Jinja–Kampala Expressway has been discussed in this Parliament several times. Unless anybody in this House has got something new or there are some technical issues – considering the fact that we have so many urgent matters to dispose of today – I would like you to guide us. That is why I rose on a procedural issue. 

Therefore, is it really procedurally right for us to just talk about theories and PPP? I think it is high time we declared that this project should have been passed by this Parliament yesterday but we have brought it today. Why are we now wasting Parliament’s time? Madam Speaker, can you guide us appropriately? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are there objections to this loan? Okay, I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted. 

(Question put and greed to.)

Report adopted.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US $300 MILLION FOR BUDGET SUPPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO PROVIDE SUFFICIENT FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO THE HEALTH SECTOR AND TO MITIGATE NEGATIVE EFFECTS OF COVID-19 ON THE ECONOMY OF UGANDA AND SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS OF 361 MILLION, APPROXIMATELY US $491.5 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (IMF) TO BALANCE THE PAYMENTS AND BUDGET SUPPORT TO ADDRESS THE NEGATIVE EFFECTS OF COVID-19 IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

4.31
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am here on behalf of the Committee o National Economy to present a report of the committee on the proposal by Government to borrow $300 million for budget support for the Financial Year 2019/2020 from the International Development Bank of the World Bank to provide sufficient financial resources to the health sector and to mitigate negative effects of COVID-19 on the economy of Uganda, and to borrow Special Drawing Rights of 361 million approximately $491.5 million from the International Monetary Fund for balance of payments and budget support to address the negative effects of COVID-19 in the Financial Year 2019/2020.

Madam Speaker, before I proceed with the presentation of the report, allow me to lay the following documents on the Table:
i. A report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $300 million for Budget support for Financial Year 2019/2020 from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to provide sufficient financial resources to the health sector to mitigate negative effects of COVID-19 on the economy of Uganda and Special Drawing Rights 361 million, approximately US$ 491.5 million from the IMF for balance of payments and Budget support to address the negative effects of COVID-19 in the Financial Year 2019/2020.

ii. His Excellency the President’s approval of the project; a letter in that regard.
iii. A brief to Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow the money we have pointed out.
iv. Proposed allocation and utilisation of resources; the $300 million and $151.5 million for COVID-19 from the IMF to address COVID-19 effects, basically Budget support.
v. Clearance letter by the National Planning Authority.
vi. Financing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the International Development Association.
vii. Explanation on the financing agreement by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
viii. IMF Board approval.
ix. Uganda Development Corporation Investment priorities.
x. Uganda Development Bank intervention strategy to reshape the economy during the post COVID-19 pandemic in Uganda as at 5 May 2020.
xi. The Micro Finance Support Centre Limited request for capitalisation to promote employment among the economically active poor through increased affordable credit to small traders saving groups and small holder farmers affected by COVID-19.
xii. An over view of the performance of the economy presented to the Committee on National Economy by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
xiii. Minutes of meetings held to consider the proposal by Government to borrow the loans in question. 

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I will try to summarise. 

Methodology
The committee held meetings with:
i. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 
ii. The Ministry of Health; 
iii. The Bank of Uganda; 
iv. The Uganda Development Bank; 
v. The Uganda Development Corporation; 
vi. The Uganda Revenue Authority.

The committee also reviewed the following documents:
    • The minister’s brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow -

THE SPEAKER: The Members can read those.

MR BATEGEKA: Madam Speaker, I may not go through the background. We all know the adverse impact and the choice that Government faces now is to raise money and the preferred source is external borrowing compared to domestic borrowing, which would crowd out the private sector. That is why the Government approached the IMF and other external borrowers for this loan.

The objectives of the borrowing 
In view of the need to provide sufficient financial resources to the health sector to support its crisis response efforts to COVID-19, bridging the gap in the country's balance of payments position to maintain foreign exchange stability and mitigate other negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy, there is need for acquiring more financing to address the effects of COVID-l9 on the economy of Uganda. 

The specific objectives of these borrowings are the following:
    • To address urgent Balance of Payments (BOP) of the country; 
    • To address the Government fiscal needs precipitated by the COVID-l9 pandemic;  
    • To provide a stimulus package to support severely affected businesses through provision of affordable credit through the state-owned Uganda Development Bank; 
    • To provide additional financing to the Health sector; and 
- To provide additional financing to Government social protection measures and addressing effects of natural disasters.

The proposed borrowing will substitute for domestic borrowing, which would have continued to crowd out the private sector in accessing affordable credit in the domestic debt market due to the need to sustain businesses during the challenging COVID-19/post COVID-19 environment.

Financing Arrangements, Allocation and Utilisation Of Resources
Budget support of US$ 300 million from IDA loan. The intention is support provision of sufficient financial resources to the health sector and mitigate other negative effects on the economy due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

A portion from the IMF loan will go to Bank of Uganda; US$ 340 million to support Bank of Uganda to bridge the gap in the Balance of Payments position though maintaining sufficient levels of foreign exchange reserves and to ensure that the shilling is stable.

Budget support, part of the IMF loan – US$ 31.5 million to finance Government response plan to the COVID-19 pandemic, including acquiring necessary health supplies (diagnostic kits, masks, personal protective equipment) and supporting the vulnerable population. These funds will also bridge the revenue shortfalls due to the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy.

Further Budget support being part of the IMF loan – US$ 120 million to support UDB and the Private Sector that has been affected by the adverse effects of COVID-19 by boosting the lending capacity of Uganda Development Bank. 

These funds will be used to support manufacturers and other producers who are engaged in import substitution and export promotion activities in Uganda. The details are contained in Annex 1. The figures are there; the key support to manufacturing and SMEs, capitalisation of UDB and UDC, support to micro finance support centres and SACCOs, support to agricultural productivity.

Secondly, social protection and natural disasters, SAGE, public infrastructure destroyed by natural disasters. 

Thirdly, Government commitments plus managing arrears and released Budget balance that could lead to arrears, including capital expenditure and recurrent expenditure, released supplementary and new pressures, domestic arrears, including coffee seedlings, support to innovators engaged in COVID-19 interventions, managing raising water levels of lakes and rivers.

Fourthly, the health sector and COVID related. Additional funding for the health sectors, Uganda Prisons additional financing. 

The total Budget support from the two sources totals to US$ 451 million and US$ 340 million to Bank of Uganda for Balance of Payments support, which adds up to US$ 791.5 million.

Terms and conditions of the loan
The IDA loan - the International Development …

Terms and conditions of the loan
The International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group will provide financing to enable Government of Uganda in managing the fiscal needs precipitated by the COVID-19 pandemic under the following terms: Loan amount US$ 300 million; maturity period 38 years; grace period six years; service charge 0.75 per cent per annum; commitment fee 0.7 per cent per annum. 

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) will provide emergency financing under its Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) to finance the urgent balance of payments to bolster the revenue reserve buffers of Bank of Uganda and other fiscal needs, which is basically budget support of Government precipitated by the COVID-l9 pandemic under the following terms:

Loan amount special drawing rights 361 million equivalent to US$ 491.5 million; maturity period, 10 years; grace period five and a half years; interest rate 0 per cent; this is an interest free loan from the IMF to address the current situation the country is facing. In the interest of time, permit me to go to the loan and current debt situation of the country.

The loans and current debt situation of the country 
By end of December 2019, total public debt stood at Shs 49,446.57 billion estimated as a share of GDP to stand at 36.3 per cent. With the approval of the two loans, totalling to US$ 791.5 million (Shs 3,013 billion), the public debt will increase to Shs 54,881 billion taking into consideration the earlier Budget support loans approved this year. 

The proposed borrowing of US$ 791.5 million alone, will increase the debt to GDP ratio by slightly more than 2 per cent (2.2 per cent) increasing the nominal share of the debt to GDP to 40.3 per cent, but public debt will remain within the sustainable levels as it can be seen in that table.

Committee observations and recommendations:
The committee noted the need to ensure that COVID-19 related resources are used in a transparent and accountable manner.
The committee recommends that Government of Uganda should ensure that COVID-19 related resources are used in a transparent and accountable manner by undertaking targeted measures that involve establishing a separate reporting mechanism for COVID-19 related expenditures.

On the purpose of borrowing, which I have already outlined, the committee recommends the following;
i. Government should urgently expedite Uganda’s export strategy to boost exports in the short to medium term to improve the balance of payment position. This improvement will require less financing from reserves that could be drawn to finance the balance of payment deficit.
ii. In order to improve productivity in the economy, Government should target the food industry to boost export revenues, because this is an area where Uganda has got a comparative advantage in the East African region.
iii. Bank of Uganda foreign exchange interventions should be limited to smoothen out excessive volatility. The bank should be judicious in determining when conditions are disorderly versus allowing the floating exchange rate to absorb shocks in order to maintain investor confidence. Once FDI confidence is restored, the bank should rebuild its foreign reserves to a level deemed adequate at least not falling below 3.5 months of imports.
iv. In order to support the wider goals of financial sector stability, the support to Bank of Uganda should focus not only on macroeconomic stability but also addressing the liquidity constraints of commercial banks, in particular the local commercial banks. This will generate more impact and effectiveness for the economy of Uganda.
v. More investment for economic stimuli is recommended. With US$ 340 million prioritised for Bank of Uganda in bridging the gap in balance of payments position for macroeconomic stabilisation and only US$ 120 million as budget support to the private sector, more balance is required between economic stabilisation and economic stimuli given the medium to long term effects, multiplier effects and implications on debt sustainability.

On performance of the economy and economic outlook, the committee recommended that there is need to improve the external position of the country. The committee recommends that Government should embark on increasing productivity in productive sectors, especially in the agriculture sector in the short to medium term; unlock the constraints surrounding the oil production phase to boost export receipts and attract foreign direct investments.

Regarding additional measures to support the economy, the committee recommends the following:
i. Government should strengthen social protection mechanisms through provision of targeted cash transfers and cash for work, and distribution of food to vulnerable households together with a stimulus package to support severely affected businesses.

ii. Government should further increase efficiency in social protection interventions like the distribution of relief food and items. There is need to study the efficiency of food rations versus cash transfers, Government should further take advantage of this financing to expand the existing social protection programmes like Social Assistance Grant for the Elderly (SAGE) and increase youth participation in public works.

iii. Government should provide a stimulus package to support the private sector. This should include measures to accelerate repayment of government arrears to suppliers, temporary deferral of tax payments, and extension of tax exemptions on medical equipment, among others.

With regard to sound fiscal management to ensure fiscal sustainability, the committee recommended the following:
    i. Government should opt for sustainable options to increase foreign inflows through aggressive export promotion, attract foreign direct investment, especially in the oil industry by concluding oil production procedures, among others. This will caution the shilling against further depreciation amidst external environment challenges, rather than opting for temporary measures that cannot be sustained, given their costs and impacts.

    ii. In the event that the COVID-19 pandemic persists, Government should explore seeking debt relief under the G-20 COVID-19 Debt Relief Initiative and further engage other bilateral creditors for that purpose.

    iii. Government should further strengthen public investment management to bring the fiscal deficit and public debt to a downward trajectory once the crisis abates and also revert back to plans of strengthening the budgetary process.

With regard to financial sector liberalisation, the committee recommends that Government should use an appropriate policy mix to attract FDI. In the medium term, Government should review its policy stance in view of controlling capital outflows.

Concerning expenditure contracts in foreign currency, you know, we have a liberalised capital account, the committee recommends that Government agencies should contract service providers in the currency approved in the National Budget, irrespective of the level of imports that will be undertaken, to hedge against existing exchange rate risks.

Concerning dependency of the health sector on external funding, the committee recommends that: 
    i. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Health should ensure that budget support to the health sector is leveraged to address both the existing COVID-19 emergencies and the already existing priorities in line with the NDP111 and Health Sector Strategic Plans. Given the magnitude of the financing beyond COVID-19 emergencies, the financing should be directed towards the NDPIII comprehensive programme for addressing the minimum health care requirements, especially starting with national and all regional referral hospitals.

    ii. The Ministry of Health should ensure that the current requirements as a result of the sector’s increased capacity to respond to the pandemic that may not be covered under this financing, as budgeted for in subsequent sector budgets to ensure sustainable operation of pandemic-related health facilities. 

Government should follow up on its promise to prioritise the health sector, starting Financial Year 2020/2021 with more investment in the health sector infrastructural development to avoid last-minute panic where external resources may not be forthcoming. 

Government should also expedite passing the law on health insurance.

Regarding boosting the lending capacity of Uganda Development Bank, the committee recommends that:

Government should further strengthen the bank’s governance to strengthen its delivery of the envisaged development impact on the economy.

Adherence to sound and effective corporate practices is central to the effective, transparent and seamless operations of the bank and impacts the bank’s ability to attract the right human capital, investment partners, and stakeholders and enhance shareholder value. 

Government should further explore opportunities for getting lines of credit for UDB based on increased equity for the bank to play its role effectively as Government’s development finance institution financing long-term projects, especially in agriculture and industry.

With regard to allocation and utilisation of resources, the committee recommends that:

The allocation to the Microfinance Support Centre be increased by Shs 20 billion, given its role in boosting the economic activities of the vulnerable active poor. 

In addition, the allocation for prisoners be increased by Shs O.22 billion to enable Uganda Prisons Service meet the additional expenses associated with the increased number of prisoners resulting from the COVID-19 measures put in place by the Government, thus causing the capacity of prisons to operate above 300 per cent.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, in the short run, in the event that the economy is unable to register significant rise in foreign inflows, Government should adjust its fiscal policy stance and opt to cut spending in less critical areas, without undermining growth objectives. 

Subject to the above recommendations, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends approval for Government to borrow up $300 million for budget support for Financial Year 2019/2020 from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to provide sufficient financial resources to the health sector and to mitigate negative effects of COVID-19 on the economy of Uganda, and; Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 361 million ($491.5 million) from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for balance of payments and budget support to address the negative effects of COVID-19 in the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

I beg to report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Have you laid your minutes already?  (Interjection) Okay. Honourable members, you have heard the report. Let us have one minute each.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I have clearly listened to the submission by the committee chairperson. From the start, I must say, I have no objection to the loan because the loan to fund COVID-19 stimulus is long overdue. However, we have a problem with the schedule that the chairperson is attempting to include in the process of approving the loan, even to the extent of suggesting reallocation of figures. That is purely on the appropriation side. 

What we are doing under the loan is to establish conditions for approval of the loan. When we come to the supply side of the application of the loan, it is purely a job that should have been done by the Budget committee, with a clear scrutiny of that schedule. 

As we proceed, I have absolutely no objection to the total sum being borrowed for COVID-19 budget support but I would like us to proceed in such a way that we look smart, not ugly. We should delete the section that approves the schedule as attached because that is appropriation. To go even to the extent of reallocating figures, saying, “this amount should be here”, it would not be appropriate. 

If Government wants to do so, then a schedule of the supplementary should be properly laid and it should be properly scrutinised. That is our procedural point of view, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you taking issue with Table 5?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, I am taking issue with Table 5. I have absolutely no objection to the loan application, which should be generally for budget support. I have an issue with the schedule five because as it is, it hinges on the powers to appropriate, which we cannot do so at this stage.

MR BATEGEKA: Madam Speaker, as you know, there is an ongoing crisis. We raised this issue with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we discussed it, agreed on it and we have a signed communication from the ministry. With your permission, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could supplement what I am saying.

THE SPEAKER: I think the complaint of the Members is that you are now taking over the work of the Budget committee. Did they have the opportunity to study this proposal?

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, what the chairperson of the committee has done is deliberate. First of all, to say that he sat down with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and agreed is already a betrayal of your role as a Member of Parliament.  

Secondly, we would expect the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to table the schedule but what we are doing right now is to approve the loan. I have absolutely no problem with the loan because we labored during the budget process to ask the minister to ensure that some funding is put in Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) and UDB in order to stimulate production. Therefore, we have no problem as far as the loan is concerned. 

However, the committee is overstepping its boundary by now attempting to smuggle the laying of the schedule - which must be done by the minister - in order to hoodwink us to approve the schedule and avoid going to the Budget committee. We cannot allow this, Madam Speaker. Some people are attempting to usurp the powers of this institution to appropriate and it cannot be done in broad daylight. Let it be done, maybe, at night when we are not seeing. (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to add to what my colleagues have said and also to thank you. You have been a friendly force to the Executive. We should do things smartly because to me, passing a loan does not take long. Allowing a committee to scrutinise it does not take long; even the clerk should have been questioned. How do you write such a report to make an appropriation in a loans committee? 

What you are trying to do is deficit financing to the economy and nobody is against it. There are two ways we can support such an economy in an emergency, by either doing deficit financing or borrowing internally and externally.

The Committee on National Economy has done its part. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come and lay the schedule to the House to be committed to the Committee on Budget. It takes about three minutes, then we start following the correct procedure rather than usurping the powers of other committees; it is as simple as that. You do not need much.

Madam Speaker, with your guidance, I think the practice of this House on how we deal with the work should be standard. It should not be overrun. Otherwise, the precedent we are creating will not be good for us. Do not do things in a haphazard manner and it becomes clumsy, when you have a friendly force. Nobody is against that deficit financing but we should follow the procedure laid down in our rules. I beg to submit.

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, we have passed budget support loans here before; this is not the first time. We had budget support loan number one up to 9 from the same IDA Bank. The way we have been passing these loans - you cannot pass a loan without a Schedule because that is the only way you can audit a loan.

I do not think the World Bank would accept to put money in a pool without knowing what exactly that money is going to do. We have approved money here for the capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank; that is the benchmark. We have approved money to recapitalise Uganda Development Corporation; that is another benchmark.

There is no way we can approve a loan without a schedule. If you want further scrutiny, that is the work of the Committee on Budget when considering supplementaries. They will do it later but let us pass the motion to approve this loan. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like to know whether in all the other loans, we have actually included a schedule of this nature. That is what I want to know. Name those which we have.

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, one of the loans that we passed here, that even caused controversy, was for the National Medical Stores (NMS). You remember when we passed money for that agency to buy Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) and it was mentioned here.

That is why NMS came back with a petition saying that money had been awarded but not given to them. The explanation then was that this money was in a pool to do so many other things and that the Ministry of Finance would be allowed to vary wherever they found a gap. Madam Speaker, that is for your information.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, the admission by the chairperson implies that the schedule had been smuggled into this report. We know very well that appropriation cannot be done by the Committee on National Economy yet what is indicated in the report is appropriation. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we agree to pass the loan with an amendment by removing the Schedule?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think let us do first things first. Let us not mix up the things. What we need to do is to pass the loan. The issue of appropriation should be handled separately. However, for purposes of this sitting – because this is a Committee of National Economy – they bring us the report on the loans for approval. Let us approve the loan; the issue of appropriation can be handled later. Let us separate these things.

THE SPEAKER: So, what do we do with the submissions of the chairperson on the appropriation because they are there on the Hansard? 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we need to approve the report of the committee. It is important that the committee probably withdraws and tidies up the report, so that we know that we are approving a report from the committee.

Approving it as it is, is like approving both the report of the committee and the schedule. What we now need to do is to ask the committee to separate the documents so that they get to know what you are laying. The committee will get to know whether they are laying a report, which Parliament has to approve and leave the Schedule to the Minister of Finance to lay. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we have always approved loans here with categories like capacity building, vehicles and construction. My understanding is that what is listed there is the proposal under the loan. 

Otherwise, we cannot simply do a blanket approval because we have been told it is for budget support or in generalities. We should not do that; we should stop approving loans in generality. We must know what it is going to do. That is how I understood it, Madam Speaker. Otherwise, if it is a schedule for appropriation, that is a different matter.	

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Minister of Finance.

5.09
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, there are two things. One is that the lender insisted that they would like to know where this money is going to be applied. We thought it would be good procedure for us to come to the committee and say, “This is how the money will be spent.”

Secondly, there is a supplementary schedule where these things are going to come back; these things are going to come back. I would say that since – (Interjections) – yes. If the House thinks that we are asking them to appropriate by approving this list, then the chairperson of the committee can withdraw this table but we still have to come back for the supplementary.

THE SPEAKER: I hope you are not thinking that if we pass this, you are free. This is your document. Where is the chairperson of the committee? Let us hear from the chairperson of the committee.

5.10
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, a point which has to be made clear is that there is a distinction between project support and budget support. Project support is support, which is given to specific activities. However, in this case, we are talking about budget support, which is money intended to help the Government overcome its budget deficit. 

Therefore, I don’t agree with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when they say that these monies are intended for specific reasons because this is not project support; it is budget support.

I would like to agree with colleagues who are saying that the Committee on National Economy should separate the loan from issues of appropriation so that we pass the loan and then the Ministry of Finance comes back to the House to seek appropriation for the items, which they want to fund using this money.

THE SPEAKER: Let us first hear from the chairperson and then –

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, before the chairperson of the committee comes in to clarify this point, the loan, as it is stated in the objectives, is quite perfect. You are borrowing 1.1 trillion from the World Bank. That is perfect. However, you cannot go ahead to usurp the power of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to say, you are the one bringing a Schedule and after doing that, you appropriate instead of committing the Schedule to the committee. It cannot happen. 

What you need to do – Actually, I am questioning the clerk who wrote that report. He could have advised you, like hon. Syda Bbumba. The objectives of the loan were read, the terms were known by Parliament and they adopted the report. What is behind that report that you have is that you are saying, after adopting the report, please pass the Schedule at ago. We are saying, there are procedures of the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I ask the chairperson of the committee to withdraw Table 5? 

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: A procedural point that we are missing here is that although this is Budget support, it is tied to specific priority areas by the financer. It is under the International Development Association (IDA). It cannot just be open Budget support. It is tied to specific priorities, which I think are prioritised under the circumstances of COVID-19. These are the areas that they have given here. So, it is just doing double work. 

Of course, if the Committee on Budget –

THE SPEAKER: No, it cannot be double work. We will not appropriate this loan. We cannot appropriate through this loan. No, please. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence. We normally have deficit financing through either project financing loans or Budget support loans. Budget support loans are conditional loans; they come with some conditions. The earlier ones we passed included the company laws and others. 

Now that the Committee on National Economy has scrutinised the loan, what they have presented is no longer for them. It is now for the plenary and the committee is not superior to plenary. It is now the plenary to pass the loan.

A week from now, we are going to have the Budget approval. A loan approval is just a framework of deficit financing but the actual loans are also appropriated by the Committee on Budget through the appropriation process. Therefore, there is no way the Committee on National Economy can usurp the powers of the Committee on Budget.

Therefore, as a person who was in this committee for 10 years, and we had a big debate in the Eighth Parliament on the issue of whether we should go Budget support or remain with project financing, I request that we pass the loan and then the other committee will, at an appropriate time, do its work. The loan is going to be released to the pool and we are the ones who passed the Public Finance Management Act, which is a single treasury account, which is consolidated. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance that we pass the loan as it is. The other committees will play their roles at the right time. We are complementary; we do not have boundaries as committees.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I ask the chairperson of the committee to withdraw Table 5 so that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes separately on the supplementary. 

MR BATEGEKA: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the committee, I withdraw Table 5. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will come and seek permission on how to use the money. Thank you very much.

(Table 5 of the report withdrawn.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, with that amendment, I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report, adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Please Clerk, go to Item 7(1).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON WEEKLY UPDATES ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE NATIONAL TASK FORCE ON COVID-19

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, be mindful that we do not have too much time. Please summarise.

5.18
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, for ease of audibility, I seek your authority to let me put aside the –

THE SPEAKER: You can remove the facemask. 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I thank this august House for the good work that you have done and continue to do to support the struggle against the COVID-19 pandemic. 

I also would like to thank you for the oversight role you are playing for the Bills you have passed, for the motions moved and the many issues including those of national importance. This is the way to promote democratic building in our country.

Regarding COVID-19, we have observed, with appreciation, members of Parliament in different constituencies supporting different taskforces and creating awareness using the media to mobilise our people to fight against this pandemic. The representatives of Parliament on the national taskforce are making useful contributions during the discussions and making significant input and insight. Overall, we are making progress. 

However, you have noticed from the updates of the Ministry of Health that the number of positive coronavirus cases are rising. As of today, we have registered 489 cases with 72 recoveries. Amongst these are seven health workers. The infection of our frontline health workers is an unfortunate development, which we are investigating to establish what might have gone wrong or caused this and to put in place prompt remedies to prevent further infections.

Madam Speaker, the clear signal from the recent rise in positive cases is that we need to step up the known preventive measures: regular washing of hands with soap and avoiding touching our noses, mouths and eyes. In addition, we should avoid crowded places –(Interjection)- I am glad you do. And let us make sure that they are obvious to all Ugandans.

Since my last statement, a number of developments have taken place. As you heard yourself last night from the President, we are consciously easing the lockdown to enable business to resume some level of normalcy. For example, private vehicles are being allowed on the roads apart from the 40 border districts and a number of other measures.

In addition, standalone shops excluding those in arcades have been allowed to reopen effective 4 June 2020. We have also noticed that a number of people are walking in public places without wearing face masks. It should be noted – (Interjections) - the Prime Minister has the authority of the Speaker for a limited duration. It should be noted that wearing face masks should not be viewed as a punishment but as a measure that benefits and protects the individual and those around him or her.

Madam Speaker, the decision to only allow truck drivers who test negative to COVID-19 to come into the country is now being implemented. The number of positive drivers totalling over 300 have been turned back to their countries of origin at the Ugandan borders. This shows that the decision we took was the right one. Efforts are being undertaken to fast-track testing of truck drivers to reduce the congestion.

The issue of the impact of COVID-19 on the economy had already been talked about and you directed that the minister responsible for the economy makes a statement and then discuss it when we return. We are closely monitoring the situation in the border districts, where the lockdown measures have not been eased. We are observing with a view to taking appropriate actions.

As stated by His Excellency last night, relief food distribution, which has been a subject of this august House discussion to the people who have been affected adversely by the lockdown measures is going to continue. 

To date, more than 1.8 million Ugandans in Kampala, Wakiso and Mukono and in hospitals and orphanages, across the country have been served. This is 300,000 more people than what had been targeted to be served. The Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness will in due course give a detailed update to this House on how the exercise is going to be conducted.

Madam Speaker, the question of reopening schools was discussed again thoroughly last night and the honourable Minister for Education and Sports, will come with a statement on the matter.

I would like to make some specific responses as briefly as possible on issues that remained unanswered during our last presentation. The questions will start with yours, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Speaker raised the issue about non-availability of boat ambulances for the island districts.

The answer is that there is no boat ambulance that is operational now. However, the Ministry of Health has procured three boat ambulances to be deployed in the island districts. These boats are expected to arrive mid this month.

Hon. Santa Alum raised the issue of Oyam District getting an ambulance. Here, the Ministry of Health allocated an additional ambulance for Northern Uganda to serve Oyam District. It will be stationed at Lira Hospital and will be available on call as and when need arises. There are also two full time ambulances stationed at Elegu border post.

Hon. Okabe proposed that money raised through COVID-19 response fund should be used to strengthen the health care system instead of buying vehicles. The response priorities to COVID-19 also require some vehicles to transport responders and also to distribute logistics. That is why vehicles have been prioritised and with additional resources, the health care system will definitely be improved.

Hon. Abbot Ouma inquired about Government’s plan in terms of food for the areas that have been gazetted as quarantine centres and this is specifically on island areas. The Ministry of Health working with the Office of the Prime Minister, is supporting quarantine centres with food although there have been some logistical gaps which have now been addressed.

Hon. Latif Ssebaggala raised an issue on how Government will spend the money on masks. Government plans to spend Shs 35 billion for the procurement of masks.

Hon. Noeline Basemera raised a concern that some sub-counties in Kibale District lack Health Centre IIs and IIIs. She wondered why Government does not use part of the COVID-19 money to address such needs. The response is that the only construction prioritised under COVID-19, are the intensive care units at the regional hospitals and laboratories at points of entries. Health Centre IIIs are being handled through another funding programme but the concern is very much appreciated.

Hon. Ongalo Obote requested for special consideration for Kalaki District in allocation of ambulances. Kalaki District, like other districts, will be considered once the ambulances are available.

Hon. Atkins Katusabe inquired on how Bwera Hospital missed out on the vehicles that were distributed. The vehicles received were distributed to districts that had recorded COVID-19 cases; and, special consideration is also given to those with points of entry. In this case, Bwera will be considered the next round of allocations since it meets the criteria set. 

Hon. Bernard Atiku asked when cartridges required to test COVID-19 samples will be available so that all the drivers crossing into the Uganda border are tested and given results within an hour. The answer is that there is limited supply of cartridges due to overwhelming demand globally. However, the Ministry of Health has decentralised testing to labs close to the borders, including mobile laboratories. Results now take a much shorter time than before. 

In addition, gene expert machines have been provided to Mutukula and results are released every hour. Mobile PCR testing equipment has been deployed at Tororo Hospital to cater for Malaba and Adjumani Hospital to cater for Elegu. Results for 300 samples are released every four hours. 

Hon. Joy Ongom raised a concern on when Lira District will receive an ambulance to handle COVID-19-related cases. The answer is that Lira Regional Referral Hospital received an ambulance from among those that were donated recently. 

Hon. David Mutebi raised concern about the interventions taken to address the COVID-19 threats from truck drivers picking sugar from Lugazi Factory. Lugazi Sugar Factory and other similar factories have been identified as high risk; hence, the Ministry of Health has enhanced COVID-19 prevention and surveillance efforts. 

Under a few questions on security – I am about to conclude, Madam Speaker – hon. Macho asked why people who are being taken to quarantine centres in Tororo are carried on police pick-ups as if they are criminals. The response is that there are few ambulances. Emergency teams use Government pick-ups, including police vehicles, since these are the readily available means to transport suspected cases of COVID-19 to quarantine centres. Being transported by a police pick-up or truck does not make one a criminal. 

Hon. Maurice Kibalya wanted to know why the police officers involved in the COVID-19 operations have not been paid their allowances. I have been informed by the Minister of Internal Affairs that allowances to eligible officers have been paid. There were some delays due to some administrative issues but these have been sorted. In case of any future complaints, appropriate steps shall be taken by the responsible ministry to have expeditious resolution of such issues. 

Hon. Molly Lanyero raised a matter on the clan clashes in Lamwo due to land conflicts, where 250 homesteads were affected. Madam Speaker, arrests were made and files are with the Resident State Attorney. Deployments have been made and the Office of the Prime Minister, through the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, has dispatched both relief and non-relief items. 

Hon. Ashraf Olega raised the need to deploy more troops at the border from Koboko up to Elegu. Government has deployed more police and UPDF personnel at the border points to stop any illegal entry into the country. 

Hon. Johnson Muyanja sought for clarity on the guidelines for reopening schools – on whether we shall we have a dead year for all or not. Following his address on COVID-19 yesterday, His Excellency the President, guided that schools will remain closed as scientific studies are being done. Government will continue to pursue the long-distance learning methodology on TV, Radio and newspapers for the learners to learn during the lockdown. 

However, at an appropriate time, the Minister of Education and Sports will come with a comprehensive statement in the House on this matter. Many of the questions that had been raised on education have not been included in these responses because they are going to be covered by the Minister of Education and Sports’ response. 

Hon. Agnes Kunihira raised a concern on Government’s plan on salary payments for teachers in private schools. In a circular dated 18 May 2020, the Minister of Education and Sports wrote to all directors, proprietors and heads of education institutions to ensure that all teachers and workers in the education institutions, especially private-owned institutions, are paid during the lockdown period, in accordance with the Employment Act as per agreed upon employment contracts. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a short statement and also to answer some of the questions. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. I know we do not have too much time. Please, honourable members give me an opportunity. We have 20 minutes and I would like to give a chance to some Members who had indicated earlier in the week that they wanted to raise questions on COVID-19 to raise those issues now.  

5.39
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to address an issue that needs the attention of the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. Buliisa is one of the border districts and in your communication, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are aware that there are some guidelines that you are supposed to follow for COVID-19, such as social distancing and avoiding crowds. 

However, in the recent past, Buliisa District has experienced a very big challenge of floods, where we have three sub-counties plus two town councils affected; we are talking of more than 1,000 households being affected by the floods. 

In the event that these floods have affected these people, most of them have been residing in mosques and churches. It means there is nothing like social distancing being adhered to in this place. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to request you that you also take keen interest in Buliisa District, where all these people have been affected. We realise that many of our people have been displaced and we request your office to ensure that there is at least some kind of temporary shelter for these Ugandans that are being displaced. 

In the same spirit, many of these Ugandans who are being displaced by these floods do not have enough food relief for their families. Property has been lost and homes destroyed.

Even health wise, there is a danger of poor sanitation because most of the latrines have been submerged by water. So, as we look at how COVID-19 is affecting the people of Uganda today, we should also know that we are going to have a very serious danger of cholera in some places. Therefore, I would like to request your office to take care of the health of the people of Buliisa even as we fight COVID-19 in the country.

Honourable minister, I also would request that you take care of the livelihood of these people because at the moment, as we look at Covid and its effects, even the livelihood of the people of Buliisa has been greatly affected. I am, therefore, requesting you to take care of this and make sure that the people of Buliisa are also given a priority as other water bodies are being taken care of.

When you look at the water bodies that have been taken care of, you realize that Lake Albert has not been mentioned in all these reports yet many of the districts in the Albertine region are being affected by the outrage of the floods. I am, therefore, requesting you to come on board to ensure the people of Buliisa and other districts surrounding Lake Albert are taken care of in this regard. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am taking the Members who had indicated earlier in the week. Let me finish with them. It is almost curfew time but I am trying my best to give opportunity.

5.42
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by appreciating the Prime Minister for the continuous support he has given and for the good responses that we continue to receive. The people at Malaba Border Post have been having challenges but I want to thank you for the support that we are getting.

Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, I raised a concern and requested that border districts be facilitated over and above the facilitation for other districts. Our security is over stretched yet their facilitation is meagre. The task force is also over stretched yet their facilitation – and of course you are aware - is like for other inland districts that may not be having as many cases as the border districts do.

Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, what I wanted to raise last week was the serious concern of the jam that had been caused by the striking Kenyan truck drivers. But I also want to appreciate the support and the interstate relationship that led to us receiving a minister from Kenya who addressed the Kenyan truck drivers and the jam eased up. 

The problem at the boarder right now is, whereas you have assured us that the testing is moving very fast, this has to be investigated to ascertain whether the testing is actually fast or not. The border is still jammed up. As I speak, we have about 50 kilometers of traffic. Yesterday, I sent my small team from the border to go and investigate what was happening on the other side. They told me the jam is now 57 kilometers deep into Kenyan side and this is making Kenyans threaten to stop bringing cargo to Uganda because of what they imagine is a slow testing process on our side.

I also I found out through that investigation yesterday that there is disconnect between the ministries of health in Uganda and Kenya. On the Kenyan side, they are issuing different certificates. Every district is issuing a certificate that is not authentic enough to be accepted by our people when the truck drivers arrive at the border. We need to harmonise that by having uniform certificates such that if a certificate is issued in Nairobi or even in Bungoma, it should be honoured here.

Otherwise when the truck drivers arrive with their certificates, they are subjected to fresh assessment. This is all because the certificates are not uniform in nature and that is why the jam is too much.

5.46
MS JANE NABULINDO KWOBA (Independent, Woman Representative Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have two burning issues at the border. The health workers at the border are not trained. The Ministry of Health informed them some time back that they would come and train them but up now they are not trained. They are just using their common knowledge to handle COVID-19 cases.

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you forgot to talk about Busia Produce Market. The traders are requesting Government to buy off their cereals because they are rotting or else allow them open the market and sell them because the new harvest is almost in July and they have loans to pay. Those are the concerns we have in Busia. Thank you so much.

5.47
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my concern is in regard to the report you just made now. You said there are two ambulances at Elegu Border Post. I want to report to you that there is no Government ambulance at Elegu right now. We only have one ambulance from Uganda Red Cross.

Secondly, what perhaps you are referring to are the two vehicles that were given to transport samples from Elegu to Entebbe Grade B Hospital. I have also heard, in your report, that the testing station, which was supposed to be at Elegu as promised by the minister when she visited, is now going to be at Adjumani. Why? The reason we had requested it to be at Elegu - we all know what is happening at Elegu Border Post, it has now the highest numbers of infections. We wanted these testing kits near or at Elegu to help quickly test and get results to reduce on the commotion at the border.


From your statement, it is going to be in Adjumani and I want to know why that decision taken and how it is going to help us. I see that it is just going to add to our problems.

Finally, I do not know what plans Government has to do massive testing for the communities in areas surrounding Elegu Border Post. We all know that because of the porous border stretch starting from Lamwo up to Koboko, with South Sudan, as we speak, almost everyone in South Sudan is sick and people are crossing the border every day. 

What have you put in place to ensure that we reduce the numbers of people who are there and to quarantine them? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.49
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About a week ago, there was a great concern raised by some of the health workers that visit the camps where the positive cases are being treated. They observed that there is a serious influx of pussycats in those camps yet worldwide, it has been proved that pussycats and goats have tested positive for COVID-19.

I want to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, whether the concern has been brought to their attention and if so, whether they have taken any steps to mitigate the possibility of having a transmission from the pussycats to human beings.

We may successfully manage the border but end up with terrible internal problems related to domestic animals that we keep at home. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for responding comprehensively. However, I would like to know whether you are making efforts to try and include all the stakeholders on the National Task Force. There is already a complaint about the National Task Force that when you have your meetings in State House, those with very authentic invitations are not cleared. Why do you leave people out? It becomes political when you leave out stakeholders.

Secondly, we would like, maybe in the future, for you to inform us on the donations. The donations are in bulk but we have not been given the accountability. You must know that people upcountry are hungry, starving and in tears, especially those in urban settings. In the rural setting, people want to cultivate but they lack seeds and farm implements. Please, take note of that.

Also, when you talk about Shs 35 billion for masks and then you talk of Nytil, what about those small business people? Are they not important to us Ugandans? Some of them call us and say, we also want to make these masks. These masks are not so special; we are already wearing them. Why don’t we also try to distribute to other traders?

I would like to thank Parliament for providing a bus to Elegu Centre. Hon. Lucy Akello forgot to thank Parliament. Otherwise, Elegu Centre should have been taken seriously. The truck drivers are left to move freely and are at large. I was happy to hear that now, only those who test negative are allowed to come enter. That is okay but three or four days ago, some of them were still being sorted out from the community thereby causing community infections. We already have community infections because Elegu has not been properly managed.

Therefore, I would like the Prime Minister, since he is also a doctor, to take note of that seriously so that we try to reduce on the spread of the infection.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in some places, they are still trying to chase people away. For example, there is a logistic hub in Gulu that is in the Railway Station. I think this is not the right time to chase them away or demolish their houses, especially during this COVID-19 or even evict them when they have not been compensated. After all, it was properly put in writing that they would be compensated before their buildings are demolished. Therefore, I would like you to take note of this.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is a short time but my prayer is that you be all inclusive. This should not be an NRM affair; it should be an affair for all Ugandans. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot have everybody. It is coming to 6.00 p.m., what do you want me to do? The Government did not consider it necessary to adjust the curfew. It is still at 7.00 p.m. and we have to stop.

5.55
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the border districts, especially West Nile, are over populated. We farm across the border into Congo. This lockdown came at a time when it is harvest time for cassava, potatoes and maize and many crops. Now, we cannot cross to harvest. 

We were hoping that for farmers who have their harvest ready, you would provide at least a week for them to harvest their crops with proper cooperation from the Congolese authorities on the other side so that people don’t die of hunger. That is my request, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Thank you, Madam Speaker.   

5.56
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. We have a challenge at the border. On Sunday, I was in my constituency and I tried to visit the quarantine centre where we normally confine people who have crossed the border coming into Uganda. 

However, when we got there - I went with the District Taskforce together with some members of Parliament on the Committee of the Presidential Affairs - we got a lot of concerns from those people. Many of them are not sick but they have a challenge; when they are set free to go home, the ministry does not give them anything. They just leave them the way they are. You find that a person was picked 200 kilometres away from the centre. How do you expect that person to reach home?

Secondly, we found out that there are mothers who have young children who are still breastfeeding – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I have no control over the curfew. Let us hear from Mutukula.
 
5.58
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice and thank the Prime Minister for supporting Mutukula. 

However, we have a big challenge at Kasensero Landing Site. Many people were displaced by the waters and we have to cross to Nangoma sub-county. Right now, the isolation centre is not there and Masaka is full. The COVID-19 victims, who have been got from the community are taken to Masaka but the place is full. Two days ago, they were left to sleep in an ambulance in Masaka. 

I would like to request that you provide a tent because Kasensero Landing Site is cut off; water cut off 40 kilometres of that place. We also request the Brigade Commander to give us a lorry or a tractor as it is the only means of transport to reach Kasensero. People were displaced by water, they don’t have what to eat and the tent where they can isolate people – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I hope that you will have time to come and respond because it is 6.00 p.m. We cannot continue sitting because of the time. I hope that next week, you will come back and respond. 

Please, remember the issue of the people on the landing sites; from Lake Albert to Pakwach. No one has addressed it yet.

Honourable members, it is 6 o’clock and I would like to make the proclamation. 

Statutory Instrument No. 71 of 2020, Parliament of Uganda, proclamation by the Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. It reads:

“WHEREAS clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation; 

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultations with His Excellency the President has been carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued; 

AWARE that the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament commenced on the sixth day of June 2019;

NOW THEREFORE in exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from Tuesday, second day of June 2020. 

The pending business before the House and its committees is hereby saved. Given under my hand seated at Parliament House Kampala, this 28th day of May 2020. 
Speaker of Parliament, Rebecca A. Kadaga.” 

Thank you, House is prorogued.    

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and was prorogued.)







