Wednesday 1st June, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr. Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair).

MOTION

(General Debate continued)

MR. SSEKITOLEKO (Bugangaizi County, Kibale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Before I make my remarks on the White Paper, allow me to make a few remarks on settlers who settled in Kibale recently.  These people came with about 300 students who were supposed to go to senior secondary schools, but they have not been able to go to find school fees, all of them are forced, have now lost over two years and some three years without going to school.  It is my wish that government urgently considers this matter seriously and tries to find school fees for these people.  They were evicted from their areas in Mpokya, these were able people, they had their homes, they were well settled, and actually, Government should find ways and means to assist these students.  

Allow me also to make my remarks on cost sharing.  There is no way we can do, we have got to cost share education, but we have to do it meaningfully.  Now, education in our area, in Uganda seems to be mainly in three phases.  We have mainly secondary education, then higher secondary education and university education.  The first secondary education is what one would say the 12 years of education and high education would be the higher school certificate and university education.  

Now, it is my wish that it should be divided in those three parts.  The first part should be born by the parents then after that, the Local Administration should come in to support the higher education and the university should be mainly left to the State.  University education should be left to the State.  My argument about this thing is, first of all, let me begin with life expectation of the people of Uganda.  Men are supposed to die at the age of 49, 48, this is the life expectation of the people of Uganda, and women much earlier.  

Now, what this means, putting into account, that most children qualify to go to the university when men are saying at the age of 55 and by the way, at the age of 55, most people are out of the jobs, and some are already dead!  And in fact, when we go to Makerere graduation ceremonies, what in most cases you see are sort of guardians not real fathers.  People go to the graduation ceremony with an uncle or a sister, an aunt and so on, but the real parents are already dead.  It is very difficult to find school fees to pay for university education, because first of all, the people who should pay for the education, most of them are dead.  Some of them are already too old, they are out of the jobs and they cannot find the money. 

In Africa, it is very difficult to save, I know very few tribes have meaningful savings ventures, but the rest do not.  When you grow old, you cannot buy shares in companies, because most companies are not there anyway where to buy shares?  So, as you grow old, you become poorer, and you will find a person staying in a double storied house gone; he has no money to - he has nothing, that is the only property he has, and this is the age when one is supposed to pay a lot of money to the university education, and some of it even in hard currencies!  

So, it is my wish that this university education should be left to the state.  Then the two years of higher education should be left to the Local Administration.  The 12 years is understandable, should be left to the parents, by the way, let us not also think that it is only the parent that who has a real obligation to meet the school fees of a child.  The State has, and the Local Administration has; it does not only help, it is not only a responsibility of the parents say, to produce doctors and so on, all these doctors, the agriculturalists what not, the children he has produced are not only going to benefit the father and mother.  In fact, most parents have never even had a benefit of the children they pay school fees for, but it is the State that benefits.  They produce these people to go and help these States, to help the district, so the district and the State should also contribute not only to leave the burden only to the father -(Interruption)

MR. NDEGE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and congratulations.  I would like to support my colleague by saying that from time immemorial, even before independence, the colonialists found it very, very necessary to pay for university education, because they know that per capita income of a peasant in Uganda is dollars 200.  It is really a dream for us to endorse something that we know it is not going to be practical and I conquer with my brother here, we tax the poor peasant directly and indirectly and is expecting the State to provide a service and university education is one of the vital services.  University education -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Ndege to address this House when he is indecently dressed?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, your dressing is in bad state, you may leave the Chamber and organise.

MR. NDEGE:  This is a Kaunda suit.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, just to bring the debate as usual back on rail.  I would like to inform the hon. speaker and the House that, one, the government is not proposing that students pay tuition fees, that two, the government actually, the budget of Uganda is capable of enabling each student to have a single room, get room, get money for pocket money, and get money for transport home.  The budget is capable of returning Makerere back to 1965, and that money is there for sure; to make every student get a gown, get all the facilities that are needed, have deacon, and take what that the other people took in their time.  But that will mean that instead of aiming at 20, 30 thousand students enrolment, we stick to the 888. That is the information I should give. (Laughter)  

So, the information I am giving to the hon. Colleague who has now returned in formal dress.  Lessons are learnt harder, those who were indecent yesterday are the most decent today, but the point I am raising to the House and they should really help to debate is in 1965 for example, there were only 888 students at Makerere that include Tanzanians, Kenyans, Ugandans and other nationalists.  If we want 1000 students, there will be no doubt everything will be in place.  

In 1969, when I joined University, the whole of Uganda had about 1,400 students who had sat the A’ level and university took about 900; this year we have got over 10,000 students who qualified with one principle and above, and 850, 8,500 students who qualified with three principles and above.  So, the question we should debate is, do we either go back to the colonial days where government gives everything, but to a small number, or do we increase the intake and reduce on some of the facilities, but maintain the basic ones, because we cannot have our cake and eat it as well?  

I would like that debate to be - we can go back to 1965, provide everything, like we got in our days, but out of the 9,000 students who qualify, we take only 300 to maintain the total enrolment of 1,500 or we increase intake and forego some of the supplementary efforts so that more of our children who now qualify join tertiary institutions.  It is not personal, it is only to debate that, and it will be helpful if we zeroed on that debate.  Do we go back to old days where we give everything to a few or we enroll most students and cut on some of the expenses that were originally made by government?  I will be happy to be guided.

MR. SSEKITOLEKO:  Mr. Chairman, today, taxation has increased and there is more money.  So, we can still afford even taking in more students than the students we were taking in before.  When I was still on the Floor, I was saying that actually, we should not always consider that because I have produced a child, then it is entirely my responsibility to carry that child through -Interjection)- normally it is, but it is also responsibility of the State and of the district.  That child I produce -(Interjection)- through taxation, yes, that child I produce is supposed to serve the State not only me, when that child qualifies as a nurse, she will not only be a nurse in my house, but a nurse for the whole State, when that child qualifies as an army officer, he will not serve as an army officer in my house, but to the whole State.  

So, I think, it is the responsibility for the State and even the district, to contribute towards the success of that child.  That is why I was saying that it is the responsibility of the district also to make sure that they educate, they participate in education of their district at national level – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please wind up.

MR. SSEKITOLEKO:  Mr. Chairman, I was interrupted.  Okay, let me briefly also talk on the national language.  There is no way we ought to have a national language in this country, and we should forget things like English or Kiswahili. We must have a national language and that national language must come from a small tribe, that small - it is in order to be advantageous to most Uganda, I see no point for instance -(Interjections)- thank you, Mr. Chairman.

DR. TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi):  Mr. Chairman, I rise to support the government view on the White Paper and to raise a number of observations.  First of all, just in passing, I would like to point out the Minister that Runyakitara which is counted as a language is not actually a language, it is a subject taught at Makerere University, there is no single Ugandan that speaks Runyakitara as a language, and therefore, we should talk about either Runyankole, Rukiga or Rutooro, but not Runyakitara as a language.  It is an imaginary language, it is a subject rather than a language.  

I would like to talk about the primary cycle.  I want to propose that the secondary school cycle remains eight years, instead of bringing it to three, remains four years, instead of bringing it down to three.  Because, three years is too short time, the first year is used for adjustment, and the other two years are really the serious years for studying.  So, I would like to propose that we keep four years for secondary and then I want to now talk about the primary circle.  

Ideally, I would have no quarrel with the primary cycle being eight years, but the Minister should realise that adding eight years to an established primary school, may have some advantage of having a child one year older, but the disadvantages are so many especially, the costs.  It means one more new classroom and equipment for that classroom, it means one more teachers’ house, it means one more specially trained teacher, I say specially trained because, a primary teacher who will have to be trained specially to fit in primary eight.  Do you take these a secondary school teacher or - so you have to be specially trained.  It would also mean for boarding schools, one more dining room, one more dormitory and all that go with those things.  I am talking about this assuming that each school I am talking about has one steam but if the school has two or three or four streams, you will have to multiply these additions by the number of streams in those primary schools.  So, for that reason, I would like to propose that the primary cycle remains seven years and secondary cycle remains four years.

MR. KAYONDE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to give information to the Member holding the floor that, the reasons he has advanced, do not hold water, because it has happened before.  We used to have primary six plus three years of junior at that time, there were fewer classrooms then, but this covered nine years plus senior four years.  Thank you.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I was going to elaborate on that one, if only the Minister can listen to me Sir.  If we change the system like that, it would also mean that the whole syllabus will have to be changed because primary eight does not take over the work of senior one, you will have to have a new syllabus for primary school and a new syllabus for secondary school, and this is a lot of work, it is a lot of complications.  If we go for free primary education, we shall have an additional year of free education instead of having seven years of free education, we shall now have eight.  So, it will actually cut on the government expenditure.  

Referring to the information that I have just been given, I would like to inform also hon. Kayonde that, in 1952, there was a Commission called Bunsen’s Commission, which recommended an education system from 633 to 842, the one that is now being proposed.  That the Bunsen’s report was implemented from 1952 to the time of Independence and it was found that it was necessary to change it because the syllabus for eight years could put into seven years and that is why we had a recommendation from the Council Commission 1953 which recommended the system that we are now following.  

I say this because we even have witnesses in this House.  We have hon. A.K. Mayanja, he was a member of the Council Commission and the Chairman of this Commission Prof. Senteza Kajubi was also a member of the Bunsen’s Committee.  

So, I would like to propose that we retain the present structure of primary and secondary education.  After all, the idea of being proposed by the Minister of having three years of secondary education was tried by government in 1960s at schools like Buddo, three; it was called express stream, brilliant students were selected.  They tried the three years and it was found unworkable, even a few students from certain schools like Ntare School tried this and it was found unworkable and it was abolished.  

So, I definitely do not support this change.  I would rather suggest we retain the present structure.  We also have wastage at the secondary level if you reduce four years to three years, you are going to waste classrooms, to waste laboratories, to waste dormitories, to waste all the things that have taken people to plan and put in place.  You are going to leave all these vacant by reducing four years to three years.

The second point I want to advance to is my colleague who has just talked about the question of cost sharing at tertiary institutions.  We are already cost sharing and we cannot avoid it but this cost sharing is not properly organised.  We have no means to test to know which beneficiary is poorer than another.  We do not know who can pay and who cannot and how much he can pay and how much he cannot pay -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  It is too much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Make your information short, please.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  If I can go back to school, I will try my best, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that in the proposal here there is no means test every student in the proposal will have tuition fee and every student who wants to take on a loan, even is he is a son of a millionaire would take on a loan for accommodation and feeding.  So, there is no means test.  It is anybody who will want to take on the loan for that facility on the proposal will do so.  So the means test will not be arising.  Thank you very much, Sir.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, if the Minister had allowed me to continue, he would probably have seen my problems.  He simply jumped the gun but I thank him for his information.  We have proposals about loans, we have proposals about bursaries and about scholarships but these are not streamlined, who get the loan and how does he get it?  How does he pay it back and how much?  How much of the national budget is spent on education as compared to what is being spent on Defence and other areas.  How much is corruption taking away from us -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Carry on please.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, what about regional imbalances?  We have areas that are disadvantaged just as much as we have families that are disadvantaged.  If we accept this system as being proposed by the Minister, well, the Minister represents government here.  He does not want to - okay, I will not call him Minister, I will call him government now. (Laughter)  As being proposed by government -(Interruption)- I do not accept that information.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Mr. Minister please, take your seat.  Yes, hon. Tiberondwa please continue.  

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Is the hon. Minister of Education in order to keep on injecting this august House without your express permission, Mr. Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I had already ruled out.  Please continue. (Laughter)  

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I raise this point because why is it possible that maybe 10 per cent of the parents in Ntungamo may be able to pay fees but it is possible that maybe in Karamoja only one per cent may be able to pay fees at university.  How do we take care of that kind of imbalances?  

I would like, therefore, to propose that at some appropriate moment during this debate especially when we come to the cost of education in tertiary institutions you will allow me to move a Motion requesting that this House sets up a select committee especially to study and make recommendations on the question of cost sharing in tertiary institutions.  I have already circulated that proposal and I hope you will be generous enough to allow me to move it at the right time.  

Since 1989, students in tertiary institutions have been protesting and demonstrating against cost sharing, have we examined their grievances?  Have we seen memorandum from them?  Have we listened to them as the august House of this country?  I would like to plead to the Members that we should give ourselves an opportunity to listen to what these students are saying, maybe, what some of these things they are saying are actually genuine problems instead of just saying, they are demonstrating, they are making noise.  There are some of the things they are raising, which are worth listening to.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  May I inform this august House, I have a document here from the Missionaries, from the schools entitled Makerere University Students Guild, submissions in respect of Government White Paper on Education Policy Review Commission Report - Education for National Development.  It was submitted by the students guild of last academic and it is dated 1993 and currently my officials and the students’ officials are meeting and discussing.  We have been meeting people from various, the women, the churches, so it is true that they have been listened to.  I have a copy of their submissions here on the whole report with me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I am not really blaming the Minister, all I am saying is that House for example, has never had access to the information he is talking about.  If we have a select committee, it will have access to the kind of documents the Minister now has.

I want to talk about universal primary of free education.  It is being proposed that free education should start at P.IV and then continues up to the end and then comes back and goes down to P.1.  I would like to propose that abolishing school fees should start with primary 1 and then continue; first year P.1, second year P.1 and P.II, third year P.I, P.II and P.III along that line.  This makes a lot of sense.  It is easy to administer.  If you start with P. IV, you are not going to contribute towards the advancement of literacy and numeracy, which this report is talking about.  You are going to leave that group of people without going to school until say, the year 2000 when you reach P.1 and without being literate, we cannot practice democracy very intelligently, especially at elections. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member try to wind up please.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, it is being proposed in the report that we have a technical secondary school in every district. This is not enough.  I want to propose that we have a technical secondary school in every county because in each we are proposing to have an ordinary secondary school in every sub-county and we could have a technical school in every county instead of having one in every district.  I think one in every district is too few.  

At the beginning of the Report, the Senteza Kajubi Commission proposes that the National Flag should be hosted in all education institutions but the government states that it should be hosted only at administrative buildings.  I think this additional change by government is not necessary, and it is too definitive.  There are some schools where you find that administrative building at the back of the school, sometimes on the second or third floor.  I think where the Flag should be hosted should be left at the administration of the school instead of being so definitive.

There is also a recommendation from the Kajubi Commission that we start with prayers.  I endorse the views of the Commission except that I would like to add there the word appropriate form of prayers’, but I think it is important to start with prayers in every education institution so that the youth can begin to experience the importance of God everyday when they are at school.  

I would also like to suggest that in R.I.3, we retain the government version -(Interruption)- R.I.3 the Government is proposing a number of things to be done to teach a kind of civic education but they are putting there adjectives and adverbs such as correctly, seriously, properly and patriotically.  I endorse what the government has put down but I would rather these adjectives and adverbs be removed because teachers know how to teach what they are supposed to teach especially, patriotism, especially correctness and that kind of things. (Interjections)  R.1.2.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. chairman, I would like to call upon the hon. Minister to consider some of these proposals because many of the things I have raised are already being submitted as amendments when the time comes.  Thank you very much.

MRS. NTABGOBA (Women Representative, Kisoro):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to contribute on this very important Government White Paper on the Education Policy.  This Paper is very important because it has got so many good indicators that show us that once we implement them, Uganda will rise and shine again.  Most of these policies have been introduced in the past, abolished by some ambiguous leaders, some of us who have existed for many years - I am not very young - I have seen some of these introduced and then abolished.  So, when I saw these proposals coming in, I was very happy because most of them are good.  

However, before we implement whatever has been suggest by Kajubi and his group, we have to consider and ask ourselves why were these things not workable in the past or why are they not working now?  As I had said, some people did not cooperate well and we have been changing in every regime.  I remember some of these policies were very good like the eight years in primary school and so on and so forth, but are we going to succeed if we just rush these suggestions through without putting right what has gone wrong?  

These days we are in a period when unique things, horrible things are happening which never used to happen. Unless we put a remedy to things whatever we are going to pass will not work and we might stand to regret and we will not really achieve anything after spending so much and in any case, we do not have 900 billion which is being our target the among to implement all the policies in this book.

We are having old men raping too young -(Interjection)- yes, you have been seeing cases of old people raping young children, this is a very bad thing which I never used to see in the past.  We are seeing inducing young boys into bad manners.  (Laughter)  We are seeing fathers putting their own daughters under pregnancy; all these things are bad.  Unless we change this nation and better our morals, whatever we plan here is going to be at waste.  

I am, therefore, proposing that other than changing the systems which we are using now in education, we would start boosting our people’s morals bettering that the generation we are having now, preparing schools classrooms for these students, facilitating teachers and then educating parents. I have listed all that because a learner needs a good learning situation that is, the home and the parents who bring up this child.  We are looking at a learner as out target but to have successful person with all proper qualities of a person, we need to start from home.  Let us educate these parents.  That is why we are meeting them on the streets these days and they seem to be confused with what we are doing here in this House.  It is not their fault.  

Our citizens have missed being educated on what is going on.  In fact, when we talk of cost sharing, if these parents were educated enough to know what they are doing, many of them in the villages would be able to pay school fees for their children.  An example is in my own area, Kisoro District where men have taken to drinking.  They do not drink nothing; they drink money and they have neglected their responsibilities.  I do not blame them.  I should blame myself or us as their leaders.  We should show them how useful education is.  

During my school days, it was very valuable but nowadays, it has been diluted.  A primary teacher would start, whatever amount he or she was earning, would enable him to remove the grass from the parents’ house and thatch it with iron sheets in the first year of working.  But if you see today what the teachers are earning, how long will it take this teacher to be able to even buy 10 iron sheets?  The answer is flogging the wind.  

If you also look at the proposed amount, the increment of 40 per cent, the lowest pay being 20,000/- that amount is not anywhere to improve the situation of a teacher.  The question is, where will this money come from?  The 900 billion!  We have no answer.  The Minister was asking hon. Members to propose ways of getting this amount of money and none of us has come up to show where it will come from.  Therefore, if we have no money to meet all these costs, let us go slowly.

MR. ALUBO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Lady holding the Floor that one source of the money could be - an account should be opened for those who have had tertiary institutional education from within and without, let them contribute to that account so that future generations also get similar education.  Thank you.

MR. NTABGOBA:  I thank the hon. Member.  In fact, he is supporting me, he is supporting the point I am bringing forward that this system will not work immediately because if that fund is going to be introduced even 10 years are less to have it useful to be able to pay school fees for the mentioned students.  So, there are many things that went wrong but we have to put them right before implementing these policies.  

The learning situation, the environment where the learner will benefit, the teacher who will teach this student and the equipments which will be useful to be able to help this student.  We used to have model schools in the past.  These model schools were mismanaged until they were removed.  I have to say that there is no cheap change. 

 All changes are very expensive.  If we try to change now, we need more money to revive whatever was destroyed.  If we change now, we will need these buildings rehabilitated and some new ones being put up, new teachers, they are being trained, there is a lot to be changed and I can say, we are not going to manage within the 10 years that have been proposed, that is from now up to the year 2000 and then other 5 years which are indicated in this book.  

These policies should have been effected since 1985, which was impossible, and I can see that even the 10 years, we are not going to be there.  Let us use these years to give up-grading courses to most of our teachers.  Most of these teachers are there.  There are some who specialised in infant work in 1960s.  Those people are forgotten.  Some of them were trained overseas.  I was one of those who went to Australia.  

I have been lucky, I have made it up to Parliament but most of my friends, are long forgotten and these teachers are thoroughly trained in infant work which is very important.  It is the beginning of life and the beginning of education.  If I would ask the hon. Minister for those people to make them realise that they are wanted and they are still useful, they can write books for our lower classes. 

In Zimbabwe, there was a teacher from Uganda after their independence in 1981 by the name Mr. Kakoraho; he is now back home.  He wrote so many books for Zimbabwe and they circulated them in all schools because that was after the boers, the white people had gone back to South Africa and Zimbabwe government found himself they had no books.  That teacher is back home, but nobody knows where he is.  If we could tap such people, they are so many.  We could tap these talents and use them.  We will find we are using less money than what we are planning to use bringing in expatriates.  

Even donors give us money but half of it is taken back.  Why do we not boost the morale of our own people and we use them?  In fact, whatever they give us should be channeled to improving the people we have here.  Another thing, we should try to appreciate our own people, we should learn to share what we have, appreciate everybody; we are so many different people.  But the problem I have seen in the past, we aim too high as Ugandans and we are known to aim beyond our reach. 

So that should be a challenge that we should appreciate what we have, appreciate the people we have and encourage them to look after our nation.  Every single piece of land in Uganda is important.  So, we should treat everybody from all corners of Uganda especially those who come from the border, we should take it that those people are at the borders of Uganda.  This should be our target.  They are marginalised; we are forgotten in Kisoro.  All borders should be targeted for rehabilitation so that our students all over Uganda have same facilities.  

When the results came last week, most of those schools, which performed well, are from within the towns.  There is nobody from Kisoro, it is so remote and even students are being scared to travel to Kisoro.  The roads have been wished washed away by the rain, and the rehabilitations are going elsewhere. The good thing, they are starting to rehabilitate.  So what I am saying, let us use this chance to create a conducive environment for every child in Uganda so that they will learn well.  

On cost sharing, once we have educated these parents, they will not even bother us with cost sharing.  They will pay school fees for their children instead of drinking this money.  And on free education, the same thing will happen.  Actually if we target the teacher, the parent, a student and the environment as such, all these things will work out without much problem because on page 152, even the Commission himself says, that there is no education better than the teacher.  When the teacher is good, the education is good.  I do not need to repeat what other people talked, but I would like to support what hon. Tiberondwa said.  To me, I would feel that we maintain the system we have but inject all the resources, the money into bettering the situation for those target groups.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Ntungamo):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Government White Paper and I will make just a few comments since the indications are that we have to be brief.  This is a decade of human development and I think because of this, this Paper could not have been brought during any other more appropriate time.  

According to models which have actually some number.  These models indicate that education and training should have at least 20 per cent of the total expenditure allocated to that sub-sector.  In this country, it may be worth nothing that 10.4 per cent was allocated in 1990/91.  So, we are very far behind for the Sub-Saharan Africa.  In 1992/93, we allocated 16.4 per cent of our total expenditure.  

Another associated area is health and family planning.  Again the mode indicates 20 per cent.  In 1990/91, 3.6 per cent was allocated, in 1992/93, 7.6 per cent was allocated.  Social security, 18 per cent is the model; 1990/91, 1.6 per cent, in 1992/93 1.4 per cent.  I would have gone on.  What I must emphasize is that there ought to be a deliberate shift in the structure of expenditure towards total human development.  It is no longer sufficient to invest money in cement and steel bars and those related items in this decade because the human being now is the centre.  I suggest, therefore, that this House which has got the ultimate authority, when time comes, it does go thorough examination about the allocation of expenditure in support of these area which include human beings, Ugandans.  

Secondly, I want to suggest that as part of this, a proper study be made of the relationship between the demands of our requirements in these areas and the taxable capacity of this nation for realisation of those demands.  What do I mean here?  What I mean here is that when you talk about cost sharing without looking at the capacity for taxation, you actually find you are very theoretical.  In other words, you may find you are targeting an area that will never realise and you know when you target an area that you cannot realise, you are simply being a bad or a poor manager.  You are just giving in the air; you are not on the ground.  That is why I would like that a thorough study be made before we have a plan of action in order to ensure that every step we take is reasonable, and is well researched and is realisable.  

Let me now turn to the structure of education that has been referred to as education cycle.  I want to first ask a question.  Have we exhaustively studied and been satisfied that the current structure is viable and, therefore, we are now able to move from a point of strength to another point of additional cost?  I am not very sure that actually these studies have been done because I think we must establish core areas within core areas.  In other words, what is a core area?  What is a crisis area to our current educational structure?  I think we must realise this before we make a move because if we do not do so, it will appear as if we are just jumping from one problem to another problem.  Now, our -(Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. Member is making a very valid and serious contribution in the House on this matter and I fear that these points might go unheard by responsible people.  I want to clarify further that he being a chairman on the Committee on the Economy, and he knows very well that they are about to have a discussion on the budget, and he having read and raised the issues on percentages valid for education for heath and for social security as contained in some of the documents like the human report which is published by United Nations as the recent one.  

I would like to find out from him whether these matters have been discussed at the level of the Committee of Economy, presented to the level of those who are doing the budget so that this work we are doing and spending time on, when it eventually get approved, has a serious impact and meaning for the whole nation and that we do not leave in the air as you are saying, but be more practical on the ground and realistic.

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the Minister mentioned 900 billion shillings.  But those figures as to how he arrived at the 900 billion shillings and how it will be financed, the change has never been given to us that we know details because when we changed from the old currency to the new currency without particular studies, it seems that there is a lot of poverty in the countryside.  So jumping from one problem to the other may create more problems for us unless we get these figures properly studied by the Committee on Economy and the Committee on Finance and Economic Development.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  May I, Mr. Chairman, inform Mr. Wanendeya that these figures are appendix to the report.  They are based on 1989 calculations when they were calculating around 600 billion shillings over a period of time.  The 900 is an update done last year, and it is appendixed. Reading it will be more helpful.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the people who have given me information.  I think I should also indicate, in fact, for the House to note and I think in this case appreciate that the Defence allocation has positively moved towards human development area.  The ideal figure for the Sub-Saharan Africa is 8 per cent.  In 1990/91, it was 21. 5; but in 1992/93, it has come closer to that ideal; it is 10.1.  So, we are really in the correct structural direction if we can strengthen and even reduce defence expenditure provided everybody wants to live peacefully here and therefore, does not cause that expenditure, we cause it.  If we make trouble naturally the expenditure will go up.  But if we can maintain the direction I have no doubt that we are even capable of coming below that Sub-Saharan figure of 8 per cent since we have already allocated 10.1 per cent.

I was going to respond to hon. Karuhanga’s point.  Right now and I think I could say tomorrow we are working towards completing an appraisal of the expenditures of NRM from 1986 to 1993/94.  Now, I am going to make this data available to the House so that you can compare both the initial approved estimates, the revised as well as so actually where I have found them.  It has been a very difficult task to do so but now the data is all available and we are just putting only the structure where I had reached.  I am very hesitant to support the change for the reason I have already given.  I have to be convinced.  Have we thoroughly researched into reasons why we should leave the current structure and bearing in mind our ability to fund because we must be able to fund otherwise, if we are not, we create more problems.  

I would like to be convinced that we have sufficient resources to fund the problems.  Otherwise, if had the money and we will probably find out in due course, I would even go further to suggest that the structure of primary, secondary and tertiary education, first primary goes even up to grade 9, primary 9 and you are four years and in fact, I would even go further to be a little more revolutionary and suggest that instead of going for higher, you spend one year pre-university, instead of having another structure, a third structure, you have primary up to grade 9 or P.9, then you have four years of secondary education; then you have one pre-university year within the university and if you do not proceed, you are given a certificate and the rest you continue.  

I would also like to suggest that in fact for even more radial change of our educational structure, we have three years of education, you leave it to the students, if they want to spend one year at that point, they are given certificates, they leave if they wish to.  After two years, they are given a diploma if they want to leave; after three years they are given a degree if they are not discontinued.  I do not see the reason why after one year at the university if somebody wants to leave since we are going to be involved in cost sharing, he does not get a certificate so that next time he wants to come, he continues and if he wants to leave, I mean, you have to be realistic -(Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Member because the numbers are a bit confusing us.  First of all, he says, 1 to 9; then one year at the university and then four years at the secondary school; one year at pre-university and then three.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Okay, let the hon. member clarify please.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr. Chairman, I do not see the problem here.  This system is working in many other universities.  One of the universities where it is working is where hon. Kanyomozi went, London University.  If you go to London University, you can get after one year you get a certificate, after two years a diploma, after three years, a degree.  So, I think in other universities you have pre-university.  In North America, they do not have this problem, there is where in some provinces they go to what they call Grade 13 and others they go for grade 12 and then in the university, you sped a pre-university year.  In other words, it is up to you to decide to continue up to the end of the programme or for you to get off at that point and go and work.  So, what I am trying to suggest here is that a thorough study is made of all options so that we can merge with an option that combines quality of education, time fact as well as cost because those must be considered.  (Interjection)

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. speaker on the Floor that much as he is advocating for a study, to me I think the issue at hand is what are the aims and objectives of that type of university education. If you can clarify on the aims and objectives, then these other issues you are raising would probably make a lot of sense to me, Sir.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Can you try to wind up please?

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Yes, I am trying to wind up Sir.  I am only going to ask hon. Dr. Magezi to look at page 7 and 8 paragraphs 13 and 14, he will find the broad aims of education to which I agree entirely.  

I want to raise the issue on the language.  I would like to suggest strongly that this country needs a second if you want to call it, a second official language because when you talk about National Language, people coil into segmented areas.  I would like to suggest that English is no longer enough on its own.  I think we must be bold and have Swahili going along with English.  What is wrong with it?  Then it does not take away our commitment to your mother tongue. (Applause)  It does not take away commitment, in the same way English does not, I believe take away your commitment to the mother tongue.  So, I would like to recommend that Swahili be taught along side English in schools.

I am now moving away to the issue of manpower planning and utilisation.  This country and this is not a moot point, this country is still poor.  People cannot afford to go to school to learn the greater classics, they go to school to learn, come back and work and pay for their brothers and sisters at home.  Therefore, it is not possible for us to just turn out very highly educated men whose chances of employment are not very clear.  This is why I would like to suggest to the Minister of Education to revive and I am saying to revive the manpower planning and utilisation section and have it liaising with the regional bodies.  I used to be a member of the East and Central Sectoral Committee on Manpower Planning and Utilisation sometime back.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please try to wind up.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr. Chairman, finally, let me talk on cost sharing.  Cost sharing is inevitable, it is already in place but it is not formally organised and I think the current White Paper is making an effort to formally organise it.  I want to make an appeal that the cost sharing structure be related to the tax structures so that people do not pay progressive tax rates and then at the same time, pay progressive cost sharing, it will cause a lot of problems, so they have to be related.  The cost sharing should be related to the progressive tax structure in place.  I would like to say that we also tighten our belts in terms of expenditure.  I think we have really been spending too much on some of the areas, which do not give returns immediately.  I think we should now begin to zero down on those areas that improve the capacity - the purchasing capacity of the population so that they become an engine of growth.  It is not enough to rehabilitate roads and so on when you have not put money into agriculture. Right now, we are experiencing famine, I do not believe this should have happened.  We should establish clearly and live by early warning systems.  Why do we not operate some of these things on a systematic basis?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House that the question of a country having no food reserves is a very dangerous thing.  Uganda is one of the very few who do not have food reserves, who do not have a food policy, who do not have granaries that are at least made available for even emergencies and to make it worse, even for the army.

MR. KYEMBA:  Further information.  It is very true that the question of a food policy and food reserve is very important for any country as the hon. Member raises but it is true that the Government has done quite a bit to mention the various avenues that the leaders of this country need to do including passing by-laws which are enforced by the districts themselves as it used to be in the past with regard to their some reserve for home consumption.  The reason leading to the shortage and famine now is being so compounded by many things that are beyond any government ministry including draught and sale of food. 

Mr. Chairman, if I could have your protection, I would like to appeal to the hon. Members not to turn a very important and a very difficult situation facing our country today arising out of the climatic conditions and other prevailing circumstances around the country, that this is a simple matter that can be solved by one single minister.  Thank you.

MR. SEPIRIYA KAJUBI:  Further information, Sir.  May I, Mr. Chairman, inform the hon. speaker that progressive farmers and every farmer in the country has done well as far as grains and beans are concerned because we have been exporting most of our food and, of course, silos are empty because we do not have any famine at the moment so we are fetching -(Interruption)- protect me, Mr. Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR. SEPIRIYA KAJUBI:  What I mean to say is that, anyway we are selling up most of our maize but we are doing well as farmers but probably the policy is now required to preserve most of it.  Thank you.

MR. PINTO:  Further information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The information I want to give is in connection with the problem of food security and disasters as referred to by hon. Rwakakooko.  As regards the policy, I believe the government has got the best intentions, in terms of implementation the problem arises.  Our Colleagues are informing the Minister that we have even the facilities where the food could be kept.  Those stores are empty now; people are dying and yet he is referring to ability to respond to disaster.  I believe the best we can do now is to listen and say, can we get something going?  We have a crisis on our hands; it is not a question of pleading; there is nothing we can do about it; we can do something about - the disaster is on, people are dying of hunger, the stores are there, food can be grown, what we want are the implementers to get to work.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes, hon. Rwakakooko, please wind up.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr. Chairman, I am going to finish.  All I am asking for, is this -(Interruption)   

MR. BUTAGIRA:  On a point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I am rising on a point of order.  I have been listening to the debate particularly on the issue of famine, we have read in the papers people dying.  We are carrying out as if nothing has happened.  This is a situation where the Minister concerned should give a statement to this House and explain to the nation because for the first time people are dying of hunger, a phenomenon which is unknown to this country of recent and yet the Minister has stood up to give an explanation and he says the task is so mammoth, that it cannot be dealt by one person or one Ministry.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the Minister concerned to keep numb n fact of this grave situation? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.  Hon. Minister, I think the hon. Minister has taken sufficient notice and I am sure he is going to do something about it.  Please hon. Member proceed with the debate.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I am concluding and I am only requesting and appealing that we do not have to wait for a famine to be able to be very strong on our food security.  We must never ever wait.  We should plan and when we plan the liberalisation policy we ought to have and counter measures that are in favour of our retaining the stocks.  That means we should have equipped our parastatal institutions, the Produce Marketing Board, to buy the grain as the exporters, the members of hon. Ndege’s Association were also busy exporting, there is no reason why we should smuggle back what we sent outside officially.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MISS WEKIYA (Women Representative, Jinja):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, before I start talking about the Paper, I would like to thank the Minister of Education for publicly coming out to show interest into the Paper that was presented to him by the Guild last year.  In fact, if the Minister had publicly show that he was interested in reading that paper and discussing it, we would not have had a situation whereby a riot police rioted against our sons and daughters in the tertiary institutions but it was because there was that silence that we had that situation and I hope that in future, it will not happen that the riot police riots against our people.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, in these campuses every year new students come in and new governments are elected.  This Paper was presented by the Government of Mr. Kazungu, which was replaced in February by another Government.  The problem with the student leadership is that when a new government comes in, it does not take into account what the previous one had done.  I had to ring the Vice-Chancellor to remind him that the new government should read the Paper presented by the former government and when that was done after they had gone for a strike, they have now gone back to revising a Paper presented by some of their students so that the discussion can continue.  I held a long discussion with Mr. Kazungu’s administration, there is another Paper here presented by the University Lecturers and I have another Paper here presented by the Churches.  

We have been discussing with these various organisations but with the student organisation there is a problem of succession in the governments.  When I came in hon. Mayanja Nkangi was the Minister of Education.  I took off from where he had left so it will be useful for some hon. members of this House, instead of exciting and siding with students even where they are wrong, to revise and check with us has been taking place.  Thank you very much.

MISS WEKIYA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister but at least, I do not know how many of us got copies of those things before we started debating the White Paper because then we would not have felt that you did not take interest in it.  

I would like to go ahead and look at the democratisation of education.  This concept of democratisation of education as far as the White Paper is concerned - kind of puzzles me because here we are with a situation where we are saying that we are going to discourage boarding schools and encourage day schools on the other hand.  But in the same breath, we are saying we are discouraging double-session schools which have been day schools; we want them to be single-session and yet these schools do not have facilities to take in everybody as they have been doing.  

Now, the people who have been attending these schools are cut off by a half and they end up either looking for private schools, which are very, very expensive and sub-standard, or they end up by not going to school at all.  So, in democratising of education, we are doing a disservice to a group of people who have actually been enjoying what has been going on by the system, because I look at a school like Jinja S.S. which has been double-session since Independence and today, we are saying it should be singled-session and we are saying everybody should or we would not encourage boarding schools.  

Now, what is going to happen to those people who have been attending these schools?  Because the numbers have been in thousands and the facilities have been enough because the school has been divided into two.  But now, there is one schools and the number has to be cut down by a half.  

A lot has been said about free education.  This free education is also puzzling me because I feel the word free should be better defined for us.  Just look at any bank slip for students whether from day schools or boarding schools.  There is school fees 4,400/-, there is PTA so much, there is boarding fees for those who are in boarding, there is a ream of paper, there is a slasher, there is a hoe, there is a uniform; mention anything.  It is on this bank slip, school lorry and so on and so forth.  Now what is going to happen?  Is it that it is going to be free of all these things so that our children just walk into classes and read or – (Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, those of us who listened to the Minister submitting his White Paper, I thought he said, not free but compulsory education starting from P.4 whereby for those who are able to pay should be made to pay and those who are unable are catered for.

MRS. WEKIYA:  It is this free concept which beats me because even sometime ago, teachers were supposed to have free education for two of their biological children and it did not work out.  If anything, it is the children of teacher who are suffering because headmasters in some good schools cannot really take them on for fear that the money may not be paid.  It was free and at the end of the day, the free bit of it was the money still had to fall back on the teachers.  

So, the word free lost its meaning and now the White Paper is saying that they will cater for up to five biological children of teachers, educate about five of them, five is good enough, teachers have now learnt family planning, they are not like the teachers of the olden days who used to have ten and above.  

But, I am requesting the Minister that this time, let it be realistic aid to these teachers and not just that kind of peanut aid of the 4,400/- because anybody can afford that but it is the others that cannot afford.  And in contrast with that, I would like to look at the issue of PTA.  Many of us are using PTA to campaign.  We shall talk against PTA, there will be no more PTA but are we really being realistic?  How are schools being run?  Can you imagine being a headmaster of a school where capitation grant comes to late and then you really continue otherwise, you either close the school or go on.  But the White paper is saying headmasters must not use PTA as if it was school fees.  What are the headmasters really expected to do under the circumstances?  

PTA is a necessary evil.  Even if the government says they are increasing the salaries, you can even see from the White paper, there are those increments when they are talking about the teacher’s conditions of service.  But teachers are people who cannot have a night allowance because they are permanently in the school, they are people who cannot have day safari allowance like some others, they do not have subsistence or lunch or whatever.  Their money is just bundled up 20,000/- and that is that.  Now, if we say we are going to stop thinking about a certain section of our people which section we are entrusting with handling that tender age of our children?  So, either government decides really to put up the teachers’ remuneration so high so that it becomes so realistic or you leave PTA to flourish and then we see how to handle it with the headmasters.  

Today, the Minister for lands and Housing talked about selling houses to civil servants.  Many teachers are living in these pool houses.  I wonder - unfortunately, the Minister has gone away, but I wonder whether he has put any scheme in place for houses; because from Jinja where I come from, one half of the pool houses is occupied by teachers.  Now, when they get sold, obviously teachers will not be able to afford buying them.  Are they going to be thrown out in the cold or is there a way they are going to be protected when the selling comes?  

We are talking about the results, A’ level results which have just come out and at this stage, I would like to advise the Minister that when he talks about democratisation of education, we do not only look at day schools and boarding schools and what have you, but we should also try to look into regionalising education.  When the results come like we have just heard them, we hear there are so many students who passed and who qualifies to go into university, that is, they got two principles and above, I think two Ds and above for that matter.  But when it comes to selecting them, you find that the entry points are really so high that these people with two Ds are left out and you may find that the majority of these people come from disadvantaged districts.  

For instance, now we are talking of famine.  Pallisa has been very badly hit, Karamoja has been very badly hit, you may find that the parents may not be able to pay school fees for their children even when those children may go to schools like Namilyango and Namagunga, they may fail to raise school fees because when you are hungry, there is no way you can say, you are sending a child to school when you do not have even the money to feed yourself.  

So, if the Ministry of Education could change the system of selection like it was in the 1970s when even the verification forms that are used today were introduce.  At that time, the purpose of introducing these forms was for a reason so that when it comes to selection those people who go to university, they also look at the area from where that person comes, so that if an area has got so many people taken in and there was an area where people have qualified but because the marks are low, they have not been able to go, then they would be admitted into university.  That will also solve the problem whereby people are complaining that the educated people are coming from one region of the country and not from another.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member who definitely has read the report to continue debating and not telling us which page, which particular point she is discussing?  I think that would be better.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. (Laughter)

MISS WEKIYA:  Mr. Chairman, I am very glad that the informer knows that I read the report and I take it that everybody has read the report.  Therefore, if I am debating within the report, I think it is alright.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You go ahead.

MISS WEKIYA:  So, I was talking about regionalisation of education as a way of democratising education.  So the Minister should really consider that thing so that in future when certain districts have got may be to elect people to come to parliament, a situation will not arise whereby they do not even have anybody who has graduated in a certain district because people were getting 12 points and below and the entry points were 17, 18 like it was last year 16.8 whereby some parents who had really very bright children failed to pay for them to come to university.  

When it comes to cost -sharing again, I am glad but one observation I must make as the Minister goes to discuss those things with whoever he is discussing with, is that even the author of the report Prof. Senteza Kajubi, when he was going out in his CA meetings and campaigns, he acknowledged one fact that the people are poor.  I think as Kajubi was writing that report, he had not gone really down to the grassroots to see what is there. But today, when even a bar of soap could win somebody’s heart, I do not think that somebody can afford one thousand dollars to educate their children.  There are many ways of cost sharing without necessarily making it appear as is they are colossal sums of money.  

So, as you discuss that report, just bear in mind that people - in 1987 maybe people assumed that Ugandans would be very rich by the 1990s but today, we are in the 1990s, we are still poor; may be poorer than the 1980s.  Therefore, that consideration has got to be taken very, very seriously.  


Before I sit down, I want us to look again at the teachers’ conditions of service.  Here we are talking about all sorts of everything.  But as far as we female teachers are concerned, I have even talked to the Minister about this thing, we feel the 1964 teachers’ conditions of service should be revised to favour some of us who feel empowered enough to take decisions concerning our lives.  Because as far as that Paper is concerned, it must identify you as a good teacher through another person if you choose to live your life the way you want it because if you do not, if you have a child outside marriage, then you can head a school or a Mrs. but a Miss without a child.  

Today we are saying women should be empowered enough to take decisions concerning their lives, to do a, b, c, d and yet in the same breath, we are not being allowed, female teachers are not being allowed to take decisions concerning their lives.  I must tell you that I know of so many girls who have had to marry not for love but because they have wanted to head schools.  She just finds ‘a kimani’ as well call it -(Laughter)- yes, I am sorry to use the language.  I am sorry, I am sorry.  I withdraw.  A teacher when she wants to head a school, she may just find somebody to be identified with as a Mrs. so and so even when she would not want to live with that man so that she can be made a headmistress and I think this is a dangerous situation.  

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Wekiya to use a language in this House and refer to another opposite as a ‘ki man’. 

MISS WEKIYA:  Mr. Chairman, I withdraw.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Okay, the hon. Member has withdrawn.

MISS WEKIYA:  Okay, she may find a useless man but I was just quoting the language used, the jargon used by the teachers. (Laughter)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  As I am taking notes, I would like the hon. Member to clarify because I am taking notes and I have to respond to some of these important remarks.  I am not clear.  The man is married in order to enable a person to get a high job.  Is that ‘kimani’ useless or useful in terms of getting -(Laughter)- I could be helped.  If you have used a man as a ladder to acquire a job, is that ladder useless?  

But more importantly, I would like the hon. Wekiya who has been a teacher herself to help us because there is a major debate going on in the educational and moral circles and this House would be helpful.  Even there is a question of when girls get pregnant.  Should they not continue to study or continue?  When a teacher, and this normally refer to a female teacher, has children outside the wedding in terms of the point, hon. Ntabgoba raised of being a good example in moral and cultural up bringing.  Are they playing a positive role?  I think these are some of the issues instead of the hon. Member saying the Minister, the Minister could also make concrete contributions so that we take them into account rather than raising dust and telling us to bring it down.  It could be useful also if she could water the fields and give us some ideas on what should be done.  Thank you.

MRS. MATEMBE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, the information I would like to give is that when people are really seriously laughing at a very serious matter that the hon. Member is raising to this Floor, it may not get importance it should get.  This is a matter of gender discrimination, and a matter where a woman capable of managing a school and administering it happens not to be married.  How does the marriage of a woman affect her ability to lead a school?  These very serious issues of gender discrimination weigh badly honours even during our campaigns for CA, some Colleagues lost because they are not married.  It is high time we isolated ability from marital status.  I am not accepting that information.  

Therefore, I would like to proceed and inform the House further that I am not allowing immorality and I am not saying that people should mishandle themselves and misconduct themselves.  But single women are not necessarily involving in immoral activities so as to be bad examples to their schools.  

The hon. Minister had better take these points serious.  We have got our girls schools which are being headed by men and by the way, although these men may be legally married, you find them with even concubines or mistresses and the hon. Minister should really take this matter seriously especially in the NRM Government which is looking at full participation of women using the ability, potential, wisdom and talents.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Wekiya, please wind up your points.

MISS WEKIYA:  Mr. Chairman, allow me to thank hon. Members for coming out to support my point.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  The information I want to give to the hon. ladies is that it is a two way street.  While it may be difficult for a lady to become a headmistress because she is not married, there are certain countries where a person cannot stand for political office if she is not married.  Even here, during CA campaigns, people were being put to task to why they were not married.  I mean men, so we have also got to go around and look for a woman to marry so that you end up with -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Information.  Please try to limit it.

MRS. MUGARURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The hon. Members here should take this point seriously.  One, the population of women today is more than that of men.  Two, the ability to lead is not linked to marriage.  In fact, some people have suffered in marriage and it has become a hindrance.  

So, if a person decides to live alone, it should not inhibit us getting equal opportunities on job allocation and it is serious in school.  Because while there are strict measures on single mothers, the men who misconduct themselves to the extent of even raping our kids go free.  So, if women are going to be punished for being single, we want the Minister also to take into account punishment for these men who are marrying and raping so that we feel we are treated equally.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, this point has received the seriousness it deserved.  Can I ask the hon. Member to please finalise your speech.

MISS WEKIYA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and before I sit down, I will just mention something about the eight years, 8 - 3.  Essentially, I do not have a problem with 8 years and the 3 years, but when I went around discussing this White Paper with some people, they were saying that today families are not limited to biological families.  They are extended families.  There are very many people that we are looking after both right and centre and the further we push them as far as I am concerned, the better.  They were not looking at age, but they were looking at the fact that we are looking after so many people today and so may of us are dying very fast and therefore, the further you push your children, the better.  So, if you leave a child when she has acquired one certificate in life, it is better than postponing getting that certificate until further date.  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for recognising me at least.  I have been standing here for the last three weeks.  I would like to support the hon. Minister for presenting this White Paper on Education, which is as huge as the Commission’s Report itself.  I would like also to put hon. Butime to rest by putting a few pages here and there, that in my contribution I will dwell more on page 10 which is to do with pre-education, then I will say something on page 20, which has to do with the community service scheme, I will also say something to do with the training of teachers which can be found on page 135 through 137; I will also say something about the proposal and recommendation that there should be the office of the Director General of Education.  

But before all this, I would like to reassure the people who have contributed earlier on especially when hon. Wekiya was talking that marriage as we talk, is ordained by God, which is backed in Genesis Chapter 2, verse 24 through 27.  If your time is ready, may be those who are not yet married, their time is not yet ready. (Laughter)

Back to the White Paper, I would like to say that by re-introducing it, the Minister for Education - which is going on in Britain.  There, they have the infants, the junior secondary that is actually that particular area within the P.8, then, this shortens their comprehensive; because I had kids in all those areas.  This shortens their area in the comprehensive school to three years.  The, thereafter, they continue doing their higher, this is the time they begin to specialise in the areas which they can then concentrate on when they go to the university.  Only that I would like as it also provided for in the Draft Constitution Article 1, 289, where there CA delegates of which hon. Minister is also representing Igara East, that I would like it to be noted both here and as will be discovered as existing law that we go in for free and compulsory education at least for the first 12 years.  Because we would not like to revisit the Constitution which they are going to make.  It should stand the test of time, but if for any reason, Government finds that she cannot go full length as may be recommended and made law, she is then free to take phases until when they can realise these 12 years.  

I would like also to back hon. Moses Ali the other time he was advocating that for schools to open, there must be prayer.  I had some discussion with the hon. Minister whom some were saying has no Christian name, I said, his name Noah, I think has fitting in the Bible, but then, I was told that Nuwe is -(Laughter)- means, he is the one! 

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information. May I inform you, Mr. Chairman, and inform the hon. Member of the House who is also a reverend that, Jesus who was neither Roman nor an English man, and that to have a Christian name, it does not have to be in English.  Sir, on the 1st January 1992, my son was baptised Munanura by no other person but the Bishop of West Ankole and the hon. Deputy Prime Minister and Mrs. Ssekitoleko were God parents.  So, carrying a European name and being a Moslem or a Christian or carrying an Arab name, has nothing to do with being a Christian or Moslem, and I hope this point is taken more serious, especially by the Reverend, and I do not expect anybody to ask me my English name, instead of my other name.  Thank you, Sir.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  I have the Minister’s point very well as he has confessed now that he is a Christian. (Laughter)  

Back on this, only that in our discussion with the hon. Minister, he told me reverend, remember this can be done administratively, but my fear is, for any prayer to be said, like this one in this House, it has to be inter-dominationally formulated so that if it does not favour a particular faith and that is why, I think it should be something which has come because all these religious denominations I have met and I have approved of the type of prayer to be said during the Assembly.  

I would like to go back to page 10, where government is taking note that the pre-primary education should have the blessing of government, where government should train teachers to be pushed there, but then, there is an oversight, government should also take responsibility because mere teaching and then leaving it to the private institutions, private individuals to run those pre-primary education, sometimes we find that the type of education given here, does not go - does not match the age of this particular group.  

So, I think government should take responsibility right from start where education is to be given, that education is to be given to the children of this nation and when it comes to the training of these teachers, by teachers, let me take the university lecturer to be a teacher in the classroom.  Here is a situation where I think we need to be very concerned with the people to handle our students, our pupils, our children.  I would not love to hear that, here is a law lecturer at the Law Development Centre, taking that graduate who is doing post-graduate in law, then this man leave him in Makerere University as a Lecturer or as Professor.  This man comes out to start his salary scale or her salary scale with 0.7, the person who has pushed this person out, remains in the university waiting for meagre 60,000-.  I think if we do not want our lecturers, our sons, our daughters, to immigrate to greener pastures, they should be well looked after.  

We have talked on page 20, I think if this one is taken care of, even in Britain, before you set foot in the University, there is that national service, they go and do this one; militarily, but I think we are keen on these cadre courses, simply because we have just been going through a situation where people have been handling guns, but I think is about ripe, when we should buy this idea of community Service Scheme, which should be broad enough to and should not - the emphasis should not only be in the handling of guns and other things, it should be broad enough, so that even if a person is not paid, he is able to look after himself.  

Right, I have said, and I am repeating by citing once more page 137, where the emphasis is on the objectives of teacher education and the type of people that we need to see handle and mould our children for future leadership.  I think things have not been going on very well as a result of which I was not surprised when a Colleague, I think this time from Kabarole was saying that, some classes have been handled by untrained teachers, that is very unfortunate situation and as a result of which performances have not been to the expected standard, especially in upcountry, later on calling it rural, anything to do with up-country is already rural enough and even as I talk now, in Lira where I come from, last year, we managed only 65 in Grade 1, as opposed to candidates at St. Kizito Primary School, Bugolobi where they were 66 and 62 of them passed very well in First Grade.  That now means that, the further away you live, you go from Kampala, the less and the worse results that you begin to experience.  With this, I would first of all to focus on the rural teacher wherever he may be, let him also have a fair package, then once he is properly paid, the parents of the schools are able then to put him to task.  

The report also recommends on page 189 that we should have a post of Director General to take over the present Commissioner for Education/Inspector or Administration.  The recommendation goes that this person be paid at the level of a Permanent Secretary. I think this will now reduce the expense, which Government is having by also having a duplicate of having a Permanent Secretary based in the Ministry of Education.  If matters of education are handled by people who are educationists themselves, you find that things are better run.  I talk with an experience across the road here, there is a Permanent Secretary who cannot be transferred, he has remained in that Ministry for 20 years now.  So, I think, let these people begin to be permanent in order to perform better, I beg to support, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Minister to wind up the debate.  

THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION (Mr. Amanya Mushega):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members for your variable contributions.  We have listened with great and keen interest and we shall take into account all the views that have been put forward on the Floor of this august House, but before I proceed, I wanted to refer to two small points which are exciting the feminists, but not the genderists.  Some of us are feminists more than being gender sensitive.  In the first place, the Ministry of Education takes seriously any teacher who has or attempts to have carnal knowledge with a student, be it male of female.  Our first step is to cancel that teacher from the Register of teachers and secondly, to hand them to the Police for Legal Prosecution.  So we have not been laxity on it, all we lack is information.  As soon as we have information which has been cross-checked, that is the step that is being taken and a number of them are on the run because once they know that the police is after them, they obviously shift around.

Secondly, it has been deliberate policy of the Ministry of Education that all girls’ schools preferably are headed by females; and if it is a mixed school, and you can go and check, if a headteacher is male, the deputy or one of the Deputies will be female, and I can give a list of schools which were headed by men and are now headed by women and I am just from mental not even checking the records - Nabisunsa Girls’ school, Wanyange, Kyebambe, this school in Rukungiri, Nyakibale and even the famous school in Rubaare was headed by an able headmistress who has been replaced by another one, but the problem we should realise is that, our means are not always equal to our needs, because also it will be presumptuous just to promote a female for the sake of it, to have a female in place, when they are not yet competent.

As you may know of a long history, more boys have been getting access to tertiary education than girls and that is one of the reasons when Makerere introduced the 1.5 points for females, we did not oppose it, because we thought in the short run, that will be affirmative action in order to speed up the process and obviously we shall not go to promote any female for the sake of it, she must first of all be competent and capable, then secondly be women.  But not the other way round.  

On the general debate, I will not answer to every point raised by hon. Members but I will deal with the general ones in the first university primary education.  To me, I consider three major pillars in this Paper.  One is Universal Primary Education.  Two is vocationalisation of the curriculum from the beginning to the end and three, the question of technical education, our people getting skills.  These are the critical pillars for the development of this country.  If you want a big and tall pyramid, it must be given a big base; and if you want to build a very tall building, it must have a deep foundation.  So, if we want to have really a meaningful tertiary education, it must be based on primary education or basic education that is both broad and deep, but if we really concentrate on putting a very tall building with a two-inch foundation, disaster will befall the country.  

Why do we talk of primary basic education?  To me, really when it is six years or seven years or eight years, or ten years, that is a detail.  The cardinal principle is whether we commit ourselves for the future of this country that gradually the majority of our children should get access to basic education.  That is defined as basic will change from time to time.  May be in other countries writing and reading is basic, in other countries going to the computer now, being the computer conscious, computer literate is basic.  In other countries, having basic knowledge of technology is basic.  So, what is basic will change with historical circumstances, the detail, but the fundamental question of basic should be addressed by anybody who loves the future of this country.  Why do we say so?  

I have already told you that if you have a tall, huge building, I gave you a story of a rich man who called his engineer and he found him coming from the bottom of the building, but usually, when a building is being built and there are many people digging 10 metres down, many people never pay attention.  They pay attention when the thing is going up and tiles are being up on, but the real foundation of a building are those deep ‘misingyes’ which most people do not see and which are covered and those are the overwhelming majority of our people.  We do not see regularly who cannot demonstrate, who cannot come here, who cannot meet Members of NRC, but who constitute the majority of the producers, who constitute the majority of the mis-voters or voters, who constitute the majority of the worshippers.  They are never seen like the deep foundations of a strong building, but when they crack, the tall buildings will disappear.

MR. KIWAGAMA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the Minister on the Floor that the firmness of a tall building, does not depend on the depth of the foundation.  In fact, if you have a rock, you can start building your house right from there, you will not have to dig. (Laughter)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  I thank the hon. Member for his information.  I am making my statement based on information got from the experts in Civil Engineering and I have yet to see 50 storey building that was started without even an inch of foundation.  If I get one, I will change my view.  I have yet to find people who complete University having not got firm foundation at primary, we are yet to come across such people.  I will repeat my statement that if you want a very tall building, you must also concentrate on a firm and deep foundation and deep and firm foundation for tertiary technical and university education is basic education and that is its base.  Why do we say so?  

First of all, why do we go for universal primary education?  We have mentioned that it is very critical for healthy population; it is very healthy for leveling the ground.  In other words, you give every child of Uganda as circumstances allow an opportunity to be a candidate for tertiary technical and University education.  At the moment, it is not the case.  You become a candidate sometimes by luck like hon. Major Gen. Tumwine.  But we do not want it to be luck.  It must be by arrangement because a government is a facilitator and the government tries to give equal opportunities to its citizens, then the citizens can compete depending on the capacities of the intellectual depth.  But at the moment the majority of the children who go through the tertiary and either those who are born from a background or able to get an able benefactor.  The majority of the children however bright they are, they did not know the inside of the classroom.  

Secondly, it is very critical for development.  Because who is the biggest producer of wealth in Uganda now or nay where in the world?  It is not we, he Members of NRC or Ministers, it is not the graduates; it is the ordinary peasant and worker in the countryside.  These are the biggest producers of wealth.  Who are the biggest busier of the environment, leading to environmental degradation, digging from the bottom of the hill to the top, not aware of soil preserve conservation?  It is the genuine producer of wealth who lacks the basic knowledge to protect their soils and environment.  They did not do it deliberately, they do it because they lack the information, and those who have the information, they do not produce, those who produce lack the information.  If we are going to develop our country for the future of our citizens, then we must pay attention to this mass of people who are the genuine producers of the wealth that the majority of us consume.  It is very important for increased production, it is also very important for a better quality of life of our majority of our people.  

As I said, then and I will continue to say now, my Ministry has over a period of time, been converted into the Ministry of those who are educated those already in the system of education.  We would like to return and make it the Ministry of Education.  Which means paying attention to those who took themselves to schools by virtue of knowledge or their parents or the environment and also those for no faulty of their won or even with the fault of their own who never went to school and now are old, who have not had an opportunity to go to school even if they are young, so that anybody who is genuine about education.  You do not only become interested in education when my friends in tertiary institutions are demonstrating.  But also become interested in those who come by to watch as if it is a new play by ‘Bakayimbira’ who are there in town, doing nothing young, able, but absolutely not knowing what is taking place.  Who come to motor accidents in town or come to rallies just to see what a Professor looks like or a Member of Parliament looks like.  That must be the genuine concern of any genuine revolutionary intellectual and leader of the population.  

So, I will not have to say much why we put emphasis on education.  It will not be achieved today; it may not be achieved tomorrow but must be a goal we seek for the future of the population.  Because this business we will eat tomorrow and not bothering what other people will eat in 50 years from now, must be abandoned if Africa is going to develop.  Other countries have budgets and plans for the year 2050.  For us when we talk about the year 1997, you are stoned that when you talk about 1997, it means you are talking about 1994.  

I will talk about another major point which was raised that when any father, and I regard a government as a father of the Nation or any sensible leader or any sensible commander introduces a fundamental change, a thing which is telling children or people to change from their way of lives to another way of life, there is always one - you excite those who expect to benefit, and secondly, you injure those who have been benefiting from the status.  

Therefore, when you introduce a fundamental change and everybody says, yes, there are two things that result from it; either they have not understood the subject or if they have understood it, they are lying.  The hon. Atwai will recall that when Christianity was introduced here, it was resisted bitterly.  But because it was a major shift in our cultural and faith beliefs, in the long run, that is why we have martyrs; martyrs were not celebrating.  In the long run in 100 years later, we are celebrating martyrs.  Those who were there 100 years ago, the situation was tense and chaotic.  When education was introduced in this country, chiefs never sent their own children.  They sent the houseboys whether they were called the equivalent of the houseboys because this was the new funny thing.  By the time they realised it was good, these houseboys were the Saza Chiefs.  

So, anything new which is introduced and is going to change a way of life of the people or raise developed a heated debate and me as a man of far sought, I did not get excited when I saw this heated debates and demonstrations they expected.  The question is, how do we handle them and how do we honestly them for the betterment of the future of our children rather than for the short-term benefits of those who happen to be benefiting currently.  So, I was happy in this debate because it took various angles and various dimensions free critical because we are talking about a change in our education system.  

In the past and currently, the missionaries did their best part.  But when they came to Africa, they were mainly looking for new leaders.  New leaders temporarily, new leaders spiritual and new leaders in administration.  That was basic to get the people who could read and write and preach the chiefs and they played their part.  When independence came, we had a shortage of administrators.  I recall around - even up to 1971, 95 per cent of our secondary school teachers were expatriates.  I gave those figures in my budget speech of 1990/91.  The Mazrui’s name them.  As soon as we had problems, they left and we went where we really belonged.  Although now we may claim to be in a bad situation, we are better off because over 90 percent of Makerere staff they may go for greener pastures but there is somebody to replace them.  Over 99 per cent of secondary school teachers are Ugandans and those outside.  This is a major achievement. 

But at Independence because we lacked people to fill the administrative positions in education, the church in administration, rightly the government of the day changes the system to produce as many administrators as possible.  But alas! We have filled all the offices in town but we continue to train people to be officers.  For example, I read newspapers, a graduate of Veterinary Medicine writing that I have been walking on the streets for the last three years, because originally every graduate in medicine, in agriculture, in veterinary, went to be District Veterinary Officers, Assistant Commissioners, Assistant Education Officers.  Now, when these positions were filled, they continue straining teachers as if they are going to detain graduates as it they are gong to be administrators.  Consequently, they walk a street, but cows do not graze on tarmac neither does maize grow on streets.  

In other countries, I have been reading reports - when you read on America, on Europe, they tell you how many Veterinary Doctors they have per animal.  I think their ratio is about one Veterinary Doctor per 1000 animals.  They tell you how many doctors they are per population.  Countries like Italy, they have one Doctor per 750 population.  That is a population of educated people - people who know how to administer drugs themselves, who know the dangers of that; who have a telephone to ring a nurse who can get a doctor within hours, yet they have a doctor per 570 inhabitants.  For us we have a doctor for every about 30,000 and if you are in Kotido, you can imagine how you will contact a doctor from Kabongo.  The people with better communication with better health, with better education, they are still producing more doctors, more nurses, more engineers, more vets, more teachers.  For us who are in the most backward conditions available on earth, Africa is the most scandalous continent on the world.  We are satisfied with the 1,200 graduated, that is why they hold parties.  In my village a school got 4 pupils in grade one, they have never seen grade one since the days of Mohammed.  They called me as Guest of Honour to celebrate.  I went but I was shocked people getting 4 people in grade one were celebrating.  Nakasero with 75 per cent grade one of 44, they were saying we need to perform better. 

If you do not see the danger in this, it is a comparison - that is comparing Africa with Europe.  Europe where they have so many doctors they are still wanting more.  Africans when we have produced one, we have to drink for a whole week and we are recovering from the victory.  That is why I become very concerned that now we must move away from education for administrative convenience and go to education for production and development.  It must be a goal that we are to produce a Vet to go and look after the animals of Uganda to ensure none of them is killed by worms and tsetseflies.  That we are producing a doctor is concerned where the sick are but not where the people with money are.  That we are producing a teacher who is concerned when the child in class drops out because PTA has been increased or attention was not given.  But we all know that our Vet. will be concerned about one animal on Kampala road but not about the 50,000 animals in the plains of Mbarara or in the plains of Karamoja.  

That is the fundamental crisis of educational system.  We continue to produce as if we are fulfilling administrative positions.  We must not produce people, it is hard, it is costly, but it is the journey worth the sweat.  People for production so that we also begin talking in terms of what is our per capita output.  How many bags of maize do we get per acre not how many acres of land have you; how many doctors do you have per population and where are they?  How many teachers do you have per class?  Those are the figures we must move to.  But not that I am the first and only African in the South of the Sahara.  At the age of 90, you are a consultant and there is no one to take over your job as you die.  I am sure you will meet many; I am the first and only African in South of the Sahara to have this degree. I do not mind you being the first, but being the only one 30 years later is a shame to humanity.  Why do we start at primary four?  

I appreciate the points raised by my able neighbour and Friend hon. Tiberondwa and other friends.  One, the official figures is that 78 per cent of our children who should go to P.1.  I have doubt about their exactness but they are somewhere between 70 and 90 for sure.  Because, sometimes you find their adjustments by the various teachers.  Which means about 20 to 30 of our children do not go to P.1 at all.  But of those 70 who start 34 finish P.7.  So, for us who are approaching it, a gradual way, first step, retains those who came, I hope you get me.  In my vernacular they say, if you are eating millet, that one in your hands you fail to eat, then you want to put your hand in the basket for more, you fail to retain those who brought themselves voluntary to school, then we say, let us also add those ones who have not come.  They have done a thorough study around primary four and that is when the crisis comes in.  It is the biggest drop out.  So, if somebody has come to P.4, if he can first of all keep this 70 per cent, who start to finish will have raised the population of Uganda of those who have the primary seven knowledge from about 30 per cent.  By that act alone, almost triple to over 70 per cent.  In statistical terms - in terms of enlightment and production, that is a major shift for you to move from 30 per cent maximum to 60.  You shift from failure to lower second at worst.  But you have not yet passed and you want to sit another paper.  

So, the first stage is let us retain those who started, and if we can do that alone, for our country that those who are starting primary, the 70 per cent finish, it will be a tremendous contribution in the democratisation of knowledge and production in this country.  It would be nice to start at P.1 - I do not want to go to that, but it will not be possible, then the second stage will be to bring more children to school.  Out of those 30 who do not study at all.  It is a gradual process; it is not sudden, so that in the long run, all the children of Uganda have an opportunity to go to school.  It means we shall have time to plan for them and as hon. Miss Ntabgoba said, have time to sensitize the parents, have time to build the classrooms, have time to raise production, have time to increase revenue and as we increase in our capacity, we also increase in capacity to take more children to school.  

So, it is not a fashion - it is based on a realistic view to train more teachers, put up more classroom so that we gradually take more children to school not suddenly.  If you do it suddenly the Baganda say, Bugubugu si muliro’ that if you start fire by this grass, wawawa, you may not cook properly.  The first fire which cooks is the low fire with a small ‘emba’ then you get ‘emere entufu’ or warm.  But if you come to ‘bugubugu’ you will have problems.  

So, the process is gradual and continuous.  Because the problem with some of us not in this House but outside this House, is that we want to do something for which we shall harvest tomorrow. I brought you the school; I brought you buildings; that is not the way the world is.  Things which are going to be useful, things which are going to last, they are done slowly and effectively and that is how we should proceed.  I come to the element of the teachers.  First of all, I would like to take this opportunity as a Minister responsible for education, to pay tribute.  The Ugandan teachers in primary, secondary and tertiary, who continue to teach our children in spite of the hard times then and now.  

I said somewhere and I repeat it now that while every parent wants his or her child to be taught by the best teacher, there are very few parents who persuade their best students or their best children to be teachers.  So, I am confident, those few teachers whom some of us have called failures, they are not failures.  I refuse to call Ugandan child the failure.  We are the failures.  We fail to give them equal opportunity and when they fail, we fail to perform at the same level with those who get opportunities; we call them failures.  The failures are us. (Applause) 

The earlier we pass the blame to ourselves the better for this country.  How do you - the child in Nyanzi who is taught by the child who stopped in P.5, has never seen an exercise book, since only a ream of paper to examination time, to perform at the level as the child in the school where there is now even a computer, there is a swimming pool, this child when he does not perform as well, you call the child a failure.  The failure is us - the parents who have not yet given equal opportunities to our children.  These teachers are clever, they are committed but they have not been availed opportunities to nourish their brains.  They are like a seed, which fell in the seesaws.  It was not the fault of the seed; it was the fault of the sawyer.  The seed was the same.  How do you put the seed on barren ground and expect it to give you the same harvest as the seed on fertile ground?  

So, I would like to caution hon. Members that these teachers are suffering enough and we should not add.  We should praise these teachers who are teaching our children with limited resources, with minimum education, and yet with total commitment and when I check in the capacities abroad, they tell us when children come from Kenya to here, they are taken to lover classes.  When our children go to Harvard, they perform and get their Masters at the same time, sometimes better than those who came from Oxford.  

So, while our education system is not the best at the same time, really we should not blame these teachers and begin to call them failures.  They are not failures; they are not.  So, I want to defend the teachers and I shall continue to struggle as long as I am alive whether being the Minister of Education of not, to fight for better conditions of our teachers within the available means of our country, because we are critical to the environment of our country.

This commitment is not by office, it is a personal and revolutionary commitment, and hon. Tumwine here will remind you that even in the bush, we used to teach without books, materials and you saw the materials which came out 1986, some of you who were in the University, in case you are in doubt.  So, the concentration on teachers is that we should really be grateful to these miserable friends of ours who have also sustained the system.  Sometimes for six months without pay and now for about a month or two without pay in certain cases, yet they continue struggling for the good of our children and the food of our country.  

The other area that I think is critical is on technical education. The only thing I want to caution about is from the little experience I had; it is very expensive.  You should know what you are going in for.  Two, there are very few donors who want to go for it.  But those donors do not also have abundant resources.  When it comes to disbursement, they ensure that the majority of inputs are from our environment and that they are relevant and from ourselves.  It will also be a slow and gradual process but a process indeed.  So, if you expect that tomorrow schools will be having everything, and will be vocationalised, and then we are in for disaster.  But if you look at it as a medium long-term programme that we are committed to, then every step we take, we shall be sure that we are getting nearer and far away from a relevant education.  

May be let me deal with this subject which has been most misunderstood.  That is the question of cost sharing.  It has been mostly misunderstood because as I mentioned earlier the majority of the children who have gone to tertiary level like all of us did, first of all, they know the value of education.  I was talking to some students last week at Makerere, in case some of you are not aware, I had gone there some reception and I was saying that could anybody tell you to go and read now?  Then some of them said, no, no, but in primary if you do not tell a child to go and read, it will not read.  It has not yet valued education.  Even those for P.1, you may quarrel with it.  I received a few pushes to go to school but the higher you go, the more you come to value education.  

Secondly, you know how to articulate your views.  Thirdly, you are also beginning to be a beneficiary of a loop-sided system and fourthly, the majority of them either come from better backgrounds.  I am not saying from richer backgrounds.  Either from better backgrounds or they are better related or they know how to approach Ministers, Presidents and candidates.  So, sometimes their noise is out of proportion with the actual size.  

I recall during these discussions a few months ago, a number of people wanted to turn those into issues and we explained it to the peasants and the peasants amazingly understood.  Cost sharing should be looked into the context of Uganda.  We want to produce many doctors, we want to produce many technicians, we want to produce many Vets, we want to produce more skilled people to come and support this base of enlightened population.  Can we do it the old way?  The majority of the teachers in the sixties were supported by British grants.  Can they give them to you again?  

In the days of men I do not want to name here - in Makerere I visited one of them when I was in a secondary school.  At dinner they would put on gowns.  At breakfast they would have cornflakes.  I do not think there are many Members of Parliament here who know what cornflakes tastes like. (Laughter)  I tasted it in 1964 and when they boiled an egg and it was not well done, you will call a waiter and say hallo, take it back and do it again.  Those are the good old days but how many were they?  

In 1965, the Makerere population including those doing diplomas, doing certificates, doing all sorts of things were only 888 being taught by 95 per cent expatriates, and by the way, I must caution that in the 1960s, in really terms of the incomes of Ugandans were better than now.  For example, in 1970, Uganda produced half a million bales of cotton.  In 1986 we found it at 40,000.  I do not have the latest figure but now it is hovering around 80 to 90.  They are not yet 100,000 bales of cotton we produce.  Yet the population has catapulted from around 8,000,000 people.  It was 9,000,000 actually in 1969 to 17,000,000.  So, 9,000,000 had a half million bales of cotton at a better price.  17,000,000 people have ‘fifi’ of 8,000 bales of cotton and we expect to dress better.  To me, this is illogical.  

So, when hon. Ssekitoleko says the taxes have gone up, you study economics and compare in real terms the revenue of Uganda now and that of 1965.  You will find that in 1965, the revenue was healthier than that of 1994, although 94 is slightly better than 1990 but we are still improving from - I used to give an example if you are having UShs. 100/-, you are ten times richer than the person with UShs. 10.  When you are boasting, but you are all belonging to the society of the poor.  So, when they call the meeting of rich men or people with millions of shillings, you also turn up because you are the best in the village, you are in bad shape.

So, we are doing better but from a position of weakness.  We have not yet reached a position of excellence.  So, here we are saying how do we expand primary education?  How would you expand professional education with limited resources but wanting more people?  It means a lot of people have to make in sacrifices, do away with certain people that other did with in the interest of a better Uganda.  

As I mentioned earlier, if we use the same budget, we have now to support 1,000 students, they would live in luxury but where will Uganda be in terms of manpower planning?  So, that is why these gentlemen and ladies and by the way they were quite - I read their list, you have seen it and they spent almost a year consulting.  They came out with a conclusion that, why does the government not support tuition?  I have heard people talking of school fees.  There is no school fees.  Government supports tuition, then the parent supports feeding.  The same policy at secondary school - feeding and accommodation.  

To me, this is a policy for the poor and for the disadvantaged -(Applause)- but at the moment, the majority of the overwhelming peasants are subsidising the children of the rich at Makerere and other tertiary institutions and if I was subsidised, I must condemn it, I cannot pass it on to myself and my children.  It is a high subsidy by the poor to support those lucky ones whose parents were able to peruse them through.  For they will remain watchers while others become participants.  That is a fact.  I will give you a few examples.  

You will find many of us who live around Kampala and even you will find somebody for example working in Makerere or living in Nakasero, his son and daughter also carries luggage at the beginning of the term and shifts to go into a dormitory.  To the disadvantaged of the poor peasant from Otuke County, in Lira where the distinguished reverend comes from, those are the people making noise.  When we closed the University in 1989, the Vice-Chancellor rang me to say open the gates because there are too many cars, they cannot enter.  You go to Makerere at the end of a term and see how many vehicles are coming to pick children.  Those who can afford to pick the children if they paid a bit, then we who walk on foot we could also get access.  

I take this opportunity to call upon my elite friends in this House and outside it to commit class suicide and accept sacrifices for the poor whom we represent instead of appearing to be representing then when we are trying to protect our own interests -(Applause)- because those ones who are able if they went another three years, it would free this money and this room for a few more people who are not able to come and also this room for a few more people who are not able to come and also get accommodation.  I would rather finish a University Degree with a small loan to pay over a longer period of time than remaining outside a University with ignorance and without a loan, because the more knowledge you get, the greater the ability for you to survive - because what is the situation at the moment?  

Last year 9, 250 students got two principles and above.  When I went to University, people with one ‘E’ went.  they are now Phd holders.  they are locked out because we are saying no, Mushega’s son who has a house in Kololo, a house in Nakasero, must also go and sleep.  Then those who say you reduce corruption; and there is a lot of corruption when the public is the one feeding everybody.  

For example, if you go to our secondary schools and the University; I have a new team there. Recently, they told me that they would find in one hall of residence with about 400 group employees, cooks, and sweepers, looking after 700 students.  They are all feeding on government food.  When the prices of food go down, those of universities and secondary schools never go down.  When they go up they stay there.  The child of an able person, you cook food in Makerere, he goes home to eat.  He has a room at the father’s place and a room in the University.  He has a plate at the father’s place and a plate in the University.  Double expenditure.

MR. OPIO :  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Minister that some of our feelings about cost sharing, it is not because we would like to support the rich to continue enjoying or their children to continue enjoying facilities but the cost sharing if it is taken as it is without arrangement, would mean that the poor ones we are trying to sympathise with - will never make it to Makerere because of the amount of money which a poor man has never counted, even a million.  

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister that as himself, we are very concerned about the poor and it is because of our concern for the poor that we would like this subject to be examined thoroughly because the people who have got many rooms, some in Kampala, others at Makerere, definitely there should be a means test by which those people can be made to pay; but if it is a blanket thing, there are many people who cannot afford even UShs. 100, UShs. 200 and who have got the brains to go to the University -who will never be able to go there if this paper is passed as it is.  

MRS. KULANYI:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would be very grateful if the Minister would clarify to us how he is really going to identify these rich people and the poor; so that at the end of the exercise, we know who is actually going to sponsor their children at the University and who are these poor people whom the government is going to assist.  So, we want more clarification on that.

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the Minister in his winding up that, actually, the majority of the rich Ugandans are not even educating their children in Makerere.  They are sending them abroad.  That is where they are studying and definitely, the poor we are talking about of the poor lot, there is no way they can contribute to cost sharing in Makerere when they cannot even educate their children in P.1 up to P.4.  

So, if we are talking about balancing the equation, the starting position should not be Makerere, it should be to facilitate these people to go from P.1 up to P.7 but this matter of - I think the Minister is trying to advance an argument which I have been following attentively, but I think it has oversimplified the facts on the ground and inevitably if you are going to let taxation - the people who pay taxes to be able to go to Makerere, the poor peasants cannot in any way pay taxes that are worthwhile considering as far as education in tertiary institutions is concerned but finally, I repeat, the rich are not educating their children in Makerere University, they are abroad.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just to clarify on what the hon. Kulany raised about how to find rich people, as opposed to the poor people.  We find the rich people by seeing those who are paying very high taxes.  Those are the rich people.  Those high taxes that they pay can easily identify them to be very rich.  The problem is whether to punish them for paying higher taxes.  

MR. MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In my view, the Minister is emphasising a very small point.  I do not think that the people who have children and have a bed in their houses and a bed in the University are that many to the extent that if you eliminate those people that you would create a significant number of people - extra people who will go to Makerere.  I think he is right there, could be a few but I think these are very few to justify the emphasis the Minister is giving.

MRS. MASABA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think I would like to add to what hon. Kulany said, who is the rich and who is the poor.  I wish to inform the Minister through you and the whole House that, the women are the poorest -(Interjection)- can I finish my point?  If you go to the rural areas where the majority of the poor live, you will find that the majority of men are not educating their children; especially in polygamous homes.  You find that only the wife who is loved by the man has her children educated whereas the others are left behind.  When you go to the widows, you find that some men who purport to be brothers of the deceased turn the property of the deceased into educating their own children while the orphans are left behind.  

When you get to the orphans themselves, you find the position is pathetic.  Even some with respect to the good work done by some of our NGOs, you find that even that little money given for the orphans does not reach.  You go to the children of soldiers.  When they go to public schools, they cannot meet the education; there is a difference.  So, the poor people are those disadvantaged group whereas we here who have had that chance of having education are really denying some education to the children of the poor especially, the rural women in the mountains.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to give the hon. Minister the information that this subject should be looked into more deeply.  Where does the advantage of the rich start?  It starts at the facility in the primary school because some people in their present capacities and in those in the past were being subsidised by the taxpayer.  I am talking of the Ministers, I am talking of the elite, I am talking of the people who are advantaged.  Their children are the ones who have got better opportunities to pass exams even to go to University.  

So, the process has been that even as we speak now, we are better subsidised than the people in the village.  So, the subsidisation aspect to be used as an element that they should not subsidise the people at the University is a wrong ground because the fact they are very few, 0.03.  The fact that they have studied from the bottom up to the top means, they deserve being subsidised as we subsidised the Ministers with Pajeros, as we subsidise people in government with higher facilities. (Applause)  

Further information, Mr. Chairman.  Why are these vehicles being many at the end of the day?  The information is going to be if we ask them to pay, that for the case of the ladies, they will be more exploited and you will have more people with vehicles to pay for their fees to enable them to pay and sometimes that is why we find there are more vehicles going to the halls of residence of females than those of the males. (Laughter). 

Secondly, the fact that more vehicles are going to the University, it is not a sign that the majority of the people are really rich.  If you see a hundred vehicles, those are a hundred students and a hundred students and a hundred vehicles following each other will look crowded, when actually the majority of the people who are walking are the majority.  I would like to inform him that we should not use the question of the rich against the poor in connection with the facilitation of the University students.  We should look at where do we get resources to inject in the whole system to subsidise those who have managed to reach the top level and subsidise those who are at the lower level?

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr. Chairman, I welcome all this information and as I mentioned earlier, when you are touching vested interests, and the Baganda have a saying that, ‘enkima tesala gwakibira.’  Maybe, in future when the forest is on fire, the monkey is not the best to be a judge because it has vested interest, that is where it sleeps, although the farmer may be doing it for growing potatoes -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Minister in order to insinuate that we cannot be objective because what we are discussing concerns us, is he in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Minister is endeavouring to put his point in a best way possible, he is in order.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr. Chairman, my own view was that we are going to discuss chapter by chapter, and I was trying to make a summary.  But if you are opening another general debate, then you extend the time so that we have a debate on this are which -(Interjection)- so we have had occasion to read this document and the point I am trying to raise is not that I am trying a small point into a big one, but is that the population including Members of this House have also born a small point out of proportion in a relation to this paper; and we have discussed as if the whole paper was nothing but cost sharing.  Some responding in equal measure that is the subject, which seems not to be understood.  

For example, that point raised by hon. Moses Ali, we have already agreed that we will make an amendment for the prayer to be recited, I do not think that is a major debate.  The point raised about the foundation bodies being Chairman, I have already signed an instrument authorising that to place.  So, the areas which seem to be misunderstood, it is my duty also to spend a bit of time explaining why people came to that conclusion, and running the risk of being ruled a little bit not in proper Parliamentary language, but from the debate I have been listening to, it will show that if a good number of any Members of this august House read the paper, it is sometimes back and some of the points are not as fresh, and you can even tell by how many people carry copies in this House? (Interjection).  Yes, it is not an innuendo!  You can look around!  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of order.  is it in order for the distinguished hon. Minister for Education to really insinuate and pass an innuendo on the Members that they are no longer fresh, that they do not know what they are talking about, that the subject is old subject fro them and that he is only one in their now?  (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  There was sufficient demonstration from hon. Members, please hon. Minister carry on, you are in order.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  I think my Friend here should not carry wrong wars in the right places.  The point we are dwelling at here, to us for example, like a road maker, if he has enough money to make a road from Kampala to Mityana, I am talking about the controversial road, he will not fail to make it to Mityana simply because there is not enough money here to take it to Mubende, and if next time he has enough money to take it to Mubende, he will not stop taking it to Mubende because the Batooro will be complaining that it has not reached Fort Portal.  Every inch that is added on for a better road, the better for the country.  

So, I believe, even if there were 20 students who were able to pay and they given room to other students who are unable to come and join, to me, is an addition and it is an achievement.  We do not have to wait until all the 100 per cent are able to do it, as I mentioned, it is a gradual process; and I was giving this example.  They could be 10, they could be 15, but if those 15 can do it and allow another 15 who would have been out of the University to come and study what has Uganda lost?  Must we wait until the whole 100 per cent is able? 

For us we are talking about those who are able, if it is one, we have an extra student; there is no harm in having an extra doctor.  If they are 20, we have extra 20 teachers, if they are 100, wonderful!  If a university, which admits 2,000 students, achieves 2,100, what percentage increase is that?  This 2 percent is great, if you brought 2 per cent, you are not in bad shape, rather than one who brought at zero.  So, when we talk of these people, put it in a total context.  One, that it will affect everybody; two, that it will start tomorrow.  I think those are the two fundamental errors.  One, that it will affect everybody; two, that it will start tomorrow.  

And the point raised by hon. Tiberondwa, I will recall when we were having our own little debates, for example, when I went to do ‘A’ level from the Ankole Government scholarship, I studied my A’ Level at the Local Government Bursary.  In 1983, the Government of then introduced fees for everybody at higher; did this help the poor?  What happened to those who would not afford?  Has enrolment gone down?  As I said, then I say now, I do not think they did it out of malice, they introduced fees because the government could not afford to subsidise higher education.  

So, as we speak now, really the poor are out of the education system, I said the poorer of the poor; those who have a bit to be subsidized is reduced, because at the primary until we interview recently with the 50 per cent government intervention, it was 100 per cent private.  At secondary, some estimated it at 60 as others go there at 90 but the parents meet more than 50 per cent of the costs.  At A’ level it is nearly 70 per cent than at University, 100 per cent reverse.  To me, it is not even consistent; it is not consistent!  I know it is a risky area to travel but those who dare are the ones who succeed.  Hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine knows it better than myself.  When he ventured on February 6th, it was a spark, but now we have ended up subsidising millions of people.  So, if 10 people can do something and save the country, why do we not think that if another extra 50 students went to Makerere and the parent did it and another 100 poor came in that this is not good for Uganda.  

So, I want to make it clear.  One, it will not affect everybody; two, it is not sudden.  It will put in place when all the logistics have been studied and even passed because there will be a law brought to the House.  We have two Committees now working in anticipation.  One Committee made up of the officials from the Public, from the Ministry of Finance, from Ministry of Local Government, from Public Service, from Education are working on a new Education Act which will talk about whatever we pass, we are anticipating, we are planning for 6, 8, 9, whatever is passed, we are prepared.  A law is brought here spelling how a child will study until P.6 or P.7 or P.8, whatever you pass.  There will be another law about cost sharing, and it will be brought to this House, which will be more detailed.  There will be another law about Tertiary Education, the National Council for Higher Education, which will be passed by this House or the House of the time.  

So, at anytime there will be democratic cheques and more details for study.  It will not be that whatever is passed today, will be implemented tomorrow.  There will be legal effect, the Members of the Sectoral Committee you remember they quarreled when Makerere introduced fees.  I am the one who stood down and said no, the fees are necessary, but we cannot introduce them now because the Paper is before Parliament and we should not prejudice the debate.  So, these who do not understand our commitment to reality, sometimes mistake our official positions for the draconian stands.  This was there, the University had good reasons. 

As we speak now in a number of tertiary institution, they are charging all sorts of funny fees, registration, I do not know what, and people are paying in TTC, in the NTCs, in the UCCs, they are paying, we are keeping a blind eye, you know when you say do not pay, they will not run the system; when you say I keep quite, you know the system keeps going.  So, why do we not really give these people legitimacy to manage things?  So, I was stressing this simple point.  

Definitely, there will be more than 200 parents of the students in Makerere now who can afford to accommodate and feed their children and they go and stay free, there is no doubt about it, 200 out of 700, the figure is higher, but I am using the minimum.  Now, if those 200 - and how will it work?  Because, if an hon. Member of this House or any man in Kampala, he takes a child now to North Court because it is free, if tomorrow you say, borrow money, he will think twice.  Do I go to borrow really when the child could have slept home, he will prefer the child to be home than to borrow, that place will be freed; and I was mentioning a number of corruption - that place when the public is one running water, running electricity, running fire wood, running plates the loses are colossal; they are very colossal.  So, this may result into a saving on the wastage, on a huge wastage.  

A number of other universities in the world now they give the student his money and he chooses what to eat and where to eat.  So, that you move away from this business of a Vice-Chancellor being the head cook, the purchaser, the cleaner and its results into heavy sailing.  Hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine knows, I can give an example of the Army.  Before the army used to give free ratio to every soldier; and we who had the escorts whenever you went home on the day they gave posho, you found the marketers there buying free posho.  Then the Army took a bold decision and they said, let every soldier get his shillings and he chooses what to eat. There was a row in the high echelons of the Army, that this will not work, it is terrible, the soldiers have no time to go there, they are poor, they are busy in trenches but he stood firm.  Those who were selling cheap posho to the Army are in trouble, and those who are milling at 10 times the prices are raising hell.  But the soldier has benefited most because he knows how to budget for his money.  I am using as an example, and if you go to Mbuya now, the hills that used to be bushy, they have been cultivated, why?  Because these soldiers prefer to keep part of the money and grow the cabbage and use it on something else, and these students were trying to subsidize more heavily than the young ones, they are mature, the majority joined the University above the age of 18.  They are able to do one or two things in the long run because this paper is not for today, nor is it for tomorrow; it is for the future of this country.  To chart a path which people will be marking as their resources are availed.  

So, my proposal is that there has been unnecessary blowing up of the cost sharing, some have called it school fees, others have calculated 4,000,000/- and those who say that the rich are abroad, it is not true.  There are also enough rich people by our standards who are in these tertiary institutions, and when we mention it, we talk about Makerere only; we are not talking about Aduku, because it is far from here, we are not talking about Kichwamba UTC, we are not talking about Lira TTC, we are not talking about Elgon.  So, I do not want to insinuate anything but I am mentioning that tertiary involves more than Makerere and really we should avoid turning this Ministry and this debate being a debate about Makerere University.  

As I mentioned yesterday, there is a Visitation Committee Report on Makerere specifically.  It will be brought to this House for debate.  We did not bring it before this one, because this White Paper talks about a spectrum of education from beginning to end.  Then the Makerere Visitation Committee talks about a segment.  So you cannot talk about a part before you have understood the hole; because the part should fit into the hole rather than the hole fitting into the part.  

To me, this is a very critical discussion. It is very small in terms of money, but it is very critical in terms of the ideological and mental direction of our people as to how we are going to satisfy our population.  Shall we pay more attention to those who make most noise even where it is not necessary?  Or to the majority who are incapable of organising but making noise, but who are in need of our support?  

So, on cost sharing in summary, it is saying everybody who goes to the tertiary, tuition and other facilities free, accommodation and feeding; those who can afford they pay those who cannot afford when the scheme has been put in place they borrow, they will pay back as they work and then those who calculate it of course will take into account the salaries of the day and the environment of the day, I cannot predict what it will be in three years time or what it will be in 15 years time -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please hon. Minister, could you try to wind up your submission?

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Of course, there are many people who borrowed money from UCB and have not paid, that does not mean that the borrowing system in Uganda is abolished.  There will be a legal framework, but the basic point is that this wrongly or rightly, but rightly this scheme is linked with the basic education and with vocational, technical and then tertiary education.  

Our assumption is that by the time this scheme goes into place, it will not start 1992/93 because that is over taken, it will start at the time when parliament approved.  When it comes into place all the sentimental arrangement, the training of the community, the training of the parents will have taken place and the attitudes then will be much far different from what they are today.  I will give another example in the 1970s when they introduced double-deckers in Makerere, first two people in a room, students rioted but two people were introduced to a room and we have produced no graduates.  Now, there is a double-decker, more people have enrolled.  So, this has been progressive in Mbarara, the other day we introduced a double-decker, the medical students went on a strike that they cannot sleep on a double-decker and become doctors.  We became firm, took disciplinary measures and the institution is continuing.  So, those who expect smooth sailing, then you are in for heavenly peace.  

On the National Flag, that can be looked at, on prayers, we have already said we have no problem with it on the school circle, the reasons we have given are correct, and they are written down, hon. Rwakakooko was asking when it was a research, the Kajubi report gives a lot of reasons as to why they are coming to this conclusion, actually, the original recommendation was 9 or 10 years but they say, the nation may not afford them at this stage.  

I am trying to finish so that we can – so, I think I have responded to the majority of the issues that were raised by the hon. Members of this august House, which we consider are critical, but I would like to conclude by saying that the implementation of this Paper in whatever form is passed, one, will not be sudden, and secondly will be gradual and thirdly, every step will be implemented when the logistics are in place by the Government of the day and finally most of the proposals -the critical proposals in this paper will be subject to a specific legislation by Parliament and at the time the details of it will be thoroughly debated by those who will be privileged to discuss it.  

But we should not tie the hands of the future simply because we are of the present fear to dare, and I want to assure these students in tertiary institutions now by the time these measures come into place, they will be the ones probably applying for jobs to implement them, because there will be also offices to do that, and they shall take into account the poor; and for you who are concerned of the poor, let me conclude by saying this.  

Hon. Ayivu is a Member of a Sectoral Committee on Education.  So, I was saying finally, are we for the poor or are we singing about the poor?  We are for the poor, the poorest of the poor are nowhere at the tender age near a classroom.  We must do something for them, in the next line of the poor are dropping out of school I am sure you hon. Members whenever you are home, you see people asking for fees for secondary, for A’ Level.  They are out and we are not bothered about them!  So, me my brother should be straight from the child at nursery right to the child at tertiary and the child at tertiary already knows better what to do more than the child at the nursery.  

So, if we are going to care for the poor, let us care for them from beginning to end, but not to go for those who attract great attention although they may not be in greater need, and the NRM Government will not abandon tertiary education.  Tertiary education is crucial for development of this country, but we would like to remove those elements that may not affect quality and performance but may enable Government also to pass on assistance to those who need it most.  

I thank you for your hearing, I thank you for your support and I am very glad that the debate was not because the subject intends to brake the bone and re-sharp it again, in that it has been - we have been producing for officers, we must now move to create conditions under which Uganda on a massive scale will start to produce enlightened people, educated people, conscious people for production and development, so that we can increase, improve on our standard of living, increase on our revenue, consequently increase on the revenue base and what we tax so that we can support more.  It will be gradual, it will be not sudden but surely, we must have a cause and stick to it irrespective of the small hardships, like you get a puncture on a long journey, you do not abandon a journey and jump on a passing lorry you repair it and you go on. I thank you for your listening.  

ADJOURNMENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now adjourn the House until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. in the afternoon.

(The Council rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 2nd June, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)
 



