Tuesday, 8 June 2004

Parliament met at 2:40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, again I welcome you to this meeting. I regret we could not start on time. I wanted to start on time, but as you see on the Order Paper we had to administer oaths for hon. Wasieba but he delayed.  Therefore, we wanted to delay so that he would make it to the House and I understand he is a few yards away from us.  He will be joining us so that he can become a Member of Parliament by taking the necessary oaths.  

Let me start with this personal sad news. I have received a letter from hon. Ben Etonu. It reads as follows: “Death of my mother, Norah Angelo Aledo. 

This is to inform you that I lost my mother, the late Norah Aledo, on 28th May 2004 at Mulago Hospital at 2.00 a.m.  

She was born in 1899, aged 105 years. She was laid to rest at her home in Amuchu village, Asamuku Sub-County, Amuria County, Katakwi District on 31st May. She has left five children of which I am the third born; the firstborn is 80 years old. I request that you inform the Members.” 

I have informed you; sorry about this death and I think we should observe a minute’s silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again I want to welcome you especially from the recess, and I also thank you for what you have been able to do during that recess.  
Honourable members, again as I said last Friday, this is going to be a very important session for this Parliament and for the country. I know you will be able to discharge your mandate, but all the time you should know that whatever you do, you should do it for the good of the country. (Applause)

It is true when we were campaigning for elections most of us had personal manifestos, but you very well know you cannot effect your manifesto unless you get the combination of the support of everybody here and other agencies of Government. Therefore, Honourable members, I appeal to you that we work together. You need me, I need you, and therefore that should be the spirit under which you transact business during this session. We are going to deal with very important matters, especially the Constitution, the supreme law of the land and therefore unless we work together we may fail to deliver. Today we are going to set up some organs of Parliament namely, the sessional committees. I want to take this opportunity to thank all of you because you served on various Committees for the work, which you were able to transact during the last Session.

I thank all the chairpersons who chaired these committees.  It is because of the work of these committees that we were able to do what we were able to do. We shall need these committees again, and I appeal to you to work together. It is time to set up the sessional committees, and again you must put the interest of the country above any other interests. The sessional committees are going to be set up under Rule 153. 

Some people approached me this morning saying, “How do I go to register myself if I am not able to run very fast to go and put my name first on the list?  Am I going to be thrown out because I have not been able to be the first to register my name on the list?” But having examined Rule 153, I do not see any problem about this; we do not have to break our legs to be the first to register. Anybody who wants to serve on this committee or the other, the rule is very clear; you write to the Clerk and say, “I want to serve on the Social Services Committee or I want to serve on the Legal Committee.” The Clerk, having received these names, will tabulate them and give them the list. The list may be beyond or less than 25, but then we shall find a solution to that.  

There was a time when some people were acting in good faith on behalf of others and writing their names maybe because they were abroad; that is very good. But sometimes this was interpreted as drafting somebody on a committee without his knowledge. So, since we have the rule that you write, if you need two days I will give them to you to do so. If you need a mailing box for this I shall provide for it, but if you want you can take it to the Clerk. I think this will solve the problem, which I see, that may arise in this one.  Should the number exceed 25, which is the maximum number, definitely we shall find a solution to this with you. But please, I appeal to you to work together. That is the only way we shall be able to do our work.

2.53
MR WAMBUZI  GAGAWALA  (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Mr Speaker I wish to express my gratitude to you and your Deputy together with the Commission for having worked very hard to make sure that there is now some clean air to be breathed by the Members of Parliament. I think this is a good thing.  You know air-conditioning is an interesting thing. I am a mechanical engineer and I have been a lecturer for air-conditioning. Air-conditioning means nobody should actually feel cold; he should feel comfortable, that is the question. If you are not comfortable, then the person has not done a good job. But if you are feeling comfortable where you are sitting and you can nod your head and say that “I think I am comfortable” and the smell of the House is comfortable, the speed with which it is blowing against your skin is comfortable and the temperature is comfortable, then we say, the person who air-conditioned the Chambers has done his work.

Mr Speaker, there is a problem with air-conditioning today because the contractor has not been paid his money for having done the work. (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I think everything is now in place. It is a question of commissioning the gargets and then you have the fresh air here. As for the contractor not being paid, we are working on it. We need not subject this to a debate, honestly.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I am not on the payroll of the contractor.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, there are ways of doing things.  There are many things that can be handled effectively without subjecting them to a debate here or anywhere.  This even goes to your welfare.  A lot has been done without attracting debates here and there, and therefore, I appeal to you to leave that to us.

MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In your exhortation before Parliament just now, you have mentioned that we should put national interests above personal interests, and I welcome that.  But I would also urge that this should not stop with Parliament, but also with other institutions of government.  Why I am raising this, Mr Speaker, is because I was surprised this morning when I read that Government is appealing against an order to pay Shs 125m to the Presidential Private Secretary, Fox Odoi, after successfully challenging the Leadership Code in the Constitutional Court. Whereas this may lie in the premises of court matters, the point is, how are public officers being guided? How are they paid?  What are they being paid for? Are they going to engage in taking Government to court and at the same time get paid by Government? I thought this, Mr Speaker –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, just inform me, you (not Speaker) as a lawyer and as a citizen. Everybody in the country has a right of access to courts of law, and there is no way, if somebody is aggrieved and thinks he is going to get redress by going to law courts, to stop him. What you are referring to as what you have read in papers, is an award of court. Courts are taxed, there is a taxing officer who taxes the courts and awards them. Anybody who is not satisfied, there is a system of appealing against the award rather than us here to debate what happens in court. We have given the mandate to court; the Constitution is a mandate to court. So if they have awarded that one, let us exhaust the procedure of appealing and we should abide with what has come up.

MR SEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. But mine really was not a quarrel over costs, but the principle. You know that you ought to be advising government, but you desist and withhold that advice in time and wait for when the matter is already ahead, then you follow it up and take it to court! The principle is what I am talking about, Mr Speaker. It is not about the cost, and I think it is setting a bad precedent and you have been seeing it all.  Even the President has been dragged into this, swearing court affidavits. I think we should have a limit, Mr Speaker. If we allow such matters to continue, I do not think it augurs well with this country, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Then you may confront the courts because they say fair trial is that the court is free to get any kind of evidence that may assist it to reach a decision.  So, even when you talk about affidavits, if you have evidence, you can be called to go to court and to give that evidence. I rather think that since this is a court matter, we should not subject it to a debate here. Otherwise, there are many other judgements that will come here for debate and may not be good for our court system. This is unfortunate. This is the problem. If it was a question of negotiation it would be different, but if it is the court that has awarded this money, then how do we say, “Court, you are wrong?” This is the problem. I see your concern, but then there are other superior principles, which require us to respect decisions of court, and we have to abide with them.

3.00
DR STEVEN CHEBROT (Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure.  This is in connection with the ruling you made, concerning some of our colleagues who have indicated to you that they are unable to come and to be able to write on the board their names to a specific sessional committee. What I have learnt in the past is that, when I am not present, I am always allowed to write a letter to the Clerk saying that I will not be present on this day, please, could you include me on such and such a sessional committee.  But my concern now is this, procedurally we are tasking the Clerk with a lot of work.  

Let us assume there are three committees, for example, where people usually would like to go, depending on their expertise.  Let us assume that the Clerk receives 200 names to belong to Legal and Drafting Committee, or Presidential and Foreign Affairs, or Defence, or those sessional committees, which are attractive to many people.  What procedure is the Clerk going to use? Are we going to subject these names to a computerisation system so that the computer can pick the names at random? Or we are going to come again to this House like we do with the Standing Committees and elect Members? Is that provided for in the rules?

This afternoon you should have seen the stampede, which was in the corridors of the House about who is going to be on which committee and who is going to be removed from which committee on the basis of what she or he has done in the past for this country. Let us not hide what is going on, there is a stampede and unless we clarify and we all agree in this House how we are going to proceed with the new procedure, there will be no harmony in this House.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much, honourable members.  In the first place, I am not used to stampedes, and therefore when you tell me there will be a stampede, I will try to stop it so that there is no stampede. I do not expect Members of Parliament to stampede because of writing their names. I said whatever I said because - I want to read the rule

“Each Sessional Committee shall consist of not less than 15 Members and not more than 25 Members who have deposited with the Clerk a written notice indicating the Sessional Committee on which they wish to serve.”  

That is exactly what I said, and I think that will stop the stampede so that at one’s pace you will take the notice to the Clerk, the Clerk will receive and tabulate. Should the number be below 25 we shall take a procedure, if it is above we shall take the procedure that will not see Members of Parliament stampeding in Parliament.

3.04
MR AWORI (Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have in the past requested through a motion of Parliament, which was unanimously passed, that we broadcast live the proceedings of this House. Mr Speaker, you assured me that the matter is being taken care of. Now, I am also requesting the Leader of Government Business that such an event as we had last week, the President addressing the nation should be broadcast live by Radio and if possible by television nationwide. I am repeating this particular request because when you leave this to the commercial media, it is subject to editing and sometimes misinterpretation. In this particular Session, we are going to a very tricky period where our deliberations must be very clear to the voters. The future of this Nation constitutionally on the process should be known to all of us. So, Mr Speaker, I am requesting again that the Prime Minister makes it a point through the Office of the President, the Minister for information, that any time the President makes a national address it should be carried live nationwide in total without editing.  Likewise, Mr Speaker, once again I hope in this Session our deliberations shall be carried live nationwide.

3.06
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I also want to thank you for guiding us so well in the last session and I do hope that the same will happen in this Session.  

Mr Speaker, as you rightly put it, this Session is a special one because we are going to discharge special responsibilities, which will either see us put Uganda to the next stage of its democracy and development or see us put Uganda a few steps backward.  In order to do this, Mr Speaker, you have rightly appealed to us to exercise the maximum spirit of nationalism and patriotism. But, Mr Speaker, in this respect I only wish to make two comments.  One, of course, is the very fact that anything that tends to divide this House or divert it from its nationalist and patriotic role should be avoided and rejected.  Anybody who tries to bring Members to a group outside the structure, which is known either in law or Parliament here, in order to create conspiracies and intrigues should not be allowed.  Members should be free to exercise their God-given intelligence to decide for this country rather than be herded in a certain manner, and I think we can only do this as freethinking people if we are allowed to be within the known structure of decision-making. I am particularly referring to caucuses, which tend to divert and divide us, and I think this should be rejected and people should be seen to be together.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, for every Ugandan to be part and parcel of the process of this constitutional change and democratisation, there must be peace in every square inch of Uganda. Mr Speaker, I come from Otuke; my people are still in camps. I do not know how they are going to be part and parcel of this very critical condition, which is going to be made by this Parliament or by the people. If a referendum is decided to be held, I do not know how even in the first place they are going to be registered, how they are going to vote, how those who are in insecure areas, how some of us are going to access them and so on.  So, what is the challenge to this Parliament? 

I think another challenge to this Parliament is to ensure that whatever we can play here there is total peace so that every area, every person in Uganda, feels that an important decision, which is being made, is not made in his absence, but is made when he is peaceful, free and able to participate properly.  

Mr Speaker, I understand in the last session you promised that we may be able to hold one of our sittings in the North. I am looking forward to this sitting because it is a contribution. I want to thank Members of Parliament because I think three quarters of the Members of Parliament have already been either in committees or in their individual capacities to the internally displaced camps; they know what to do. Therefore, to have a formal meeting of Parliament in one of these districts, which is in a state of insecurity, will not only be of symbolic importance but it will be re-assuring the people that Parliament is part of them and that it is consciously contributing to ensure that the situation is normalised.  

I wish this Parliament success in the very challenging tasks it is going to have.  I hope our contribution will make Uganda a better place to live in.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.11
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, as we resume this historic session, which you have elaborately associated to important responsibilities, I would like to welcome you all on behalf of the people of Lubaga South from wherever you have been. (Applause)

I am standing here to seek your advice on matters related to procedure vis-à-vis what you have stated.  My inquiry is in two dimensions.  One is in regard to the speech of His Excellency, the President, recently on the State of the Nation.  Although the President does not sit in Parliament but through consulted action, he is well presented by the Leader of Government Business. I believe he briefs him from time to time.  When the President makes a speech under the aegis of state of the Nation Address, it is more or less policy.  When he was briefing us, he stated that there were certain items in this Session which we should begin with, namely, the Referendum.  On behalf of the people of Lubaga South, I am asking whether what was stated in the State of Nation Address is going to be part of the real agenda we are going to debate.  That is number one.

Number two, Mr Speaker, when we last adjourned, in accordance with our procedure and the process under which we adjourned, you stated that all the items which were seemingly left out, shall be handled expressly as soon as we come back. Those items included, among others, issues related to BIDCO and Electricity Tariff Petition.  Mr Speaker, what assurance do I have that those issues shall be handled first thing in this Session?  

THE SPEAKER:  First Of all, honourable members, we shall get a copy of the President’s State of Nation Address to enable us appreciate it and make our comments.  That will come soon.  

In regard to the business he mentioned, we have to set up the committees, and after we have known the Chairpersons of these Sessional Committees, the Business Committee will be fully constituted to consider the business we have according to the priority it deserves.  You very well know that according to our rules, the Government Business is a different category.   Therefore, it must be given preference but the Business Committee will consider all these appeals by the President and then line up the business, including your business which you have mentioned.

3.15
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I would like to thank you for the wise counsel you have given this Parliament and the nation at large. In this very trying moment, we should put the State first and our personal interest second.   This is a very important opening of the Session because important people like the Political Advisor to His Excellency the President in the names of Maj. Roland Kakooza Mutale is in attendance in the Gallery. (Laughter) Why do I say this?  

Last week this country was thrown into some turmoil, and I am very happy that the Head of Government Business is around.  There was this quarrel, if I may call it, or misunderstanding among institutions of Government between the IGG, the Solicitor General and the Political Advisor.  To many, it gave the impression that State machinery had broken down if we go by what we had on the press that the IGG demanded information from the Solicitor General and for one reason or another that information was not given. It is also stipulated very clearly in the laws and the Statute that establishes the office of the IGG that he or she has the powers of a High Court and can order for that information to be delivered if not cause a warrant of arrest to be issued.  But when that stage reached, the Press went further to say, “Maj. Roland Kakooza Mutale deployed Military men to give protection to a person who was wanted to answer or give information.  

To us, as the ordinary people in Terego, that is an indication that Government seems not be in control. Because if a person has done something wrong and he is required to come to answer charges, why should another Arm of Government be deployed to obstruct a legal and lawful arrest order?  So, Mr Speaker, these are issues of concern, and many people are wondering now that we have the Head of Government Business here, can he assure us that there is one State or these various Organs of State are working in unison to maintain that one organisation?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very important issue which requires a debate.  It is not something that should be incidental. We need detailed information, but you made the point. Let us only deal with matters connected with the communication from the Chair. I am not saying your observation has no merit; it has, but it will attract a full debate.  I suggest that you give it time; you will have a debate on this issue.
3.18
MR ONEK OBALOKER  (Lamwo County, Kitgum District):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to take this opportunity to convey my appreciation to this House from the people of Lamwo County and generally Kitgum District for the concern our national Parliament has shown to the suffering of our people. 

About two weeks ago, we visited the camps in the various districts of the north under the Select Committee led by hon. Alaso. When we visited Lamwo County in Gemu sub-county where 103 houses were burnt and 530 homes were looted, people were hungry and there were no supplies.  These people had kind words for our Parliament. They had a lot of appreciation because a number of delegations have visited our districts from this House, including a delegation led by you, Mr Speaker, and the people are having hope that maximum efforts are being exerted to end the insurgency in our sub-region.  

The major concern facing our people now is the inadequacy of supplies of humanitarian needs.  Food ration has been cut down to only less than 60 per cent of what a normal human being would need to just live.  The World Food Programme has cut it down to below 1500 calories a day per person.  At the moment, the World Food Programme is complaining of lack of funds and possible delay or even absence of future supplies to these IDP camps.  I would urge that Parliament takes special steps to see that something is done, if not by the International community, but at least by our Government to bridge whatever shortcomings that are there with respect to supplies to the IDP camps, because they are totally inadequate now, and there are visible signs of malnutrition in the IDP camps.  

The people of Lamwo also appreciate the increased efforts by Government in eradicating the insecurity.  A number of insurgents have already reported and they are increasingly coming out.  Our people are working hard to ensure that this insurgency comes to an end.

I would like to conclude by really urging my Colleagues in Parliament to continue with their efforts so that we get peace in that Sub-region, start development, and have order just like any other part of the country.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.22
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I have about four issues.  One is that, on the 15th of May the people of Kooki were delighted to see and witness the enthronement of their Kamuswaga after 38 years. (Applause)  I want to thank Members of Parliament and the hon. Speaker for having joined us to witness this important occasion. I also want to thank the Movement Government which has put in place an environment to enable us see these cultural institutions revived because to us, these leaders are a symbol of unity, a symbol of development and a symbol of mobilization.  

I want also to add my voice on yours, Mr Speaker and the rest of the colleagues, about this hectic session we are going in, the 4th Session of Parliament.  It really requires the issue of discipline amongst the members, mutual respect and patience. When Hon. Wadri was talking and referring to a member in the Gallery, Maj. Kakooza Mutale, to me he is a Ugandan, and we now have laws in place.    So, I think we should not really harm others.  You know very well he cannot come here on the Floor and defend himself; he has no access to the Floor.  He may be a father or a friend to some of us. So you really harm us.  I think if there are issues as Members of Parliament, you can address them in other forums. You can go to court –(Interruption) 

DR CHEBROT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  On the Order Paper, I have looked through it, and I do not see anything to do with third term or “Ekisanja.”  In the gallery, on the right side, there are two respectable ladies with that dressing.  I know I am not supposed to raise it to members in the gallery, but is it in order for the honourable ladies to sit there and start advertising themselves when it is not on the Order Paper?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, whereas we have –(Interjections)- order please!  Whereas we have a dress code for honourable Members of Parliament, we do not have a dress code for the strangers. (Applause)

CAPT. MATOVU: Mr Speaker, my third point is about UPDF.  When we were in the recess, I used to access some newspapers.  I was really humbled when I used to read about our comrades from the LRA who are reporting back.  I saw fellow Captains lining up in 4th Division. I was so touched and I want to congratulate the UPDF for a good work, the political wing in the army, Government and the leaders in those places. We need to use all approaches to end that nasty war.  So, I want commend the leadership in the army, leadership in those regions and even colleagues, Members of Parliament from those regions, for they have really done a commendable job, a very risky job, as you all know what it means to go in those deep places.    Let us keep the fight; we need each other for the good of this country.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.28
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to just welcome all of you back, and appreciate the enthusiasm with which we have come to the second last session of our term of office.  I say this because, Mr Speaker, you could have opened the House at 7.30 a.m. today because there was quorum in the lobby. So, Mr Speaker, I am very assured that there will be no shortage of quorum in this 4th Session - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Very good.

MRS MUSUMBA SALAAMU: That is why I want to congratulate us all for this enthusiasm.  The gallery too will be full and that is a level of concern that we have begun with the 4th Session.

Mr Speaker, I am also happy that today you did refer us back to the rules, and this is a matter that I have kept raising throughout the years of the Seventh Parliament. I am glad it is going to be the rules to rule this House.  I hope these rules will rule us all the way and this is a precedent. That is why I chose to speak today because we have started on the right footing and I am glad whoever takes the day or loses will know they lost according to the rules that we set as a National Assembly. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I am banking on you to guide this House minute by minute even in the use of our time.  Mr Speaker, today I have heard people talk and I could not understand where it is arising from and it has eaten up almost an hour of our time. However, I take it that this is a preamble to the Fourth Session to which my colleagues have come with burning issues. I think in the interest of us all, let us go back to the rules and put notice of motions because everything that should come to the Floor of this House should come by way of motion, either by notice where members are given time or without notice as properly prescribed in our rules.

Mr Speaker, as everybody knows, this is really going to be a do or die Session.  Yes, otherwise we would not have been here at 2.30 p.m. full of quorum. I am asking, Mr Speaker, that your powers are not usurped from you.  I have a genuine worry that your Chair might be snatched from you soon.  Yes, by manipulations around you and about you and within the House.  This is a worry that I am expressing and I want to say that you must be on top of events, Sir. Today I saw a box outside here.  I have never seen a box here. I did not know where the box was coming from.  A box – have you not seen a box of a printer outside there in which we were all scrambling to get loose papers to put in?  

Mr Speaker, the integrity of this House is a responsibility of us all who have chosen to be Members of Parliament by profession or by default or whatever means and so that is why I want to appeal to us all that really the integrity of this House and this Institution is very paramount for us all whichever divide you are. 

Mr Speaker, I am hoping that the documents of this House too will be secured and we will know that they are authorized from one source, that is, the Clerk. On the notice board today we had this document “To Members of Parliament” and it was saying this. I will read it verbatim. I quote: 
“The registration exercise for Members of Parliament on Sessional Committees will be this afternoon beginning at 2.00 p.m.  Office of the Clerk, Tuesday, 8 June 2004 at 9.00 a.m.” It was on our notice board but it is not stamped. My biggest fear, Sir –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, the member holding the Floor has mentioned several things that many of us, including myself, Mr Speaker, have not understood.  For instance, she has mentioned the issue of a box, which was in the lobby and I do not understand what that box, according to what she saw, what it meant and the purpose for which it served because I did not see the box.  Can she clarify so that we know exactly what she talking about?

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Mr Speaker, on the issue of the box, I too saw it.  I was told to sign on a piece of paper to serve on a committee that I would wish to serve on. But I have heard with dismay that hon. Lumumba Justine carried away that box.  I do not know whether she is now the Returning Officer you have appointed- (Laughter)-I also wish to know whether it would be Justine Lumumba to determine who should be on which committee.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have just started business and we have a lot to do.  In transacting our business, we have to use the Constitution, Rules of Procedure and at times it may be necessary to read the Rule of Procedure.  I have no doubt that we intend to abide by the Rules of Procedure and the proper interpretations as may be given by the competent authority.

It should be known very clear too that there are offices in Parliament and the Clerk to Parliament is an Office mentioned in the Constitution and has his own functions and he is free to do his work.  I not concerned with the box in corridors or in the Clerk’s Office. I do not intend to interfere.  I have got my assignment. I know my mandate and I intend to carry it out. (Applause) Therefore, let us be serious on what we should do today and we shall do tomorrow.

MR AWUZU ANDRUALE:  Is it in order for the hon. Chebrot to bring a box and put it right in the middle of Parliament, the box whose contents we do not know?  These days security is a matter, which we all should be aware of.  How do we know there is no bomb in this box?  Why does hon. Chebrot probably want to kill all Members of Parliament of Uganda?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members - it is out of order to use this Chamber where honourable members sit to transact business as a stage in theatre. 

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank everybody for their contributions.  I think we share the same pain across the House.  We share the same pain of indignity where a box is picked and is protected by a staff of Parliament – a door keeper in this Parliament - taking charge of a box whose origin we cannot tell and when I see smartly dressed national leaders scramble for pieces of paper to throw in that very box and disown it here - Mr Speaker, the point I am making –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If I may ask, was it in the Chamber here or outside?

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, the box was deposited on the table where we sign and register our presence here. The point we are making is not to turn this place into a theatre; there is no point in turning this place into a theatre. We are all worried that the standards are declining and it is us all to protect them. I am talking about the box today because I have been here all these years, nine years, and I have never seen a box -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think, honourable Member, I can assist you this way. I have heard it for the first time from you, and I may not be competent to give an answer until I have made inquiries with the administrators. The Speaker does not do day-to-day administration of Parliament, I deal with policies; the Clerk is the Chairman of Board of Management. I will try to make an inquiry and at the next available opportunity I will definitely advise you of what happened. But let me investigate and give you an answer. Thank you.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I want to conclude with a great hope that this House will discharge its duties. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: It will do, please. (Laughter).

3.40
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): I want to thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to ask for your indulgence because you had indicated that hon. Salaamu Musumba would be the last person to speak. I wanted to beg your indulgence just to raise one issue for all of us. 

Mr Speaker, as we begin this session, which everybody believes that is going to be very important for the foundation and for the future of our country, there have been a few reports in the media where some of our colleagues have been quoted and they have been representing this Parliament in a manner that directly undermines the integrity of this House. People have been quoted at public functions and rallies ridiculing that Parliament is working so hard to grab the power of the people. Parliament has never done that and for us as Members of Parliament, who have been elected and we swore to uphold and protect the Constitution, to go outside to the masses and we mislead the people with wrong information and in a manner that ridicules the integrity of this House, I think this is very unfortunate and we are setting a very bad precedent that should be outrightly condemned.  

Mr Speaker, for now all of us have been reading newspapers. I will not mention names, but I will call on every Member of this House that we would rather observe caution, be patient but above all, show the people that we actually know what the law says. It will be most unfortunate to be down there when the people expect guidance from us and then it will be seen that there is no difference between them and us. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I want to assure you and everybody caring to listen that Parliament constituted by 304 Members, will uphold the Constitution as by oath and it will not go beyond its mandate. And we know powers are given to us by the Constitution and other organs also have powers given to them. We shall make sure that we adhere to the mandate, the powers as given to us. That is an assurance. We can go to the next business.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

3.45
The oaths were administered to:

Mr Sylvester Wanjusi Wasieba

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wasieba, on behalf of the entire Parliament, I welcome you to this Parliament and congratulate you for the success. But you know you are replacing our departed friend, Francis Wapakabulo, whose great contributions are very well known, therefore, you are expected to continue with what he was doing.

It is true, you participated in the election where many things were said but now you are representing the people of Mbale Municipality, including those who did not vote for you –(Applause)- including those who wanted to vote for you. So, you should behave as a leader, as a father in a house. Someone might have offended you here and there; forget about that. Mbale Municipality is your base but you have come to serve the entire country. These are your friends, work together for the good of Mbale Municipality and the entire Uganda. You are most welcome! (Applause)

PROGRESS REPORTS BY SELECT COMMITTEES ESTABLISHED DURING THE 3RD SESSION

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is just to be updated with the position of work with the select committees we set up. Can I start with hon. Alaso as number one? Report on Roman (i)

3.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS IN THE WAR AFFECTED AREAS (Ms Alice Alaso): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. I am glad to report that our committee has completed its work. What we had pending before we went for recess was the question of going to Gulu, Kitgum and Pader, which we were able to do in the last one week and our report is ready. I think if you put us on the Order Paper even for Tuesday we will gladly present it.

I want to unhesitantly say that we as the committee are grateful to you, Mr Speaker, for making sure that we finally ended up in Northern Uganda. We also want to thank Development Associates for coming in at such a time to facilitate our trip. Basically we are ready to present this report if possible by Tuesday. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Chairperson and Members of the committee.

3.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON IMMIGRATION (Dr Kasirivu Atwooki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a full progress report by the Select Committee on Immigration. The committee has concluded public hearings in accordance with its work-plan. One major field visit within Kampala has been arranged to back up the committee’s findings and recommendations. This will take place in one week’s time. We will subsequently report to this House within three weeks. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and Members of the committee.

3.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON PORNOGRAPHY (Ms Sarah Kiyingi): Mr Speaker, honourable members, the Select Committee on Pornography started its work on 11th February and has held meetings with institutions and organisations as well as individual members of the public as follows: 

·	Institutions and organisations include: The Law Reform Commission, Uganda Joint Christian Council, the Media Council, Ministry of Information, Broadcasting Council, Uganda Communications Commission, Uganda Youth Network, Uganda Police, Ministry of Ethics and Integrity, Directorate of Public Prosecution, Family Life Network, the Red Pepper tabloid and Bukedde newspaper. 

·	The committee invited Ms Betty Kamya Turwomwe with regard to an article she wrote in the Sunday Vision of 20 July 2003 on prostitution.  She has appeared and testified before the committee.  

·	The committee also published an advert requesting members of the public to appear and present their views and concerns and in response Ms Robby Kakonge, a concerned mother and media consultant wrote to the committee requesting for a hearing and she has already appeared and testified.  

The committee has a few more organisations and individuals to interview before filing its report, it is also studying international trends and laws of other countries regarding pornography and will come up with comprehensive proposals. The committee, therefore, requests that in spite of the business schedule of the forthcoming session of Parliament, space be found for the committee’s report to be presented as soon as it is ready because the matter is urgent and there are lots of things that need to be handled regarding this matter. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and Members of the committee.

3.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mrs Dora Byamukama): Mr Speaker, honourable members, I would like to report on the Select Committee on Industrial Relations.  We have completed interactions with the people whom we had wanted to meet and all that we had left was going out into the field and we had planned to go to the eastern part of this country, as well as Kampala to visit some industries in order to have a practical experience of what is happening. Taking this into account, I am confident that we will be able to report at least in the last week of June.  

I am also glad to report, Mr Speaker, honourable members that the report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities is ready and if we can be given space, we are ready to present it on Thursday this week so that Members can hear about what we have been doing. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and the Members of the committee.

3.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE JINJA INCIDENT (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I chair the select committee investigating the circumstances that led to the disruption of the PAFO meeting in Jinja on 5 March this year. 

Mr, Speaker, I also wish to report that my committee is doing well. All the Members of the committee remained behind during the recess and we have been carrying out our work very diligently, and today we returned from Jinja where we have been interviewing people we thought could give us useful evidence on this matter. We have literally interviewed the key people and we are remaining with about four key people whom we need to interview and then write our report. Mr Speaker, you will bear with me that this is no simple task but we believe that in three weeks time we shall be ready with the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Chairperson and Members of the committee. Now, honourable members, this brings us to the end of today’s business. I thank you for coming in such big numbers and again I appeal to you that in the spirit of Uganda, let us continue to work together but not individually. I thank you very much. 

We shall be receiving the national budget on Thursday at 2.00 p.m. at the International Conference Centre. Therefore, the House is adjourned until Thursday at 2.00 p.m. at the International Conference Centre and I wish you good celebrations in Nyimbwa tomorrow for Heroes’ Day.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 3.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 June 2004 at 2.00 p.m. at the International Conference Centre)








