Thursday 5 June, 2008

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

NATIONAL ANTHEM

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

OPENING OF THE 3RD SESSION OF THE EIGHTH PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

PROCLAMATION

2.30
THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the First Lady, hon. Janet Museveni, Your Excellency the Vice President of Uganda, Your Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker, the Rt hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition of Parliament, honourable ministers, honourable members of Parliament, distinguished invited guests, ladies and gentlemen, I welcome you. This is my proclamation.
                         
WHEREAS Parliament was prorogued on 15 May 2008, thus marking the end of the Second Session of the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS clause (2) of Article 95 of the Constitution empowers the Speaker, by proclamation, to appoint the date of commencement of a session of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS it is expedient that the Third Session of the Eighth Parliament should commence;

NOW THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by clause (2) of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed that the Third Session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda do commence on this 5th day of June 2008 at 2.00 p.m. at the Parliamentary Chambers. 

Given under my hand at Parliament House on the 5th day of June 2008. 
Signed by Edward Ssekandi. (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR AND INVITATION BY THE SPEAKER 
TO H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO ADDRESS PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, “WHEREAS under clause 1 of Article 101 of the Constitution, the President has to deliver to Parliament an Address on the State of the Nation at the beginning of every session; 

AND WHEREAS the Speaker has just proclaimed the commencement of the Third Session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda; 

NOW THEREFORE, I, Speaker of Parliament, do hereby invite his Excellency the President to deliver to Parliament an Address on the State of the Nation Address this 5th day of June 2008". Your Excellency.

ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 101(1) OF THE CONSTITUTION

2.34
HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency, the Vice President of Uganda, the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, honourable ministers, honourable members of Parliament, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 

Mr Speaker, I stand here to deliver the State of the Nation Address of 2008 in fulfilment of the requirement of clause 1 of Article 101 of our Constitution. The five countries of the East African Community will at the same time be reading their national budgets for the financial year 2008-2009. Since such budget speeches are quite detailed on the performance of the economy as well as all the future projections, my presentation will give a broader picture but with particular emphasis on areas of a strategic nature as well as broad cross cutting matters.

Mr Speaker, before I go any further, permit me once again to convey to you and the entire House my deepest condolences and sympathies over the death of the following members of Parliament: hon. Omwony Ojwok, former MP for Labwor County, Kotido District who was also Minister of State in charge of Planning in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe of Ntoroko County in Bundibugyo District, Mr Emmanuel Pinto, former Member of Parliament for Kakuuto County in Rakai District who had worked as a coordinator, Parliamentary Development Coordination Office in this Parliament.

On a very sad note, the death of 20 young pupils in the fire that gutted Nassolo dormitory at Budo Junior School on 14 April 2008 is still fresh in our minds. Additionally, death robbed the country of Rev. Fr Dr John Mary Waliggo who was not just a member of the Uganda Human Rights Commission but a man of virtue who had made tremendous contribution to the well being of Uganda through the various offices, which he occupied at different times. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, at this moment I would like to request you to stand up and observe a moment of silence in memory of the departed persons whom I have mentioned.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

MR MUSEVENI: It is my pleasure to inform Parliament and the country that the Sixth Parliament’s mistake of delaying the Bujagali Power Project notwithstanding – (Laughter) - the economy has been doing exceptionally well. Rebased figures- and this word Rebased means updating for current prices in the national accounts by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics have shown that the economy has been growing much better than hitherto reported. 

These rebased figures show that our economy grew by 9.1 percent per annum in the calendar year 2007, measured at market prices. The economy is moreover projected to grow by 9.8 percent in the fiscal year 2007-2008. Over a five year period - that is from financial year 2003 up to date - the economy has been growing at an average rate of 8.3 percent per annum, which is quite above the seven percent per annum that we had set for ourselves in our poverty reduction programmes. 

As a consequence of this rapid growth, the economy of Uganda is now estimated at UgShs 24.1 trillion compared to the Shs 3.7 trillion in the financial year 1986-1987. UShs 24.1 trillion translates into about $ 14 billion if you use what the economists call the Atlas Method of calculating GDP or if adjusted to purchasing power to about $ 39 billion. 

This impressive rate of growth has been good in spite of the mistake in respect of energy already alluded to, in spite of high international oil prices, the crisis in  Kenya, some roads inside Uganda et cetera. What would the rate of growth be if these obstacles where not encountered? This is the question and you should answer it yourselves. You can see that it is very possible to transform Uganda in a fairly short time into a modern country. Even without these revised figures, that authenticate our view that the country is growing quite rapidly, one’s naked eye will show an unbiased observer the phenomenon growth that has been taking place in the economy. If you just look at the housing industry in Kampala, Entebbe and Mukono areas, you will see that the economy is growing phenomenally; that is if you are not blinded by prejudices. If you are suffering from blindness of the heart then of course you will not see. (Laughter)

Recently, I was in Arua; the hon. Angufiru, MP for Ayivu is sending out S.O.S; sign of distress because Arua Municipality is invading her county on account of the rate of prolific building of modern structures. (Laughter) She is very worried. There she is, and you see how well dressed she is. (Laughter) She is very worried because Arua Municipality is growing so fast and it has invaded her rural constituency and she was worried thinking that we would now convert her rural constituency into part of the Arua Municipality constituency. She does not have to worry because we can accommodate both rapid growth and Ayivu autonomy from Arua Municipality. What is happening in Arua and the Kampala, Entebbe, Mukono, and Mpigi areas is happening in other parts of Uganda as well; that is big growth. 

Already, structural transformation is taking place in the economy. As a consequence of that transformation, the contribution of agriculture to GDP has declined from 53.1 percent in 1986 to 21.4 percent now. At the same time, the contribution of industry and services has increased from 10.9 percent and 36 per cent respectively, in 1986 to 24.4 percent and 49 percent respectively, in the financial year 2007/2008.  

The other time when we talked about this, I saw some uninformed commentators in the newspapers saying, “agriculture has gone down.”  Not at all!  Actually agriculture has grown quantitatively.  But in relation to the whole economy, agriculture now is smaller because the other sectors have grown - that is what it means. (Laughter) And it is good for agriculture to be a smaller portion of the economy because that is how all modern countries are.  If you see agriculture is still a major part of the economy, then you know that you are backward; actually that is one of the characteristics of backwardness.

As you can see, these figures, which I am quoting, are higher than what I reported to the country in my New Year’s Speech of 2008.  The figures I gave in the New Year’s speech were apparently based on the spectrum of economic activities that characterised the economy in the years 1997/1998, thereby not taking into account new activities such as oil exploration and BIDCO that have since come on the scene.  When you include these new activities, which were not there in 1987, which was the base year, then the economy is much bigger than what we had said in the past.

High economic growth in the recent past has been in mining, in construction, hotels and restaurants, transport and communication sectors and expansion in financial services.  The construction sector was boosted by the CHOGM meeting; It is a pity some political actors tried to interfere with that meeting, but God was on the side of Uganda –(Interjections)- maybe, you do not have to say, “shame”! You could say “repentance”.   If you repent, you are always received in the Kingdom of Heaven.
  
Poverty eradication through Prosperity for All.  

After trying for 13 years, ever since my countrywide tour of poverty eradication of 1995, it seems that the countryside is finally beginning to respond to this message of Prosperity for All. 

I have inspected a number of homesteads in different parts of Uganda that are already generating household incomes in excess of Shs.20m per annum - (Laughter) - the minimum we have set for all homesteads of Uganda. The homesteads and the land around them hitherto have been used for only two purposes for the majority of them residence and in some cases, but not in all cases, food security and the problem of poverty in Uganda.  Maybe I will elaborate on it later.

The aim of Prosperity For All (PFA) is to transform all rural homestead land holdings into commercial, money-making units in addition to be in the centres of residence and food security.  The problem of the rural areas of Uganda is that the homestead is now taken for only two purposes, to sleep and to grow some food some times; not always. Many of our people in the rural areas do not see the home as a commercial centre; they do not see it as a shop.  The people in the town have shops. A person will use the front to sell things and the rear part to sleep.  But people in the rural areas really take sleeping literally and seriously, and in one of our languages, they call it “kulambala”, to really sleep. 

So, the purpose of prosperity for all in this campaign is to tell everybody that that home should perform three functions.  You should sleep there, you can grow some food there, but also use that home for commercial purposes as a money making unit.  

Since we are fresh from Namugongo, I am sure we still remember the idea of Trinity, God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit.  Now, let us take that idea of Trinity in our home.  Sleep there, produce food from there –(Laughter)- but also use it as a commercial unit.  That is where the poverty comes from - because people do not see this as a commercial unit.  You ask somebody in the rural areas, “What are you doing?” and he will say, “I am doing nothing - silina kyenkola; ntudde waka.”  But you have got five acres there.  Why don’t you use the five acres to make money?  You can see where the problem is.    

The Cabinet and the National Resistance Movement Caucus have already agreed that PFA starts immediately using some of the money we had halted for this financial year, by supporting six homesteads per parish to commercialise their agriculture –(Interjections)– you should wait – (Laughter) In one of our languages, when somebody touches into the pocket before he gets his hand out, you don’t ask, “What are you going to give me?” Why don’t you wait until he gets the hand out for you to see what you can get? - (Laughter)– you wait until he gets his arm out and see what he will give you.

But maybe, I could answer that question - how about the others - now before I forget. You see the problem in the countryside is really knowledge. There were other problems, but those ones have been solved. As of now, the problem in the countryside is knowledge and it is possible to be rich and lead a modern life through agriculture. So, the function of these six homesteads is to act as residential; as local demonstration centres so that people can see that it is possible. That is why we are taking it to the parishes. 

You know in the past we used to have District Farm Institutes (DFI) at the district. But now we want demonstrations in the parish, not by the Government demonstrating that you grow maize; that you grow this and that, but by the people themselves –(Applause)– because if people can see that Museveni, who was a poor man, through agriculture has now improved his living in our parish, the others will follow. I have got enough proof on this; we have already done it in a number of areas; we want to do it in the whole country.

Then that question, “how about the rest?” The leg of Prosperity for All is SACCO. A SACCO –(Interjections)– corruption? That is why we went to Namugongo the other day to repent our sins -(Laughter)– otherwise, if there were no sins then we would not go to church. Since Adam and Eve caused us problems in the Garden of Eden and God had to throw us out, we have been struggling to fight sins but also fight poverty.

The second leg of prosperity for all is SACCO based at the sub county. Once these six homesteads succeed in having a new way of production and they become examples- of course we shall continue, each year, to add on more demonstrators - because you should remember that in Uganda there are 5000 parishes. So, if you succeed in converting six homesteads in each parish into model farmers, then you are now talking of 30,000. That is a very big demonstration network. But the one who learns from the demonstration farm and does not want to wait for this slow process of six homesteads per annum can go to the SACCO, borrow the money - because these SACCOs which will be supported by the Ministry of Finance, we shall ensure their money is cheap; it will be cheaper money because we are talking of 13 percent per annum for agriculture and 17 percent for commercial activities.  So, once you learn that you want to move, you go to the SACOO, borrow and come and copy what the other people have done. 

Mere commercialisation of homestead economic activities is not enough. We must aim at profitable commercialisation especially using small pieces of land of say, five acres or less. With small holders, we must encourage in addition to food crops, those activities that will give a high return. There are areas in Uganda that have been engaged in some small commercial farming without paying heed to economics, that is without looking at maximum returns to the homesteads.

In West Nile, our people grow tobacco. Most peasants grow tobacco on a quarter of an acre or less. Even if one was to plant a whole acre, he would earn about Shs 600,000 gross per annum. After deducting costs, he/she remains with Shs 350,000 net per annum. Somebody with only two acres will end up with Shs 1.2million gross or Shs 700, 000 net per annnum.

Honourable members of Parliament, I have a question here: Is Shs 700,000 for a family in a year enough to support that family with its modern demands, as you know them? That is where the challenge is. The poverty in the rural areas has two challenges: One is that our families that are stuck in subsistence and just use the hoe, grow food crops and end there. That is category number one, which is causing poverty.

Category two relates to those who engage in some sort of commercial production but without what we call in one of our languages here, kubalilila. In another language we call it chuura and in the other one, otita. You do not know what I am talking about –(Laughter)– because you do not know Uganda. So, what can I do for you? But that is what is missing. Some are just engaged in subsistence farming only. The others who try commercial farming do it without having economics in mind, without “cula”, without “kubalirira”, without “otita” - this is where the problem is.

Like these people in West Nile, you hear that, “West Nile grows tobacco”, but what are you getting from tobacco? First of all, he grows a quarter an acre; I have been through much of West Nile, I have not seen more than a quarter an acre of tobacco. But even if he were to grow a whole acre of tobacco, how much would he get?

The leaders have not helped the people to see this! That is the second problem. Recently, I was in Okoro County of Nebbi, soon to be Zombo District, where I advised them as follows: assuming one homestead has three acres of land; my advice would be: plant upland rice for food on one acre - because I was told that it does well there, the place being a highland. Secondly, plant one whole acre with improved variety of Arabica coffee because the area being a highland, Arabica coffee can grow well there. Thirdly, plant highland fruits such as apples in the third acre. With one acre of Arabic coffee, one may get Shs 5 million per acre per annum; with an acre of apples, one may get Shs 15 million per acre per annum. 

On top of this, one should keep poultry near the compound from which one gets eggs for sale; should keep pigs - if one is not a Moslem –(Laughter)- from which one sells piglets. One should keep three or four dairy cattle in a shade from which one may sell 20 litres of milk for sale and drink the rest of the milk with one’s family. And finally one should keep bees from which one would get honey.

By combining these seven activities, we are absolutely sure that one will earn in excess of Shs 20 million per homestead per annum. The formula I recommended for Okoro will of course vary in the different areas. Some areas will grow mangoes instead of apples and coffee; some will grow bananas and Irish potatoes instead of rice for food, some will do fish farming through fish ponds, some will grow Robusta coffee and others will grow tea instead of Arabic coffee.

However, all small holders should keep dairy cattle for milk, cow dung and urine. The latter two are for manure and the milk is for cash and also for nutrition for the family. 

Does it mean that activities like growing tobacco, growing cotton or keeping indigenous cattle are not economic? Does it mean that we should abandon these activities? Should we abandon cotton, should we abandon tobacco, should we abandon indigenous cattle? Not at all! They can be very economic. However, you need to undertake them on a medium or large scale to be economic. That is where the problem is.

If you were to put 20 acres under tobacco, you would end up earning Shs 7 million net. That is not bad. With cotton, although you get Shs 0.7 million per acre per annum, with a yield of 1000 kilogrammes per acre, if you were to grow it on 20 acres, you would get Shs 14 million per annum - not bad. The source of continued poverty for those small holders that attempt to commercialize their agriculture away from mere subsistence farming is undertaking low value economic activities on a small scale. That is the problem. They undertake low value economic activities but on a small scale. Low value economic activities are rewarding on a large scale. 

I found a man in Madi-Okollo County, whose family has four square miles of land, keeping some cross breed cattle. Such a person, even if he used one square mile for rearing 300 head of cattle, whereby he would be selling about 60 cattle per year - because we farmers normally sell 20 percent of the herd per annum - we call it “off take”. So 20 percent of 300 head of cattle would be like 60 cattle. At Shs 500,000 each, he would end up with Shs 30 million from cattle alone from one square mile, and yet he has got four square miles.

And this one I know because I get much more money than this in my operations. So, if you want to know people who are not suffering from poverty, I can give him to you as one of the witnesses. I know that you can earn this money and even more. If he adds income from goats - because the two go together: poultry, fruits, et cetera, he would be a millionaire, this man in Madi-Okollo. And I am going to assist him to do exactly that, to become a millionaire in the Nile valley there. (Applause) And the doubting Thomases –(Interjections)- will come and touch the millionaire like Thomas touched the scars of Jesus. So, there is no need to argue, you do not have to argue, we shall do it and people will see it. 

The source of poverty in the countryside therefore, apart from being caused by the problem of sticking to subsistence farming, is sub-optimal returns per acre, especially for small holders, on account of wrong enterprise selection. You heard how fast the economy is growing - because I have just told you - 9.8 percent –(Interjections)- yes, by the end of this month -(Laughter). This growth is, however, mainly in town. It is good that the towns are growing and they will grow faster when the problem of energy is solved. The problems of energy, high oil prices et cetera not withstanding, our economy registered 9.8 percent rate of growth this year. What will happen when in addition to solving the problem of energy we are also succeeding in transforming the 5.5 million households in the rural areas into commercial units? You should think about this.

According to the Registrar of Companies, there is somebody here they call the Registrar of Companies - he registers companies, that is his work. According to the Registrar of Companies, 262,000 companies are registered in Uganda. These ones are as follows: private limited companies, 98,000; public limited liability companies, 530. What they call business names, partnerships and sole proprietorships, those are 161,000; foreign companies are 1,930. We potentially have another 5.5 million companies that can add themselves to this list if we succeed in commercialising the rural homesteads.

I want you people to ensure that each rural homestead becomes a family company. (Applause) Each of those rural homesteads is a potential family company like my Katwekamba Farm Limited. I have a company; me! I have a family company and it is among these 161,000 -(Laughter)- it is called Katwekamba Farm Limited. Katwekamba is one of the places near where I stay. 

I am sure all of you honourable MPs have companies. (Laughter) Yes! The question is: why don’t you want your constituents each one of them in their homes to also have a company? That should be the task of every MP here: to ensure that all the homesteads in his or her area also become family companies, so that the Registrar of Companies does not continue with the figure of 262,000 in a population of 30 million, in a country where there are 6 million homesteads - because I am only talking of 5.5 million homesteads in the rural areas and I am not including the ones in the towns. In the towns I assume some of them are involved – they are part of this 262,000.

So you can see that even this rate of growth we are talking about, the 9.8 percent, is just scratching the surface. The potential is much bigger. Those people there in the villages, they are just seated there and they disturb you for money. “You help me, you help me, you help me”, they say. Your job is not to be a charitable organisation. Your job is to be a leader who points the way forward for the people -(Applause)- and the people follow. But if you do not point the way forward, they come to you and say, “You give us”, and of course you cannot give them because you do not have enough to give them.

Therefore, potentially Uganda should be having at least 6 million companies in the book of this gentleman or woman called “Registrar of Companies”. That person is underemployed because since the British came here and introduced this modern system of money, the poor fellow has registered only 262,000 companies. There are 6 million homesteads that are not part of this movement! 

Prosperity-for-All aims at turning all these people into people who can form companies, at least family companies - they may form other things but the minimum is a family, farming company. Let us all support this movement - and when I say “movement” do not think that I am talking about the political “movement” -(Laughter)- even those who are allergic to the political “movement” at least support the movement of Prosperity-for-All. (Applause) The people are already responding; the signs are there. All these enterprises we are promoting have national, regional and international markets. This is the security involved in this strategy. Some people who do not see far keep talking about vanilla, which had very high prices, which then collapsed.

Recently in Arua, I helped hon. Godi to remember that the fact that the infant mortality rate in Uganda is still 66 for every 1,000 live births does not stop Ugandans from having children. You cannot say, “Because the infant mortality is still 66 children out of 1,000, I will not have children as the child I have may die”. Hon. Godi was convinced -(Laughter)- that although vanilla had problems, we cannot stop trying just as we cannot stop having children because some of them have died. Even if one of the activities gets problems, you continue. This is the curse of Adam and his wife Eve; we were living comfortably in the Garden of Eden; eating without working and they said we were not dying. But since that poor person and his wife caused us all these problems, God said, “From now on, whatever you will eat will come from the sweat of your brow and you will die and you will be buried and others will be born”. This is the law of nature. Some projects will start and others will fail but the struggle must continue. 

If an enterprise develops problems, we must try again and again. The problem with vanilla was that it had only a narrow international market of US $75 million to US $150 million. You go to the Internet – I hear most of you spend time watching football of European clubs – Arsenal and I do not know who. (Laughter) I am a footballer myself as you know and if you want to find out, we can have the Parliamentary team in Namboole and we shall sort out a few issues. (Laughter) Unfortunately, I do not have time to watch those games of those European clubs because I have got a lot of work to do here. When you go to the Internet, in addition to looking out for European clubs of football, also look at the demand for these products. What is the total demand for fruits in the world? What is the total demand for vanilla in the world? What is the total demand for beef in the world? That information is available on some of those sources so that you as leaders know how you can advise your people. If you search on the Internet, you will see that the products we are promoting have got either reasonable or large scale demand globally, or regionally, or within Uganda. Therefore, Prosperity-for-All through agriculture means fuller mobilisation of all commercial producers or potential producers, that is, plantation owners, large scale farmers, medium scale farmers and small holders.

As far as the small holders are concerned, we shall use intensive farming methods and maximum return choices. As far as the medium, large scale and plantation producers are concerned, we shall use both extensive and intensive agricultural methods as well as high return and low return per unit choices because they have more flexibility. A big producer can grow cotton and get money out of it; he can grow tobacco and get money out of it; he can grow fruits and get money out of them; he can keep chicken and he will get money out of them. He is more flexible. But the problem with the small holder is that he is the one who must make the right choices and this is where we the leaders must play that role of guiding the people. 

Large scale production utilises quantity to compensate for low prices. This option is not available to the small scale producers. They can only engage in high value activities to be viable and prosperous. 

One of the high value activities I want to promote is fish farming. On one acre, one can put two fish ponds of 1,500 square metres each for large scale farmers and about three ponds of 1,000 square metres each for small holders. These fish ponds on one acre can give you Shs 16 million gross per annum if all conditions are right. And some of the people are already getting this money; like this person I visited in Pukule. That man is getting Shs 48 million a year from a number of fish ponds. World and national demand for fish is inexhaustible. World demand for fish is of the magnitude of US $52 billion. We, therefore, intend to develop fish farming in all zones that have swamps, such as Buganda, Busoga, Bukedi, Teso, Lango, some parts of Acholi, some parts of Bunyoro, and some parts of Ankole and even in the Kabale area where people have been grazing cows in swamps. Cows are not for swamps; fish is more suited for swamps.

Crop growers and cattle keepers learnt how to domesticate crops and animals 11,000 years ago and 10,000 years ago respectively. Why do the fishing communities in Uganda insist on continuing to be hunters and gatherers of fish from the wild; the lakes and the rivers? It is high time they joined the crop and animal farmers, although quite belatedly, to domesticate fish like we domesticated crops and livestock thousands of years ago. Stop following fish in the wilderness because that is what you are doing now.

Vertical integration and value addition industrialisation: point number five of the NRM ten-point programme talked of building an economy that is independent, integrated and self sustaining. We have never relented in the pursuit of this strategic goal. It was not easy because this was an emancipation message to political and bureaucratic classes that were used to servitude. The message of the NRM of, “We can build an integrated, independent, self-sustaining economy” initially fell on deaf ears because people were used to slavery to western countries. “For us to be modern is impossible; we are here to stay the way we are,” we said. People did not believe that we can be a modern country. Many of these could not accept our vision that African countries can industrialise. Some of the international agencies were also promoting this dependency syndrome. The Ugandan elite are like the children of Israel when they were emancipated from Egypt. They spent forty years wandering in the desert because they did not know how to be free. 

Furthermore, some of the policies pursued by the Western countries were distorting the world market situation with trade barriers and protectionism supporting artificial producers in their countries with subsidies. They would get somebody who is not a farmer and they bribe him to be a farmer with subsidies. Why are you bribing people to be farmers? I am farming without subsidies and I have got poor infrastructure, bad roads, do not have enough electricity, but I am farming without subsidies. Why should countries, which have got infrastructure, have to bribe people to be farmers? 

However, we persisted. The first sector to respond was the fish sector after we built Masese Factory using an Italian grant given to us by Prof. Fault. There are now 17 factories processing fish whose exports bring into the country US $110 million and employ 1.2 million people directly; 1.1 million catching fish and 6,000 working in the factories. This is in addition to another three million people being employed indirectly. 

With tea, we now have 20 factories processing and exporting tea. Tea brings in US $34 million and employs 50,000 people. These are factory workers, tea growers and tea pickers. Our old sugar producers, Madvhani and Metha came back to be joined by our sugar parastatal company at Kinyara. They rehabilitated their estates and the three of them are producing 193,000 metric tonnes of sugar per annum according to the 2006 figures thereby saving Uganda US $120 million per annum and they are employing 27,000 people. 

We have three new sugar processors by the name of GM Sugar Works in Mbiko, Mayuge Sugar Industries due to start in 2008 and Sugar Ally Industries Ltd in Singo, Mubende. Unfortunately, Uganda Investment Authority made a mistake of licensing them to produce in the same area as the old producers. This will simply undermine sugar production in the country. We are trying to resolve this. 

Sango Bay in Rakai needs to team up with others that may help to utilise, for sugar production, the land of 228 square miles leased to them in 1933 and 18 square miles leased to them in 1962. They have been keeping that land without using it and I would like to encourage them to get partners and they use it to produce sugar. 

Metha and Madvhani asked for more land to increase sugar production by 100,000 tonnes and increase employment by 16,500 jobs. Some confused groups -(Laughter)- tried to interfere with this expansion. With patience, these problems will be solved. 

In the last 15 years I have been struggling to solve the problem of exporting unprocessed coffee for which we get US $1.6 per kilogramme when the price is high, instead of getting US $10 per kilogramme for the same coffee after processing, thereby donating US $8.4 in every kilogramme to the people who are supposed to be donors. We do not know who is donating to whom. We are slowly succeeding on this front also. I have been in this battle of coffee - I had a meeting in a very cold place called Davos. I used to go there for the World Economic Forum in the past. I do not know why they take us to that cold place. 

I met the proprietors of Nestle there and asked them to come to Uganda and they said, “We cannot come to Uganda”, since they already have a factory in the UK. What will happen to Uganda? Will Uganda remain a province of UK in coffee? They were not bothered but I did not give up. I have been struggling to build a coffee processing plant here and I am slowly succeeding in that. (Applause)

There are the following small scale actors: Star Coffee, Good African Coffee, Bugisu Cooperative Union, and Nguvu Coffee. Apart from these small scale actors, we have succeeded in attracting TATA Africa Holdings; the big Indian company that produces vehicles. I talked with them and told them that if they want me to buy their vehicles, I need dollars to do so. I, therefore, asked them to help me with coffee. And once they process my coffee and add value, I will buy more of their vehicles. Fortunately, they agreed and they are coming. (Applause) 

We gave them 50 acres of land at Njeru; it was government land. I am very proud that I gave them the land because we are the ones who need those people; not them who need us. TATA is doing very well without me and it is me who needs to attract them so that they process my coffee. How can you be against somebody who wants to add value to your product? What sort of reasoning is that? I am very proud to have given TATA this land –(Laughter)– so that they add value to my coffee. 

The Libyans have also come and we gave them 15 acres in Namanve Industrial Park to do the same - to add value to the coffee. 

In the cotton sector, we have been engaged in a big battle to produce textiles instead of exporting lint cotton for which we get 1/15 of the value, just like in coffee. Again there we are succeeding by attracting the long suffering old friend of ours Kashwadah of Phenix Logistics – always being tossed here and there by different state actors; he is now able to move from lint cotton to high quality garments for export. 

The only remaining issue is to guarantee his organic cotton for garments for overseas markets. The Libyans moved into Tri-star, the former Coffee Marketing Board that we have been slowly turning into a high quality garments centre with vertically integrated processes, that is, ginning, spinning, weaving, dyeing and tailoring; Nytil in Jinja, and also slowly building up capacity. We are determined to turn Uganda into a major textile exporter given in time our favourable competitiveness in that area on account of our good, long stable cotton. 

In fact I have directed the National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) and the Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) to use government lands in Nakasongola, Maluzi, Aswa, et cetera to grow all the necessary organic cotton for our factories: Phenix, Lab textiles, Nytil or any other new comers instead of endlessly haggling with peasants, being manipulated by cotton merchants or those politicians who do not know what their country needs.

Recently we scored a big victory in the battle for value addition when we commissioned Sameer Agriculture and Livestock Ltd, a high-tech, integrated milk processing plant in Bugolobi at the sight of the former government parastatal of Uganda Dairy Corporation. This plant is able to process 400,000 litres of milk per day instead of the previous 35,000 litres; as well as producing a whole range of processed milk products: pasteurised milk, ultra-heat treated milk (UHT), powdered milk, yoghurt, flavoured yoghurt, butter, ghee et cetera. We are now able to export processed milk to all parts of the world. (Applause)

I am most grateful to our partners Messrs Jitulia of India and Merali of Kenya; they have promised to build a fruit processing plant in Masaka. You remember how I was being ridiculed by the Daily Monitor newspaper when I was engaged in this battle? The Monitor headline of 30 January 2005 screamed, in quotes: “President donated Dairy Corporation to a Thai”; with another heading, they said: “Dairy Corporation to go for a dollar” – that I have sold the Diary Corporation for a dollar. I lay it on the table –(Laughter)

How could I sell Dairy Corporation for one dollar? Am I an imbecile? You see, these poor people, on this issue of one dollar, I told them – because of my confused so called bureaucrats; they were asking for rent. This Thai man was coming and they started asking for rent. I told them that, “I do not want to hear about rent because rent is not our problem; our problem is processing, job creation and export. So for rent, you put there a nominal figure of one dollar just to show that one day in future, they may pay the rent”. Now this is what they took and said that, “Museveni has sold the Dairy Corporation for one dollar”. (Laughter)

The man from Thailand was frightened away by Monitor’s headlines and lost interest. Fortunately other players came on the scene. However, I have the right to ask the following question: what right do such saboteurs have to sabotage our development? What right does anybody have to damage the future of this nation? 

When you put a story in the papers now, it goes on the Internet; everybody in the world reads it and yet it is false. What right do you have to damage our future? You have no right! We cannot go on like this. You have no right to damage our future. You put a false story in the papers and it goes on the Internet and people all over the world know that there is something wrong in Uganda yet that thing is actually false. What right do you have to do that to Uganda?

Recently, the Committee on Government Assurances of this Parliament had consultations with me on how to hold accountable ministers and civil servants who do not deliver on government plans that we budgeted for. 

I, however, also put it out to them that they should also consider holding accountable all other actors that behave in a manner that causes damage to the development opportunities of the country - Members of Parliament, local government officials, newspapers, etc. 

In developed countries, there are restraints when it comes to commenting or acting so as not to damage the national interest. There are some American leaders that do not support President Bush’s actions in Iraq, however they are careful not to endanger their army there; although they do not agree, they do not go far. 

What is the attitude of some of the opposition groups here? For some of them, their attitude is, “as long as I am not in the government, no progress should be achieved” (Laughter). If such groups cannot restrain themselves, then the law must restrain them. 

Recently, Senator Obama was in trouble - I know that some of you people worship the western countries; you worship the United States instead of worshipping God – (Laughter) – but unfortunately, you do not learn from those western countries. Recently, Senator Obama was in trouble for belonging to a church where preachers – not Obama himself - were using sectarian language. He was in trouble. The man just went and sat in a church and a preacher used sectarian language - I think he was not even there - but the question which they put to Mr Obama was: “how can you belong to a church where the priest is so sectarian?” This was a very big issue for Obama and he had to withdraw from that church. 

The question to Senator Obama was: “Why do you associate with people who talk with sectarian language?” My question to some of the actors in Uganda is: “Why do you associate yourselves with radios or newspapers that preach sectarianism? (Laughter) Why do you associate with those who undermine the economy? Should we accept the behaviour of such people if they cannot control themselves?

In the western countries, because they are advanced, they are very careful. Once you say something, you have to apologise. But here you can get a character who just says, “Tsunami will sweep Uganda”; imagine! This is a leader and he just says, “Tsunami -” (Laughter)

The leaders and the actors have no right to damage the future of our country. If they do not control themselves through the civilised conduct of debate then they should go away. I liked the honourable who headed the Committee of Government Assurances –(Interjection)- Kikungwe. We should hold all these people accountable - the ministers, the civil servants, the MPs –(Laughter)– and the newspapers. 

I am giving all these details to acquaint you with the struggle for freedom from the modern slavery of Africa - reliance on the export of raw materials. I would like all of you to join this battle wherever you are - in the ministry, on a parliamentary committee, on a foreign trip etc. By persisting in this battle of value addition, many of the sectors in agriculture can go up in value by a factor of 10 just in a very short time. Whatever is produced in our agriculture should either be consumed fresh or processed in order to add value for the national, regional and international markets. 

We must support these processors in all special ways. In one of our languages, we call it, “Okutitibya” - to treat with a lot of care. We must kutitibya these processors. Our transformation process needs them. We are not just doing them a favour by allowing them into our country; they have a historically unique role to play in the metamorphosis of our society.

What is happening under the NRM – what should have happened sooner if all the state actors had lived up to the historical obligation - is the greatest socio-economic technological revolution in this area of the world since the Iron Age in 1200 BC. Since the invention of agriculture, about 11,000 years ago, there has been no qualitative leap in this part of the world; we are still as our ancestors were. We cannot go on like this; there must be a qualitative leap. That is why Africa was colonised. 

For Africa to be colonised was not a vote of confidence for the chiefs who were governing Africa at that time. I supported the restoration of chiefs - I am the one who brought them back with our Army and the people - but the chiefs must know that they had failed to defend the sovereignty of Africa. The mere fact that Africa was colonised under their care was a vote of no confidence in those chiefs. While I support – and you should listen very carefully – the traditional institutions, I cannot accept the idea that traditional institutions should interfere with our modernisation; it will not happen, it will not happen, it will not happen.  

I have concentrated on agro-processing because agriculture is everlasting petroleum,  for those who have got eyes to see,  provided it is linked to industry and is not condemned to producing slave raw materials. We should, however, not forget other sectors now that the UPDF, the militias, our people in Northern Uganda and our people in the Northeast have defeated Kony and the cattle rustlers in Karamoja. (Applause) 

Under tourism, there are 642,000 tourists already coming to Uganda annually. They bring in US $448 million per annum, and this sector is employing 30,000 persons directly and 90,000 persons indirectly. This is bound to grow with the peace now prevailing.

On ICT, thousands of university graduates will be able to work in the call centres now that we have tackled the problem of the broadband and are in the process of tackling the undersea cable by mid 2009. 

Under energy and minerals, apart from the discovery of petroleum, there is also the exploration of other minerals and the results are very encouraging. As far as petroleum is concerned, we have confirmed the presence of commercial oil and gas resources in the following areas: Kaiso-Tonya, Buhuka and Butyaba. Kaiso-Tonya has got Mputa, Waraga and Nzizi oil fields. Buhuka has got Kingfisher oil field and Butyaba has the newly discovered Taitai oil field. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I reported in my last State-of-the-Nation Address that Mputa-1, Waraga-1 and Kingfisher-1 oil wells had been tested with flow rates of 135 barrels of oil per day, 12,050 barrels of oil per day and 4,120 barrels of oil per day respectively. Since then, five additional oil wells have been drilled and completed; these are Kingfisher-1A and B, Nzizi-2, Mputa-3 and Mputa-4. Flow testing of Kingfisher-1A and B gave a total rate of 9,773 barrels of oil per day. Mputa-3 and Mputa-4 flowed at a rate of 1,986 barrels per day and 2,001 barrels per day respectively. Nzizi-2 also had a maximum flow of 14.13 million cubic feet of gas per day. So, we do not only have petroleum there but also gas in some of the oil fields.

We have decided on the Early Production Scheme (EPS). This will involve a mini refinery that will produce diesel, kerosene and heavy fuel oil. We shall be able to produce electricity using heavy fuel oil at a fairly low price of 80 American cents per unit as compared to the current cost of 24 American cents of thermal power generated from imported diesel; because it will be our own fuel without taxes and without high transport costs. (Applause)

The discovery of this petroleum and gas - I have had occasion to tell you - was a consequence of our correct strategy of relying on ourselves and developing our own capacity. If you, our political colleagues, firmly adopt this orientation, Uganda will be transformed in a fairly short time. Our economy will grow in double digits if we removed delays, stopped treating investors as trespassers and all of us adopt a pro-business orientation. 

On the physical infrastructure side, in order to lower the cost of doing business, we are already moving well on the issue of energy. Bujagali is under construction. We shall by the third quarter of the coming financial year start on Karuma, if necessary, using our own money from the Energy Fund. We already have US $130 million in the Energy Fund. In the coming financial year, we are proposing an addition of US $74.14 million to this Energy Fund. So it will be more than US $ 200 million - our own money - dedicated to, if necessary, building these dams ourselves. If, for instance, a dam is to cost US$ 500 million, we already have US$ 200 million in our fund and in three years we shall build it ourselves. We shall finish it. We do not have to be here waiting in darkness –(Laughter)- begging this one and begging that one; that is not my idea of running a country. 

I wish to inform the House that the country’s rural electrification programme has made a fairly modest progress. The programme has largely been negatively affected by the need to put financial resources in subsdising the high electricity tariff price. It will nonetheless be recalled that when Government embarked on the implementation of the Rural Electrification Strategy in 2002, access to electricity in the rural areas in the whole country was one percent. Today rural electrification is about five percent. 

The mistake by the Sixth Parliament –(Interjections)- in delaying Bujagali did not only affect the generation of electricity but also affected the extension of electricity to the rural areas. The money meant for that extension had to be diverted to subsdising the very expensive diesel generation of electricity. Now we are using diesel to generate power instead of using water which God gave us free. How did this come about? It is because of that mistake of the Sixth Parliament and some other people who I have made peace with so I do not want to talk about them now. Because of that mistake, we are forced to use diesel to generate electricity. 

The price of generating a unit of electricity using diesel is Shs 560 per unit. This is too high and many people will not afford it. So, we have got to subsidise in order to bring it to Shs 426 per unit of electricity, which is a subsidy of Shs 134 per unit for domestic consumption, and from Shs 349 to Shs 187 per unit for industrial consumption, a subsidy of Shs 162 per unit. Now this is the money we had planned to use to extend electricity in the countryside. We are now going to divert it to subsidise this diesel which we are using to generate electricity. You can see; these mistakes can be very costly to the country. People are engaged in so-called politics and you are ruining the chances of your own children. This is not acceptable. It is really annoying. This was really a crime.

Government focus on rural electrification: When we run into these problems, we had to divert money to come and put it into buying diesel for generation and we then had to limit our rural electrification programme. We, therefore, identified some targets - district headquarters, rural large scale industries, health centres and schools and concentrated communities with small industrial activities.

During the last financial year, Government was able to complete the construction of the following power extension projects: Arua-Nebbi, Kakumiro-Kibaale-Kagadi, Rukungiri– Kanungu-Kayonza Tea Factory-Kihihi, Kalangala Township and several community schemes.  

In the next financial year, Government will start the construction, or in some cases continue with the construction, of the following rural electrification projects: Fort Portal–Bundibugyo-Nyahuka, Rugombe-Kyenjojo- Katooke, Corner Kilak–Pader-Abim, including Kalongo and Patongo areas, Katine-Kalaki-Kaberamaido, Kamuli-Bukungu fish landing site, Munteme–Kagadi-Muzizi Tea Factory, Mbarara-Kikagati small hydro power plant, Kabuyanda- Ntungamo, Masaka-Bukakata Fish Factory, Kasensero Fish Factory and Mutukula, Bugiri-Uwemba, Kaliro-Itanga. Once the electricity is at Abim, it will later be extended to Kotido. They are also going to complete Bushenyi - Kyabuyimbi-Buhweju line (Applause)

In addition, Government has purchased three generators, 750 kilowatts, to be installed at Moroto Municipality, Adjumani and Moyo town councils as interim solutions while Government completes planning the execution of grid extension of power projects in eastern and northern Uganda. The planned grid extension will cover Soroti, Katakwi, Moroto, Nakapiripirit and Katekekile, Gulu, Adjumani, Moyo, Nebbi, Pakwach and Arua, Koboko, Yumbe.

I must salute the German Ambassador who was reported to have told some Ugandans who were pestering him for support that donors were not responsible for them and that they were being over stretched by the begging Africans. That was beautiful. He told those people what I have always told you. Therefore, on energy, we are moving forward with or without external financial collaboration. 

The following renewal energy projects are under development: Kakira Cogeneration currently providing nine megawatts to the grid and will provide a total of 12 megawatts by the end of this month; Mpanga 18 megawatts - a small project in Kamwenge District whose construction has commenced; Bugoye 13 megawatts project in Kasese District whose construction has commenced.

One major challenge we have to deal with is the power system losses, both technical and commercial. The losses stand at 41 percent. So far, the technical losses are being addressed through the rehabilitation and refurbishment of the distribution laying network. However, the commercial losses, which are primarily caused by power thefts, posed a big threat to the electricity industry in the country.  This requires collective efforts on the part of every citizen.  

On the issue of roads, I should inform honourable members that two and a half years ago, I learnt from hon. Nasasira for the first time that there are two types of roads in the world. There are those that are designed to last for 50 years, which are the types you find in Europe, and those that are designed to last for only 15 years, designed for poor countries like Uganda; moreover, the poor man’s roads need repairs by the seventh year.  

Maybe in the early years of our economic recovery, our experts had no alternative but to accept this unreasonable arrangement, given our very low tax collection levels then. However, we should have been told so that we get involved in the strategy for the road sector. In fact, I more-or-less bumped onto this issue when I asked hon. Nasasira the reasons for the contrasts between this 15-year life roads of ours and the road which Dr Nkrumah built 50 years ago, which is still there even today in Ghana. That is when I discovered that that road had been built according to European standards and that is why it is still there, and yet Nkrumah was attacked for it - that he was building white elephant projects - along with Akosombo Hydro Power Dam.  

Now that I know about these roads, it is my duty to inform the country about them. My quarrel with our partners - what they call development partners - who had pledged to support these roads revolves around the reasons they do not provide money for reconstruction in time, for instance by the 13th year, so that the road is reconstructed in the 15th year. My question to Nasasira has been, when I found out about these 15-year old roads, then my question was: “If you know that the road is supposed to last for only 15 years, why don’t you by the 13th year start arranging to reconstruct it?” He gave me some answers which we shall discuss when we are among ourselves.

Furthermore, as far as the question of roads is concerned, we should act as follows: First of all, we should utilise any external support provided it comes on time. Secondly, for the core road arteries, that is, Katuna, Malaba-Busia, Kampala-Gulu-Bibia, Kampala-Fort Portal, Kampala-Hoima, Tororo-Moroto, Mbale-Lira-Kamudini and Karuma-Arua, we should never allow any delay when it comes to reconstruction after the 15-year lifespan. If those who pledged to work on it do not move fast, then we should use our own money as we do for Defence and as we did recently for energy. Therefore, in the coming budget, we must ensure that that issue is addressed.  

The other roads that I listed in my New Year’s speech will also be tackled in phases. There are roads which I mentioned in my New Year’s speech which we are going to work on. This is like the story of the hydro dams that plunged us into the power shortage we are still grappling with. 

However, there are also weaknesses on our side. What is the cost of constructing a kilometre of our third world roads in the world? What is the cost of constructing a kilometre of these types of roads in African conditions? Is the cost of constructing a kilometre of such roads in Uganda comparable to these other situations? I am directly doing research into this issue using diverse sources.

Some years ago, a kilometre of such a road, I was told, used to be US $250,000, up to 300,000, per kilometre depending on the nature of work and terrain. I am told it is now US $600,000 to 800,000 or even more, on account of high fuel costs et cetera. Is it the same in other areas of the world? I am setting up three audit units in my office to help answer these questions in addition to the very useful information I get from the respective ministries of Government. One unit will audit NAADS and NUSAF, the other will audit government civil works including roads, schools, health centres and other government buildings and the third one will audit the way Uganda Investment Authority handles investors.

On the railway, discussions have taken place between President Kikwete and me about the need to expand the present narrow gauge line to the standard gauge. We discussed the idea of maintaining the two lines of the narrow gauge but adding a third line so that the standard gauge locomotives and wagons can use it while the narrow gauge ones also continue to use it. I hope we can do the same with Kenya. Once we deal with the issue of power, roads and railways, the economy will soar.

On feeder roads, I am toying with the idea of buying road equipment for every district instead of the present system of contractors who charge exorbitant prices per kilometre (Applause) Each district could be given a grader, a wheel loader, a compactor and two tippers. The capital cost of these machines, if they were new, for 80 districts would be only US $50,000. It is not much. Would this not be worth it? I will discuss this with the Minister of Works. 

The ministry has also come up with the idea of standard prices per kilometre of road instead of depending on quotations of contractors, which is a scandal. I also think road manual maintenance groups should be re-introduced with each group of three people being responsible for eight kilometres. The feeder roads network in the whole country is 27,000 kilometres; if three people using wheelbarrows, shovels, et cetera look after eight kilometres, we shall need 3,427 groups comprising of 10,283 persons. If we are to pay Shs 50,000 per person per month, we could end up spending Shs 6 billion per year. This is manageable. It is also a sure standard, predictable and a sustainable way of dealing with roads.  

Now the Ministry of Works gets much more money than what I am talking about here. US $50 million can equip all these 80 districts with new machines - a grader, a wheel loader, two tippers and a compactor. Now if we had road groups of three people for every eight kilometres, we would need about 10,000 people. If you paid each one Shs 50,000, the total amount of money each year would be like Shs 6 billion. But how much money are we spending on the roads now? Much more than this!

On social infrastructure - schools and health centres - we have done tremendous work. To date, there are 87,000 classrooms in permanent materials for the primary schools compared with 1986 when we had only 44,000 classrooms.  

There are currently 11,883 government-aided primary schools and 5,924 non-government primary schools. There are 9,011 government secondary schools with 804 of them being USE schools. There are 3,535 non-government secondary schools. 

In 1986, we had 597 health centres ie dispensaries and sub-dispensaries etc. The total number of health units now, health centre IIs, IIIs and IVs, is 3,124. This does not include 40 general hospitals and 11 referral hospitals -(Interjection)- drugs will come. What brought the building will bring the drugs also -(Laughter)- and the drugs are being stolen by your people. So, we shall catch them and the drugs will be available.

However, we need to do something about the district hospitals and the referral hospitals. We need to repair the old secondary schools such as Kabalega S.S, Masaba S.S. and so on. Once I was invited to Masaba S.S for a fundraising. I took Shs 10 million but my supporters in the area brought some menvu (yellow bananas) –(Laughter)- and they brought some chicken etc. We ended up raising Shs 12 million; my Shs 10 million and their Shs 2 million from all these sources, yet the school needed Shs 1 billion to turn it into a centre of excellence -(Interjection)- yes or something like 500 million. 

Therefore, this business of fundraising is really a waste of time and just a pressure for nothing. What I am planning to do is to get a loan from the African Development Bank to repair the old secondary schools and the district hospitals. (Applause) These need a big answer; they do not need these little – bringing some sweet bananas and some chicken and –(Laughter)

The crucial question is; what will be the cost per square metre compared to other constructions in comparable situations? I am saying this because that is where we waste a lot of money. You find a classroom constructed at a cost of Shs 60 million, but in some situations we have constructed classrooms for Shs 18 million or less. So, there is something there that we are going to discover and what the problem is.  

I cannot leave the subject of the economy without talking about the raising prices. This phenomenon is due to the following factors: One, is the growing prosperity in the world. As I told you on Labour Day, until recently, prosperity was only confined to Western Europe, North America and Japan. The rest of the world was living in misery on account of under development and poverty. In the last 20 years, hundreds of millions in India have moved out of poverty as a consequence of implementing policies similar to what the NRM Ten-Point Programme No. 5 says: “Building an independent, integrated and self sustaining national economy.” Hundreds of millions of people in China have done the same. Of course, India and china were building on better foundations; they had started building in 1947 and 1949 respectively after the changes in their countries.

In 1986, we started almost from zero. Even then, prosperity in Uganda has also grown. The people below the poverty line are now 31 percent instead of the more than 56 percent in 1986.

The number of vehicles in Uganda is now 199,000, according to the year 2007 figures and motorcycles are 164,000 compared to the figure of 27,000 vehicles in 1986 and 4,000 motorcycles in 1987.

Certain Latin American countries such as Brazil, Venezuela, Mexico, Chile, etc are also rolling forward with progress and affluence. This means that consumption levels of people in those countries have increased, hence pushing the world commodity prices upwards. 

The world demand for petroleum today is 87 million barrels per day compared to 45 million barrels per day in 1970. The annual demand for pig iron, which is the major primary input for steel production, is now over 866 million metric tons compared to 431 million tons in 1970. 

The annual demand for cement is now 2.55 billion tons compared to 571 million metric tons in 1970. Why this increased demand? It is because more people in the world are richer thereby needing better houses instead of staying in grass or straw huts. They need cars instead of walking.

In respect of food, egocentric policies of the developed countries that include subsidies for the artificial farmers, tariffs etc have interfered with the more efficient producers in the world such as Uganda, other African countries, Argentina, etc. You remember in 1986, when the NRM came to power, we introduced commercial growing of maize. National production jumped from 200,000 tons to 1.2 million tons. The prices were good then. Then the western countries brought subsidized yellow maize which they dumped into the region as food aid. This brought down the price of maize. However, some of our farmers stuck to the practice, especially in Kamwenge, Kibanda in Masindi and the whole of Busoga.  

These depressed world prices for food, because of the market distortions caused by the unfair trading practices of the western countries, are responsible for continued poverty levels among the sections of the farmers. In Busoga, people stuck to duma (maize). I have actually been struggling to wean them away from maize. However, the developed countries’ egocentrics and lack of vision has now got everybody, themselves included, in trouble. Recently there were demonstrations in London; truck drivers demonstrated against fuel prices. The Bible says whatever you sow that is what you will harvest.

On account of increased prosperity in the world and therefore great demand for petroleum because of the increased cars, the USA, Brazil, and other countries are now converting food into oil. After all petroleum is from plants or animals that were buried in the ground under certain conditions, at least 20 million years ago.  Therefore we can indeed get petroleum from plants, sugarcane, maize, Jatropha, Pongamia pinnata etc. This now has resulted into high prices of everything including food.  

The high prices of food however are an opportunity for us, provided we add value to our foods as we have succeeded in doing with milk and fish. By getting higher prices for our foods, beverages, minerals, we shall be able to afford kerosene and other products. That is the way forward.  

As far as petroleum is concerned, it is good that we discovered our own petroleum. We shall benefit from the high world prices. Nevertheless, we also need to examine the profligacy of the modern living. Must we own individual cars? Would it not be cheaper for individuals and countries to use electric trams, taking advantage of our hydro electricity and energy from other sources that we have in Uganda in plenty?

The fossilized hydrocarbons in the world are limited. Unless most sustainable energy sources are developed by us, I see big problems in future. Accordingly, I have instructed the Minister of Energy to send young graduates in physics, chemistry, engineering, geology, etc for Masters Degrees in Solar, Wind and Nuclear Energy so that we begin to look at this more sustainable sources.

The third cause of high prices has been regional, and has been actually due to increased opportunity in the form of the new markets in Southern Sudan and Congo. This is not a problem at all but a new opportunity. Through Prosperity for All, we should contribute to satisfying the national, regional and international markets where we have unutilised potential.  

The other short term factor that caused high price rises was the problem of Kenya, which is gradually being solved. You remember that at the height of that problem, our goods could not go through Kenya. Obviously this caused temporary problems.  

Finally, there is the factor of the inefficient railway transport system of East Africa. When you transport a ton of coffee by railway to Mombasa, you pay US$65 for freight. If you transport the same ton by road, you pay US$99. So, trucks are more expensive.

In China, on the Beijing-Shanghai line, a ton of goods costs US$12 to transport. So, here a ton of something by railway will cost us US$65; if you use trucks, it will cost us US$99. In China, the same ton will go for US$12 because of more volumes there hence more efficiency. That is where we must really wake up so that we catch up.

However, the railway is not efficient enough to handle all this freight and do so quickly. We are discussing with the governments of Kenya and Tanzania on how to solve this problem.  

Concerning security, the situation in the country is excellent. (Applause) The whole country is peaceful and will remain peaceful. The UPDF, as already pointed out, supported by the wanainchi, the people’s militias, the Amuka, the Arrow Boys etc, had by May 2006, defeated the terrorists of Kony and was in the process of disarming Karimojong cattle rustlers.  

They were about 200 victims of Kony still hiding in the Acholi area, the UPDF having cleared all the terrorists out of Teso and Lango. By that time, Kony and Otti, had fled out of Uganda, out of Southern Sudan into Garamba, DRC with 557 armed people, and 200 members of their families. At this stage, His Excellency, Salva Kiir, the President of the Government of Southern Sudan, following the earlier initiative of His Excellency, Riek Machar, Vice-President of the Government of Southern Sudan, approached me when he came here for our swearing-in ceremony, with the idea of offering Kony a soft landing. 

Since the Congo Government had not allowed us to pursue Kony into Congo, and the UN was doing nothing about it, I decided to accept His Excellency, Salva Kiir’s idea just in case it worked. Although I thought that it would not work, nor was it really necessary or correct to allow impunity to continue. It has not worked, just as I suspected. Kony was fooling those who were trooping to Garamba to beg a criminal to accept forgiveness of the victims while it should be the other way round.  

However, I can assure all of you that Kony or any other terrorists and troublemaker cannot disturb peace in Uganda given the level of professionalisation and equipment of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (Applause)

Kony’s behaviour is his own business. Since Kony is in Congo, it is the responsibility of President Kabila and the UN to deal with him. However, all our means, all our capacity, is ready and available in case Congo asks for our assistance to go and deal with Kony there. We are ready, able and prepared to go. If Kony tries to come to Uganda, we shall destroy him more thoroughly and quickly than we did in Teso in 2003.

Meanwhile, the disarmament programme in Karamoja has succeeded in removing 2,977 guns from illegal hands since January 2006. A total of 82 warriors have been convicted by the division court martial for illegally carrying weapons. Another 108 hardcore warriors are in custody being tried by the court martial. 

We rejected the position of pacifists who were claiming that illegal guns in Karamoja cannot be removed unless we bring development first. And yet the gun was the biggest saboteur of development in Karamoja. Karamoja is now peaceful and will remain peaceful. The only problem now is famine. A combination of dry spells, floods, livestock diseases and violence led to high levels of food insecurity in parts of the sub region. 

A few days ago, I spoke to the Prime Minister and he assured me that the following measures had been taken to deal with the famine: 

•	Relief food has been provided; 8,501 metric tons of food by the World Food Programme and 430 metric tons by the government.
•	There is provision for 12 tractors to be used in seed multiplication in Karamoja
•	Shs 3.0 billion for more relief food from the Government of Uganda.
•	Seeds for planting.
•	Vaccination of all animals in the Karamoja region is also going on.

I have also directed the Prime Minister to meet the Karamoja MPs to compile all the extra needs as far as seeds and food is concerned so that we fulfill them. 

Government, WFP and other partners are constantly monitoring the situation. More importantly, we long ago developed drought resistant seeds at Serere that can mature fast. We have got sorghum, which can mature in 90 days. We have got groundnuts, which can mature in 90 to 100 days. We have got pearl millet, which can mature in 75 days. We have got pigeon peas, which can mature in 90 days. Why are they not used? Upland rice can also be introduced in southern Karamoja, Namalu, which is not so dry. Let the leaders and technocrats use all those possibilities to immunise our people in Karamoja against this recurrent dehumanising famine. 

Meanwhile, all those concerned with relief must ensure that our people get food. Nobody should die of hunger when we are all here. The National Resistance Movement war succeeded among other reasons because of our ability to prioritise, utilisation of scarce resources in order to achieve a higher threshold. 

I told our fighters when we were in the bush that our primary needs were: recruits, good politics, discipline, and guns with their ammunition. With these, we would get the rest: food, medicine, clothes, publicity, etc. Clothes, for instance, were totally optional; a naked person can shoot you. (Laughter) 

Soon after the last general elections, I held a Cabinet retreat at Statistics House as we were preparing for CHOGM to drive this point of prioritization home. At that time, I identified the following priorities for the year 2006: energy, defence, industrial innovation, and CHOGM activities, that is, hotels, roads, the airport, State House, security, etc. We agreed that all other sectors maintain the expenditure levels of the previous financial year so that most of the new resources are concentrated on these priority areas. You all saw what an outstanding success it was.

This year’s impressive rate of GDP growth of 9.8 percent is in fact due to this focusing. Similarly, I again urge you, to prioritise for the coming two financial years. I recommend that we concentrate on the following: energy, Karuma and the rural electrification. Let us start building Karuma and we continue with rural electrification. 

Another area is completing the equipping of the UPDF and the Uganda Police because as you can see, tourism is booming now because of security. There have been some criminals who have been killing people here but they are being arrested as you saw, and we are going to try them by court martial. This game of the courts – your Lordship the Chief Justice - (Laughter) - we must forgive his Lordship, he is a bit overworked with all these many cases, matrimonial cases and what have you. They are too many! 

Your Lordship, let us help you to deal with the ones of the guns; you leave those to us. Somebody with a gun - court martial! Uganda will be very peaceful. People will be sleeping on the streets. They will not have to close their doors. Please, do not object, you will see. In a very a short time Uganda will be very peaceful. We find you with a gun, you are a voluntary soldier. Yeah, you are not recruited but you are the one who recruited yourself for negative purposes! So, let us deal with you in the way we deal with the -(Applause) 

So, I suggest that for these coming two financial years we concentrate on energy because now Bujagali is being constructed; it is funded so that one has no problem.  We lent them money to start because they were delaying but when they finished their financial packaging, they paid us back. The money they paid us back is part of this $130 million, which we have in the fund now.

Now the issue is with Karuma. We are working with the Norwegians but in case they delay, we are going to move ahead alone and we shall build that dam and also continue with the rural distribution of electricity. 

Roads! Roads! We must deal with roads. (Applause) When I travel on some of these roads - I do not have time to keep bumping – me a guerrilla, I almost get out of the car and decide to walk. (Laughter) The central artery roads, the roads in my new year’s speech and the feeder roads. 

Prosperity for All, meaning NAADS and microfinance. Employment creation through industrialisation and industrial innovation. If we concentrate on these four or five areas, you will see we are going to achieve very big gains in the next two years. “Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and His righteous and the rest shall be added unto you”, this is Matthew 6:33. (Laughter)

We deal with these in the next two financial years, and it will be very easy thereafter to deal with other issues: public servants pay, more classrooms, more health centres. You know, the problem which I see is not knowing how to focus. You try to touch everything at the same time and you end up being nowhere. God told you here, “Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven and the rest will be added unto you.” He did not say, “Seek everything at the same time.” No. (Laughter) “Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven and the rest will be added unto you.” This is Matthew 6:33. In case you need to -(Laughter)- they have Bibles but they never read them. I am helping them to revise.

I end with a quotation, from the Bible again, “Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in Heaven.” (Applause) This is Matthew 5:16. This is very important for all of you especially the Movement supporters. Our good deeds, NAADS, schools, health centres, security – [An hon. member: “No drugs”] - No drugs? Repentance is accepted. We will expose the lies of the ill-wishers and our people will be happy with the Movement.

With these few words -(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, it is my duty now to thank all of you for listening to me. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, on behalf of the entire Parliament of Uganda and the invited guests assembled here, and I believe the entire country which has listened to your State of the Nation Address today, I want to thank you sincerely for fulfilling your constitutional duty and fulfilling it on the very day the new session commenced. Thank you very much. (Applause)  

I want to thank you for the account you have given to us of the activities and programmes that you were able to carry out in the ending year and your plans for the next year that is starting very soon. 

We are happy that you have been able to make this address when in just a few days from now, precisely on 12th, we will receive the Budget. Now that we have received your plans for the next year, we shall be able to compare the Budget with what you have promised to do for us in the next financial year.

We thank you for giving us ideas as to how to improve the lives of our people especially those in the rural areas. You have introduced a concept of economic trinity in the rural homes. (Laughter) We shall go and discuss this idea with our people so that they can see the necessity to improve their living standards. 

I want to thank our guests today for honouring this occasion, and I want to apprise them that normally this function, the State of the Nation Address, has three corners, a sort of trinity situation. In that we started it when we welcomed you to the parliamentary grounds; you have received your address here and this will not be the end of the day, we shall end in another corner, at the parliamentary gardens where tea and coffee is waiting for honourable members. (Laughter)

I thank you very much, Your Excellency. The House will be adjourned until the 12th, and that is the day we will receive the Budget, at the same venue, here at Parliament House. And again I am asking Members when the House is adjourned to go outside and have coffee with His Excellency the President. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 June 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)

