Wednesday, 2 June 2010

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

National Anthem

(Two Verses)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

STATE OPENING OF THE 5TH SESSION OF THE EIGHTH PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA 

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the First Lady, hon. Janet Museveni, Your Excellency the Vice-President of Uganda, Prof. Bukenya Gilbert Balibaseka, Your Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, the distinguished traditional leaders, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, the Cabinet ministers, honourable judges of the Courts of Judicature, hon. Members of Parliament, members of the Diplomatic Corps, the Chief of Defence Forces, the Inspector-General of Police, the Commissioner-General of Prisons, the leaders of political parties, religious leaders, distinguished invited guests, ladies and gentlemen. I welcome you all to this occasion.

PROCLAMATION BY THE SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: “Proclamation by Edward Ssekandi, Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, for the commencement of the Fifth Session: 

“WHEREAS Parliament was prorogued on 19 May 2010 thus marking the end of the Fourth Session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution empowers the Speaker by proclamation to appoint the date for the commencement of session of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS it is expedient that the Fifth Session of the Eighth Parliament should commence;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of powers conferred on the Speaker by clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed that the Fifth Session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda do commence on this 2 day of June 2010 at 2.00 p.m. at the Parliamentary Chamber. 

Given under my hand at Parliament House, on the 2nd day of June 2010.” (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, distinguished invited guests, ladies and gentlemen; it is yet another occasion in the year when I have the pleasure and privilege to offer on behalf of the Members of Parliament of Uganda our warm welcome to His Excellency the President of Uganda and other distinguished guests upon the State of the Nation Address of the Eighth Parliament.

Your Excellency, you are warmly most welcome to Parliament. We feel we have a sense of pride that Your Excellency had the opportunity to bless us with the four addresses in the past years on this important occasion, which is an obligation bestowed upon you by the Constitution.

Your Excellency and hon. Members, you are all aware that this is the beginning of the final year of the Eighth Parliament. I would not be completing my duty if I do not report about the performance of this Parliament during the past period.

Allow me, Your Excellency, to give a brief report about our performance in the past four years. In my opinion, I am satisfied that the Eighth Parliament has done a commendable job. (Applause) It has executed its legislative, oversight and representative roles satisfactorily and honourably. Parliament has completed the following businesses: 

•	Bills considered and passed; 74. (Applause) 
•	Motions for resolution considered and adopted; 151. (Applause)
•	Reports considered and adopted; 116. (Applause)
•	Petitions considered and concluded; 16.
•	Ministerial statements presented and debated; 135. (Applause)
•	Other statements presented; 48.
•	Questions for oral answers handled by ministers; 63.

Let me take this opportunity to congratulate honourable members for their devotion and commitment, which has made it possible for us to handle and complete the mentioned items. We have a short time to conclude our term and I wish to urge all of you to be available for the committee and plenary business –(Interjections)- I know –(Laughter)- and exhibit a high level of commitment so that we can complete important assignments given to us. Please, do not relax.

Your Excellency, you are aware that the constitutional amendments enacted in 2005, among others, stipulate that Parliament, hence forth, should operate under a multi-party dispensation. I am happy to report that we have been operating under this system successfully although there is still a lot to learn and perfect. Let me thank the leadership of all the parties represented in the House and their members for the spirit of tolerance and co-operation that has allowed us to handle business in the plenary and committees. Please, keep it up. 

I wish to welcome back Prof. Ogenga-Latigo –(Applause)- in the House, the Leader –(Applause)- of the Opposition who suffered a serious motor accident in October last year. I am happy that he is back after undergoing treatment and is fully recovering. (Applause) I am sure he is ready and has the energy to execute the obligations expected of him. Once again, on behalf of all Members and on my own behalf, I welcome you to Parliament. Thank you. 

INVITATION BY THE SPEAKER TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO GIVE AN ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION TO PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS under clause 1 of Article 101 of the Constitution the President has to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation at the beginning of every session; 

AND WHEREAS the Speaker has just proclaimed the commencement of the Fifth Session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, as Speaker of Parliament, I do hereby invite His Excellency, the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation on this second day of June 2010.” 

Thank you very much, your Excellency. (Applause)

AN ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION TO PARLIAMENT, BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA 

2.57
HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition, hon. ministers, Members of Parliament, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

Mr Speaker, in accordance with the provisions of Article 101, clause 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I am here to deliver the State of the Nation Address 2010.

Indeed, this is not a mere ritual, but a significant aspect of good governance. I, therefore, stand here to give accountability of what has been done since the last address, and appraise you of the plans and strategies for the next 12 months. 

Before I go further, Mr Speaker, permit me, once again, to convey to you and the entire House, my condolences and sympathies over the death of the following Members of Parliament: Henry Balikowa, Member of Parliament for Budiope; Samwiri Byanagwa, Member of Parliament, Rukiga; and David Ringe Chan, Member of Parliament for Padyere. 

Recently, Mr Speaker, many lives were lost as a result of natural disasters, with the biggest occurring in Bududa where the massive landslides claimed many lives and rendered many families homeless. Many lives continue to be lost through road accidents and careless driving; many of which could have been avoided. These accidents also badly maim people, thereby reducing their ability to look after their families or contribute to national development. I commiserate with all Ugandans who have lost their loved ones during this period. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I request you to stand up and observe a moment of silence in memory of the departed persons.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

MR MUSEVENI: Mr Speaker, as is the practice in our region of East Africa, in a few days’ time the budgets for the Financial Year 2010/2011, will be presented to the respective Parliaments of the five East African community member countries: Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi. 

Consequently, I am happy to report on the state of the nation today. In a few days’ time, the Minister of Finance will be giving more details about the economy.

State of the Economy

Although some people expressed pessimism about my assertion regarding the resilience of Uganda’s economy in the wake of the global economic crisis that rocked many other economies of the world, time has proved that what I stated then was correct. (Applause) The Ugandan economy has on average grown by 8.4 percent per annum over the last five years, which is a much faster rate than the remarkable 7 percent over the last 24 years. So, while others are crying, we are sort of laughing. 

This rate of growth has resulted into a six-fold increase in the size of the economy over the last 24 years. The revised total national output in 2009 is estimated to have been Shs 34.2 trillion, or almost US $17 billion. This translates to a GDP per capita or average income per person of about US $540, based on a population estimate of 31.5 million Ugandans in December 2009. 

This figure of Shs 17 billion is very interesting for me. Having been around for sometime –(Interjections)- until a few years ago, only the economy of Kenya had a GDP of Shs 12 billion. You can go back and check when this was, but I do not think it was many years - it was like six or so years ago. So when I see that the economy of Uganda is now Shs 17 billion and has surpassed the level of Kenya where it was at that time – of course Kenya has also gone ahead now – I am quite happy, as I will tell you, we are going to even get happier –(Laughter) (Applause).

Economic growth over the last five years has been driven largely by the performance of the industrial and services sectors, which grew on average by 10.5 percent and 8.9 percent per annum respectively; that is the industrial 10.5 percent and the services 8.9 percent. Of course, this Shs 17 billion I talked about is very small by world standards but we are moving. We are moving and as I will tell you a little later if you will not be too tired because it is quite a long speech –(Laughter)– well, if you sleep that will be good for you in case you did not catch up with sleep last night –(Laughter)– it is good to use the House for relaxation – no problem –(Laughter)– as the Bible says, many are called but few are chosen. So, it is up to you to choose where you want to belong.

The agricultural sector performed at an average annual growth rate of 1.4 percent over the last five years. The inadequate growth of the agriculture sector has been a result of the continued reliance on the weather and the insufficient linkages to value addition and market opportunities. These issues shall be addressed – the issue of value addition and irrigation.

Science and Innovation

The NRM Government has developed pro-active science and technology development programmes with our own Ugandan scientists and innovators at Makerere University and the Uganda Industrial Research Institute at Nakawa to enhance technology and value addition to agricultural produce – this is the answer to value addition; our own scientists have now been mobilised to solve this problem of exporting raw materials. 

The NRM Government has over the years made significant investment in science education which has produced many innovative Ugandan scientists, some of whom have got patents for their innovations with our support. Many have got formulae for value addition and scientific innovation. In the financial year 2009/10 alone, Shs 48.23 billion was allocated to support these science groups. This is about US $24 million in one year – this is not a small amount of money.  

These resources have been provided to Makerere University, Faculty of Food Science and Technology, Faculty of Technology, Faculty of ICT and the Uganda Industrial Research Institute, as well as scientists in any of the Ugandan universities with any innovation. If the hon. Members of Parliament could spare some few moments and get some of these points, it would add information to your knowledge. 

These scientists are not only - if you want me to give you their addresses I will give them to you –(Laughter)- contact me through the Speaker. (Laughter) These scientists are not only active in the full spectrum of value addition but are also active in bio-medical sciences, mechanical engineering, electronics et cetera.   

In order to retain the scientists we produce, I have directed the ministers of Finance and Public Service to ensure that starting with the coming financial year, scientists’ wages should be close to international levels of remuneration -(Applause)– and please, when my policy comes here, support it, because I know many of you have a wrong idea – but this one was introduced by our Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi. When I got him from Makerere he came and introduced the concept of democratic suffering -–(Laughter)- that if we all suffer, somehow we are better -–(Laughter)– now this is different from our guerrilla concept. 

Our guerrilla concept was if there was little muhogo or cassava, we would let the ones on duty eat even if the rest remained hungry. If those who are on duty eat, they will be able to guard the rest better. (Laughter) Therefore, the formula I want to recommend is this guerrilla wisdom that although we are all hungry, let us concentrate on our scientists, because they will, not in a very long time, get us out of the bush like the other guerrillas did. Do you remember the other time? (Laughter)        

External Sector Performance

Export performance continued to expand while import growth slowed markedly with the downturn, leading to a narrowing of the trade deficit. The small increase in the external current account (to a projected 5 percent of GDP in FY2009/10, largely on account of lower official transfers) should be readily covered by higher FDI and multi-lateral disbursements. 

The rebound in capital inflows pressured the shilling, which appreciated by 19 percent between June and November 2009. Gross international reserves (including the SDR allocation) stood at the equivalent of about 5.1 months of imports in December 2009.

Total exports of goods and services for 2009 were equivalent to US $3.6 billion compared to US $3.4 billion a year before. This represents a modest increase of 5 percent in total export receipts during that period. 

Informal cross-border exports increased by 40 percent, largely driven by the export of industrial products to Southern Sudan and DRC, which increased by 45 percent compared to the year before. In nominal terms, informal cross-border trade, on a net basis, was equivalent to US $1.2 billion compared to US $844 million in the year before. So to the region, Uganda exported in 2009 goods and services to the value of US $1.2 billion. 

In addition, workers’ remittances rebounded strongly in the months of July to December 2009, averaging about US $76 million per month on average compared to about US $39 million per month on average between January and June 2009. Similarly, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) had also fully recovered to an average of US $50 million per month by December 2009. 

The total foreign exchange inflows for 2009, excluding FDI, are US $4,297 million (export of goods US $2,700 million, export of services US $903 million and remittances from Ugandans working abroad, US $694 million).  

Inflation

Mr Speaker, there has been a return to price stability in early 2010 following inflationary pressures which peaked at 14.9 percent in February 2009. I remember when this inflation was going up, a lot of panic was being spread around by the radios here, about how inflation is going up and you remember I gave a speech and I said this was good news. This means more demand; let’s produce more. Now here we are.

Inflation gradually subsided over the course of 2009 to 8.8 percent by January 2010, as food prices, which were the main factor keeping overall inflation at double-digit levels, declined. The demand for our goods in the region, which had pushed the inflation up was good. The demand was good and that is what I told the country; let’s produce more. 

However, at 27.5 percent in January 2010, food prices remain high, thus underscoring the urgency in ensuring that the measures to increase agricultural production are implemented quickly and effectively. There is now a glut of maize. Maize is in big supply but the minister, when she makes her speech on the budget, will give some ideas on how to deal with this. This is good. We should not panic. We shall find solutions. And those who are producing maize should not be discouraged. Let them continue; they should learn from my experience as a milk producer. 

Some years ago when we encouraged milk production, milk production went up, so the prices went down. And those who had joined farming for opportunistic reasons withdrew but I stayed because I cannot withdraw from that sector. We started processing milk into powder and this milk is now going all over the world. That is what we are going to do with maize. We want to see how to process maize into different products so that it is not only eaten here but eaten even far away; but in order to do that we must improve processing and storage. I am sure the minister will say something about that when she gives her Budget speech.

Other aspects that show improvement in the quality of life of Ugandans include telecommunications usage, which has improved with the liberalisation of the sector. In 2009, there were a total of 12.1 million mobile telephone subscribers and an estimated 2.5 million persons used the Internet regularly in 2008. This is compared with an installed telephone line capacity of only 62,000 lines and active connections of only 23,000 for a population of 18 million in 1993. I hear telephones lines in Uganda are now 14 million because these are the figures of 2009.

Investment

I am happy to report that Uganda’s investment climate continues to be attractive and, on the whole, profitable. Statistics for the period, July 2009 to March 2010 indicate that 313 projects were licensed by the Uganda Investment Authority with a total planned investment of US $1,344,755,319 projected to create 69,000 jobs. 

The sector that attracted the highest planned investment was the manufacturing sector with US $610 million. It is gratifying that the largest proportion of investment was from our local private sector with 174 projects worth US $619 million and projected creation of 52,000 jobs. China topped the list of foreign investors with 32 projects worth US $243 million and 5,500 jobs expected to be created. Other countries with sizeable number of projects registered during the period were Kenya with 13 projects, India with 29 projects and the United Kingdom with 14 projects. Such investments are key to the modernisation of our economy and country as well as the creation of employment.  

I, therefore, reiterate my call to deal with and remove all the obstacles to investment in our country, be they occasioned by individuals interest, groups or bad laws. One impediment to investments is corruption by officials asking for bribes and wanting to get free shares. You will hear of casualties if these shameless people do not stop their activities.

You know I am a milk drinker. Milk is very precious but you should always protect it against flies because when you put it in a glass and not cover it, especially if you are outside, a fly will come and drop in it. So, I call these people who harass investors “flies” because why should you want to get shares in a company where you did not sweat for, why? [HON. MEMBER: “They are yellow flies.”] One evil-minded Member of the Opposition has said that they are yellow flies. I have never seen yellow flies. (Laughter) I do not want to use un-parliamentary language but we normally know that the colour of flies is not yellow; it is certainly not yellow. (Laughter) But these fellows are a disgrace; we shall get them slowly. [HON MEMBER: “When?”] When? You will see.

If you want to solve some of these problems, give powers to the Military Court Martial -(Interjections)- you have the powers; this Parliament has the powers. So, if you want to get rid of corruption, court martial them and corruption will very soon be over. But if you want to go on with your system, then we shall have to use it the way it is. Because with the system you have, you must bring evidence – of course even in the Court Martial you bring evidence but the court is more – mambo iko haraka haraka- and there is no problem because from the Court Martial they can later appeal to these other courts although they will already be somewhere. Do you see the advantage? That is an idea you can think about. 

Agriculture

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, agriculture remains the backbone of our economy and an activity on which many people still depend for their livelihood especially in the rural areas. Consequently, in the crop sub-sector, Government has provided high yielding seeds, improved breeding stock and planting materials as grants in kind to farmer groups through the NAADS programme and other Agricultural Sector Development Projects. In all this, the principal objective has been to increase productivity, which in turn has translated into improved household incomes as a sign of Prosperity-For-All or as we say, Bonna Bagaggawale; Abarate Kere; Lonyo pi Dano Duca; in Karimojong they say, Abara da’g da’g. (Laughter) I must get the Lugbara one – hon. Bako, help me. Oh! My daughter is now a good girl. (Laughter)

MS BAKO: Mr President, in Lugbara you would say, Lebadria meesu dri leba. (Applause)

MR MUSEVENI: You write it down for me. Awadi fo - (Applause) She is now a good girl. In Lugbara we say, Lebadria meesu dri leba. I know some of these people who do not know Uganda very well waste their time talking about Uganda having many tribes but there are not many tribes in Uganda. There are just five linguistic groups: the Bantu, the Ateso/Karimojong, the Luo and the Lugbara. [HON. MEMBER: “Banyala.”] Banyala -(Laughter)- Banyala are Bantu speaking, and if you use any of the Bantu dialects, they will understand what you are saying but they just pretend. You people need to encourage Ugandans because they pretend not to understand what other people are saying. How can you fail to understand? So, when I go upcountry with my five selected words, I can reach everybody. Keep this gift from my daughter; she is a very good girl today – I will bear it in mind. 

During the current financial year, the NAADS programme coverage was rolled on to cover all parts of the country. It is currently supporting 929 rural sub-counties and 137 urban councils within 80 districts.  Additionally, support to farmers through the NAADS Programme has focused on strengthening the community value chain on which Shs 48.5 billion has so far been spent.  

This financial year, under the crop sector, the following inputs, among others, have been provided to model farmers. But before I talk about this- part of what the minister will talk about in the Budget speech- is to ensure that there is value addition for all these crops– maize, if it is not eaten while still fresh, should be processed into flour. We should not sell grain maize to our brothers in Kenya or in Sudan. When you do that you are taking away animal feed. When you mill the maize from here, the remains are used for processing animal feed while the human being eats part of the grain. 

So I have told the ministers to please – in fact I am busy donating maize mills wherever I go. If you give me more money, I can donate all the maize mills. But we shall plan structurally. I have been giving away these donations because I find there is need, which can be quickly fulfilled.

And on milk coolers, I would like to say that there should be a milk cooler wherever there is enough milk. I introduced coolers in what is now called Kiruhura District and other parts of that area; they have created a big impact on the population. And wherever there is rice, there should be a rice huller. Juice extractors should also be placed in areas with enough pineapples and so forth. So, my formula that I have given to these people, the ministers, is that either something is eaten while fresh or it is processed. There should be no other category.

We are going to work systematically to ensure that at least at the sub county – the other day I went to this sub county after Bamunanika coming this way –(Interjections)– Mukono North, I will go back there. (Laughter) Yes, it is called Zirobwe. I went to Zirobwe and found a big group of people in a co-operative society – they were very active but they needed a maize mill and I gave it to them through a donation. So in every sub county where maize is grown, there should be a maize mill. This should be our target. In every sub-county where there is milk production, there should be a milk cooler. 

The other day when I went to Teso, I found they had a milk cooler at Awoja – some genius from NAADS had put a 700-liltre cooler at Awoja near that bridge and people were supposed to come from Katakwi, which is 24 miles away to bring their milk to Awoja. I thought that that NAADS genius was not really sharp in the brain. So, I directed that I needed more coolers wherever there is milk. I hope they have done what I told them. The Minister of Agriculture who is here must – because I put it in writing, now I am telling you publicly.

We have given 2.3 million banana suckers to model farmers in Central and Western regions; 1.3million coffee seedlings distributed nationwide; 147 metric tones of groundnuts seeds distributed to model farmers in Busoga and Acholi sub-regions; 116 metric tons of rice seed distributed to model farmers in Busoga, Bunyoro and Acholi sub-regions; 3,762 bee hives to farmers in Lango and Acholi Sub-regions; and 212 animal traction to farmers in Bunyoro and Acholi sub-regions – (Interjections)– West Nile -(Interjection)- that is a good point. I will check, though they did not bring it out here. I know they are there, but they should have brought it out, you are right. Of course NAADS is everywhere as you know; it is at all the sub counties unless you do not go home to check. (Laughter)

Although the restructuring and  change in approach have led to improved service delivery by NAADS, the misuse of funds by some NAADS officials, in many cases done in collusion with some local leaders, still persists.  My appeal to you, honourable members, is that you should take interest in what NAADS is doing in your respective areas with a view to bringing to book errant and corrupt NAADS officials. 

I do not know why you politicians fear these corrupt people. (Laughter) If you want to have a good political future, you should stand against corruption especially in your local areas –(Interjections)– even nationally of course. No problem. But in your – because in 1967, after A’ Level I taught – some of my students are here – yes, that is one of them. (Laughter) The general there was in primary seven at that time. But when I was teaching there you could see the corruption of these local officials. 

In fact that is where I got the idea of these chairpersons especially of LC IIIs because from that time and a little earlier I lost interest in this local structure because it was corrupt. One day when I get time, I will tell you more about this otherwise I might be diverted. But that is why when we came from the bush, I said we cannot trust the sub county chiefs – we had to put the LC IIIs above them and those LC IIIs had to be elected to carry the power of the people –(Interjections)– if they are not yet doing their work, they will do it, but that was the structure – the people had to have an overseer to represent their interests. Otherwise, if you put this structure of a sub county chief, the veterinary people, agriculture, primary teachers who are very corrupt –(Interjections)– yes! So, if you want to have a good future as a political leader, really fight these corrupt people because the people will see.

This time each sub-county is getting Shs 127 million for NAADS only -(Interjections)- yes, all, Kampala even more. But when you come and you ask the people, “Have you heard of this money?” They have never heard of this money, and you the leader, you have not said anything about it. That is also not good for you. (Interjections) So, please if you want good political mileage, the Government has already helped you, sent all this money, your job is a simple one; just follow it up. What happened to the money? I will be able to point out to you some politicians who are doing very well because of that, not today, but another day.

Government with the support of Japanese Government has set up a regional centre of excellence for research and training in rice production at the National Crops Research Institute, Namulonge. The centre will undertake research and training in rice growing and harvesting skills in the entire region of East, Central and Southern Africa. Construction is ongoing and the centre is expected to be fully operational by December 2010.

In order to step up seed multiplication, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has partnered with the Uganda Prisons Service to achieve this goal. Consequently, 100 acres of land have been set aside for the production of 150 tons of high yielding varieties of maize seeds to enable commercial farmers have timely access to improved seeds.

In addition to the 6100 hectares of land already acquired in Kalangala Islands to promote palm oil production, Government has acquired 2000 hectares in Buvuma Island for the same activity. The oil mill in Kalangala became operational in February this year with capacity to crash 30 tons of palm fruit per hour. So, Uganda now is going to produce its own palm oil instead of importing palm oil from Malaysia. What a big shame! (Applause) And you remember what a big battle I had to fight for this palm oil industry; how much opposition I faced. That there were some butterflies, which were going to be disturbed (Laughter) God is my shepherd, I shall not want. (Laughter) I hope some of you have read Psalm 23. So, Uganda now is one of the few countries in East Africa with palm oil and this palm oil is very important. You cannot make soap without palm oil. Imagine we are importing - what do they call it? There is a way they call it. [Hon. Member: “Tallow”] Tallow from Malaysia to make soap to wash ourselves. Can you imagine? (Laughter) and the Malaysians got this palm oil from Nigeria, now they are selling to the blacks as usual. What happened to these black people?

So, we are now going to produce this tallow here. We shall not be importing tallow for soap to wash. If we cannot wash, then what happens to us? Spending all this money just to wash ourselves, donating to Malaysia? This is terrible and the opposition we faced, it was as if we had committed a crime by proposing a project until some partners went away saying, “What is wrong with these blacks, let us go back”. But fortunately, some of them were strong; they stayed; now here we are.

This financial year, Government, with support again from the Japanese embarked on the sustainable irrigated rice production in Eastern Uganda. (Applause) Under the programme, small scale demonstration irrigation systems have been developed within the Busoga, Bukedi, Bugisu and Teso areas. In the West Nile sub-region, now my daughter will be happy, including Adjumani, Government completed the construction of 22 markets, rehabilitated four district farm institutes, sunk 10 community boreholes and constructed 16 permanent bridges to increase farmers’ productivity and access to markets.

In the animal sub-sector, Government will continue pursuing an integrated approach to the prevention, control and eradication of the major animal diseases. Government has an ongoing collaboration with the Norwegian Government for developing animal health and meat hygiene services with a view to meeting all meat safety requirements for meat export, especially to the European Union.

The European Union needs our beef because it has no Mad Cow Disease in it but we need to get rid of some other sicknesses which they are worried about; not affecting human beings but possibly infecting other cows. Our cows are very good; very good meat so we are working on this.

Government has established animal water reservoirs capacity of 2.4 million litres reflected by eight valley dams and two valley tanks in the districts situated along the cattle corridor. Mr Speaker, the following valley dams have been commissioned: Renjubu in Isingiro District - this is badly written, my secretary, it should be Lwenjubu not Renjubu; Makukulu in Lyantonde District; Kibanda in Rakai District; Lyangoma in Mubende District; Kasejere in Kiboga District; Ajamaka in Kumi District; Atar in Apac District; Wangkwok in Kitgum District.

The following valley tanks have also been commissioned: Imeri in Kamuli District and Kasiira in Kumi District.

Progress in the Energy Sector is as follows:

(i)	The procurement and installation of an additional 20 megawatts thermal power project in Tororo has brought the capacity of thermal power projects to 170 megawatts; 50 megawatts at Kiira, 50 megawatts at Mutundwe and 50 megawatts at Namanve. Government continues to provide a subsidy to make the tariff affordable. Construction of another 50 megawatts heavy fuel oil thermal power plant in Jinja by Invespro is underway.  When completed, this plant will replace the thermal power plant at Kiira which uses expensive diesel.

(ii)	So far, on Bujagali Hydro Power Project, civil works for the 250 megawatt power plant are estimated to be 65 percent complete. The first unit of this project will be commissioned in October 2011 and the target is to have full completion by April 2012.

(iii)	Karuma Hydro Power Project; 700 megawatts, Mr Speaker, following Government’s decision to optimise the capacity of this project to 700 megawatts from a capacity of between 200 and 250 megawatts initially planned for by the Norwegian firm, an Indian firm was engaged in October 2009 to study the various options for achieving this capacity, to carry out a detailed feasibility study and engineering design capacity, as well as prepare bid documents. This hydro power plant will be constructed using funds from the Energy Fund as a Public Private Partnership, with Government taking the lead.  Construction is scheduled to begin in 2011.

(iv) 	Isimba Hydro Power Project - 100 megawatts; A consultant to carry out the feasibility study for the project was procured and construction is expected to start later this year. This project is the third plant to be developed in the medium-term.

Renewable Energy Projects

Construction of Bugoye mini-hydro power plant (13 megawatts) in Kasese was completed and commissioned in October 2009. The plant now sells power to the grid.  

Mr Speaker, construction is on-going on the following small dams: Mpanga in Kamwenge, 18 megawatts; Ishasha in Kanungu, 6.5 megawatts, Buseruka in Hoima, 10 megawatts. These plants will be commissioned later this year, adding a total of 34.5 megawatts of renewable energy to the national grid.

Hydro Power Development Master Plan

Government is carrying out a Hydro Power Development Master Plan study, targeting sites above 50 megawatts mainly along River Nile. The objective of the study is to prepare a Hydro Power Development Master Plan that is in line with the long term power and transmission development plans. It aims at prioritising potential hydro power sites basing on technical, environmental, economical and financial aspects to prepare primary designs thereof and to build Government capacity in this field.

Grid Expansion Programme

Construction of the Bujagali Interconnection Project is in progress. The project consists of a 220 kilowatt transmission line from Bujagali to Kawanda and a 220/132 kilowatt sub-station at Kawanda. In order to expand the national grid transmission network in the country, several other transmission projects are being developed.

Energy Efficiency Programmes

Under this arrangement, energy auditing is being carried out in a number of public institutions and a couple of industries. From the findings of the energy audits, Government will provide the investments to reduce energy waste in the institutions audited. This measure is expected to reduce energy demand by about 10 megawatts.  

To date over 700,000 improved household stoves and 700 institutional stoves have been disseminated in 16 districts. These are: Bushenyi, Rakai, Kayunga, Wakiso, Mukono, Tororo, Mbale, Kabale, Moyo, Yumbe, Arua, Lira, Apac, Kiruhura, Kamwenge and Kamuli; leading to reduction of wood fuel use, a measure intended to preserve the environment.

The Petroleum Sector

Mr Speaker, oil exploration activities have intensified in the Albertine Graben in Western Uganda and the country now has adequate reserves to commence commercial production. In order to plan for production in an orderly manner, Government has put in place a National Oil and Gas Policy, which provides the guiding principles in the petroleum value-chain and institutional framework for prudent management of resources and the revenues accruing out of production.  The new petroleum legislations; one on resource management and the other on revenue management, are being prepared to operationalise the policy.

A total of 35 exploration and appraisal wells have so far been drilled, out of which 33 encountered oil and/or gas in the sub-surface. That is a very high score; 35 wells, 33 productive. Very good luck for NRM! (Applause)  

A total of 15 fields have been discovered to date, with recoverable volumes of about 1 billion barrels of oil equivalent. I reiterate our stand that given our commitment to value-addition, commercial developments will be in refining the oil and processing gas within the country. In the short term, however, the discovered gas resources together with test crude produced during appraisal will be used to generate electricity to help meet the country’s electricity needs. 

So as we are developing electricity stations on the rivers, we also have this new source of energy now through gas and some of the diesel. When we use our diesel, it is, of course – we shall give you cheaper electricity because when we use imported diesel, you generate a unit of electricity at US23c. When you use water, you can generate the same unit at US4c or US3c. When you use gas – our gas and our diesel, you can generate at about US6c per unit. So, you see why you are now suffering from high energy prices. This is because we are using imported oil. In fact, we are subsidising it. We are adding – I think US14c. Otherwise, it would be too expensive for you to afford.  

So far, Uganda has not exported any drop of its discovered oil. I, therefore, appeal to those who have been peddling lies that oil is already being secretly sold abroad, to stop those – that rubbish, which they are talking about –(Interjections)- un-parliamentary language, I am very sorry. (Laughter)

Those who are saying these untruths –(Laughter)- I could use a Luo word “Goba” for lies, they are “Gobaists.” 

Mr Speaker, in line with the Government policy of promoting small and indigenous investors into the sector, a number of investors were attracted to the industry. To this effect, five new companies were issued with petroleum operating licences during 2009.  This brought the total number of oil companies licensed to operate in Uganda to 75.
	
Recently, there has been a lot of talk about Jinja Storage Tanks (JST), especially when we experienced a limited spell of fuel shortage due to some challenges with the logistics in Kenya. Unfortunately, most of the talk was speculative and not based on facts. I would like to reassure the country that Government has never lost interest in the Jinja Storage Tanks whose capacity of 30 million litres exists to hold national strategic reserves. The facility was only temporarily closed to enable its refurbishment. Plans are underway to integrate the Jinja Storage Tanks into the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline system and to build four new regional storage facilities in the East, North and Western parts of the country. Government is still committed to developing the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline in spite of the challenges experienced in both countries regarding land acquisition and the need to re-design the infrastructure to cater for the future export of petroleum products from Uganda. That pipeline was designed to import, but now, we are going to produce oil. So, it must adapt accordingly to think of exporting. These issues are now being addressed to pave way for construction.

Mindful of the importance of quality products, in November 2009 Government launched the fuel working programme. The programme promotes quality assurance and protects the market by ensuring that smuggled and transit products are not sold in the country. Monitoring is regularly carried out to ensure that petroleum products sold in Uganda meet the required standards.

The Road Sector

Mr Speaker, sequel to last year’s report on the road sector, the following roads illustrate the progress: 
(i)	Reconstruction of Jinja-Bugiri was completed. (Applause)
(ii)	Kampala Northern-Bypass was completed in September 2009 -(Interjections)
(iii)	Soroti-Dokolo-Lira was completed in December 2009. (Applause)
(iv)	Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Lama border, the contract was signed and work which is expected to be completed in 2013 has already started. (Applause)
(v)	Gulu-Atiak-Bibia/Nimule, design work was completed and procurement of the contractor started in December 2009.
(vi)	Ntungamo-Mirama Hill/Kagamba-Ishaka, design work was completed and work starts in November this year;
(vii)	Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba, work is to start by August this year. (Applause)
(viii)	Nyakahita-Ibanda-Fort Portal- Kamwenge, the design work has been completed.
(ix)	Matugga-Semuto-Kapeeka Road, work is expected to be completed by September 2010. (Applause)
(x)	Muyembe-Namalu-Moroto, design work was completed and work will start in November this year. (Applause)
(xi)	Gayaza-Zirobwe-Wobulenzi Road, work which commenced in March 2008 will be completed in July 2010. (Applause)

The ferry for Kumi-Katakwi on Lake Bisina has been paid for; while the procurement process is ongoing for others. Procurement for the ferry for Lwampanga to Namasole is in the final stages of awarding contracts to be signed in July 2010.

Government has decided that works on rural roads be carried out by the local governments through what they call “Force Account” or the employment of their own machinery instead of tendering out the work to contract firms. This idea of contracting had caused a lot corruption and I am very grateful for the chairmen of the Ankole area – when I was down there on one of the trips, they sought me out and gave me this information; how this contracting of roads had just become massive theft and I stopped it - stopped the contract. But you should have seen - the thieves went and misinformed the donors –(Interjections)- yes, they went to accuse me to the donors – the thieves –(Laughter)- they went to accuse me to the donors – they think – 

Some of the donors came and tried to raise this but I said, “Please, go back. I know this place a bit more - asante sana. Rudi nyumbani!”  So now the districts will work on these roads. We shall get them equipment and they will work on the roads themselves.

The decision was taken after establishing that the “Force Account” method was not only less costly but also efficient if supervised properly. Road equipment units will be availed to the local government for that work. The minister of works should come here and tell you when that road equipment is coming and how much –(Interjections)- I can tell you I was somewhat involved in getting this equipment. The Chinese Government gave us a loan to buy road equipment but I advised those people involved to mix some Chinese equipment with Japanese equipment. Because the Chinese had given us a loan, we had to buy some of their equipment but the Chinese should also agree that we buy some of the Japanese equipment as good brothers – I think that is what will be done. 

Water and Environment Protection

Mr Speaker, the water and environment sector has continued with the implementation of its major activities, which include development of new water supply facilities, rehabilitation of the old and existing systems and improvement of their functionality. Currently, the rural and urban coverage stands at 63 percent and 61 percent respectively. In the medium term, the sector will raise rural and urban coverage to 65 percent and 68 percent respectively.

The following are the major sector achievements realised in the Financial Year 2009/2010 as at December 2009:

(a)	Rural water supply and sanitation – construction of eight water supply schemes, in Lugore in Gulu, Labara in Gulu, Madi-Opei in Kitgum, Minakulu in Oyam, Adwari in Lira, Orum in Lira, Magoro in Katakwi and Ayero in Apac.
(b)	Urban water and sanitation - designs for the water supply systems to serve Kabuga in Kamwenge District, Kakuuto in Rakai District and Kagongo in Ibanda District were finalised while construction in Rugaaga, Kabira and Mutara were completed. For sanitation, 75 Ecosan toilets were constructed in Kakuuto, Kasensero Kakyanga-Kirumba, Buyomba, Kibiito, Rugendabara, Hima, Nyakigumba and Rubona.
(c)	Water for production – construction work on the following is near completion, that is, 90 percent of the work:
(i)	Kagango dam, Kagamba Valley Tank and Obwengerero Valley tank in Isingiro District;
(ii)	Kawomeri dam in Abim District;
(iii)	Olelpec and Olamia valley tanks.

Mobilisation was completed on the following sites:
(a)	Arechat and Kobebe dams in Moroto District;
(b)	Akwera in Lira District;
(c)	Longorimit dam in Kaabong District.

The shoddy work that has been done on dams in Karamoja is being investigated. You know in Karamoja, people were what we call in Akarimojong, “akinyam.” In Luo we call it “cam”- these people were “akinyam” the money –(Laughter)- they thought that because of insecurity, nobody will go to check but now we are beginning to - the Minister of State for Karamoja, physically –(Laughter) visited the sites; took photographs and wrote a report. This report enabled us to know the state of these works, at least, from the consumers’ point of view. Many of the dams were not functional yet money had been paid. Cheap valley dams, we shall find out by whom -(Interjection)- you should not be impatient. You see this is the problem of people who seat on this side. They do not know patience. Slowly by slowly – I have forgotten how they say it in Luo – step by step. [HON. MEMBER: “Mot mot”] Not “mot mot” there is another one. I think “Iyole yole”. 

We do not have to panic because we sent these people the money. They signed for it. Where is the work? We do not have to panic; the world is not ending today. We shall get them. 

Cheap value dams have been constructed at Shs 20 million in all the sub-counties in Katakwi District -(Interjection)- Yes, I sent a team to do our own research. What does it require to build a dam? And my people have gone to Katakwi and built dams for Shs 20 million. I would want all of you to go and see them and compare it with billions, which disappear. You see, you do not have to panic because if people are playing games, you need to go slowly. The problem is that many of you have not read the Bible. In the Bible, it says, “Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good deeds and praise your Father who is in heaven.” Have you read that? (Laughter) I practise it. 

My people went and built these dams. I sent some task force to build dams cheaply. Compare that to these ones of billions. [HON. MEMBERS: “Kazibwe”.] Kazibwe is not the one who was building – it is the engineers. They just play around because you do not question them. They can fool you.

All the dams in the eight sub-counties in Katakwi have each a capacity of 7 million litres of water. I have dams on my land - remember I am a farmer - for which I used Shs 40 million to build each. One of them holds 100 million litres of water. My cattle on that farm have never lacked water even in the worst of droughts. In case you want to find out how poor I am, you come and visit me. So, when we tell these people that you can build these dams cheaply; we have done it. I have done it; I have dams at Rwakitura, dams at Kisozi; why should a dam go for billions? 

Water Resources Management 

Uganda actively participated in all meetings in the sharing of the Nile resources. Uganda and a number of countries in the region have signed the agreement which came out of those negotiations. It is our hope that both Egypt and Sudan will eventually come on board because the agreement which has just been concluded is fairer to all of us than the one which was made during the colonial period. (Applause) Government will continue to spearhead the proper management of natural resources of the country for both the present and future generations. Consequently, the following have been done among others:

A total of 379 community watershed management and 60 tree planting groups have been formed, registered and strengthened as the main implementers under the Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project.

Recently I was in Karamoja and I mentioned to the hon. Minister of Karamoja -(Laughter)– I said, “You know, there are such strong winds in Karamoja” – even this famine they talk about – well, when I saw the strong winds I remembered my nature study. In primary school we used to have nature study, which was like Botany at an elementary level. You remember in that study there is pollination. You will not get harvest if there is no pollination. Now, what is the effect of very strong wind on the pollen? Doesn’t it throw it away? I was wondering; these agricultural people should do something about what we call wind breakers. Plant trees so that the wind is slowed down. Otherwise, even if we solve other things, that wind, I am sure, can even blow away the pollen. [HON. MEMBERS: “Mabira”.] Mabira? We shall have time for that. (Laughter)

Government has embarked on a rigorous programme to restore degraded river banks, lake shores and hill tops. Already 497 hectares of land have been planted with 244,200 trees in a bid to restore the degraded Lake Victoria shoreline. This has covered the districts of Rakai, Masaka, Mpigi, Wakiso, Mukono, Jinja, Kamuli, Bugiri and Busia.

Since Government is aware of environmental concerns and potential impact resulting from the oil and gas related activities, all oil and gas projects have been subjected to environmental and social impact assessment to ensure that there are no adverse environmental effects. So far, 69 oil and gas related projects across the country have been reviewed to ensure their compliance with environmental standards.

Government has produced the Environmental Oil Spill Sensitivity Atlas for the Albertine Graben documenting Uganda’s changing environment resulting from local activities and global phenomena. The Sensitivity Atlas provided environmental planners with tools to identify resources and risks, establish protection priorities and identify timely appropriate response and clean up in case of an oil spill.

Government has constructed and equipped nine municipal solid waste compositing plants in Lira, Soroti, Mbale, Jinja, Mukono, Fort Portal, Mbarara, Kabale and Kasese.  An additional eight sites including Arua, Gulu, Hoima, Mityana, Entebbe, Busia and Tororo have been selected for the next phase.

Mr Speaker, recognising the critical importance of wetlands in the regulation of weather and climate, Government has embarked on a rigorous programme to ensure sustainable management of Uganda’s wetlands including the restoration of the degraded ones and protection of others from encroachment. Nobody is going to be allowed to destroy the wetlands. (Laughter)   

Using political methods, we are going to guide the people that are in the wetlands, to learn how not to destroy the core integrity of these vital assets. I will handle this issue myself, as I will the forest reserves. It is true that I chased these groups called NEMA and NFA; I said, “Get out please, because you are going to mishandle our people.” Our people do not need force; they need education and engagement. I am busy with my upcountry trips but once I finish, I am going to deal with these groups directly -(Interjections)- ask them? We talk. Ugandans are not people who do not know what they are doing. Once you show them, they can find a way out rather than using force. 

Recently I addressed the Army Council in Karamoja. In that address, I told them two major points, which I would like to also mention to Parliament; point one, was  that the NRM has always aimed at transforming Uganda from a Third World country to a First World country. (Applause) Even when we were still a liberation movement, that was our point No. 1. Point No.2 was that the problem we faced when we took power was that we did not have money of our own to fulfil our vision on account of very low tax collection levels. Here below is a table showing levels of tax collection since 1986. 

In 1986, we collected only Shs 5 billion for the whole country. Today, in this coming budget, we are going to collect Shs 5 trillion. (Applause) This will be 13.2 percent of GDP. As you can see, tax collection in Uganda has gone up 1,000 times since 1986. I am very happy about this. (Applause) I have nothing but pride when I stand here and read these figures. 

What does this mean? It means that at last we are almost self sufficient in terms of funds. With careful prioritisation, we can fund our crucial projects. We can no longer be held at ransom by external funding. I will give two examples; roads and energy.

Energy

Let me start with energy. By 1986, we were only generating 60 megawatts - that is what we found in the system in Uganda. One factory like NYTIL, at that time, would have required 20 megawatts. Fortunately, most of the factories were not working and so there was no need for power. We now have installed a capacity of 600 megawatts. So, power production has gone up 10 times since that time. 

With Bujagali’s completion, we shall be generating about 850 megawatts. However, we are aiming at 3,800 megawatts in the next five years. This will give a kilowatt per hour per capita of 600. There is that measurement where you measure kilowatts per hour per person. Thereafter, the master plan is to aim at 17,000 megawatts in the next 15 years. That is the level of Malaysia now. This will, if necessary, be funded by ourselves. That is why we set up the Energy Fund. We now have US $350 million in the Energy Fund. This fund has already helped to start Bujagali. Bujagali would never have started on time if we did not have our own money. 

The people we had given the concession to were facing problems with their financiers asking about butterflies, some spirits; that there was a spirit there. Just a joke; frivolous behaviour – people are having serious problems of how to live and people are just playing games. When you are begging and they say they saw a certain butterfly there and so cannot give you the money before carrying out an assessment - that is what happened to this Aga Khan group, which we had given Bujagali. They were not going to get the funding because they were being asked about butterflies and spirits.   

Now, what did we do? We gave the group at Bujagali an ultimatum and a loan and told them, “Here is US $75 million, start now or we shall re-enter the site and build the dam ourselves.” They started. Their financiers co-operated and then these people paid back our loan. So we are also lenders now. (Laughter) 
 
Recently, there was delay on Nyagak mini-dam. We took over the site, put in US $8 million and it will be finished by December 2010. (Applause) We used US $8 million to hire a consultant to design work for Karuma. In the past, for even the design of a dam or a road, we had to beg or borrow. You see how we could not move? Even to design something, we needed money and we had to beg for that. We beg somebody to give us money to design and after you get the design, you must go back to beg the money for the implementation of the project. That is now finished. With the NRM, it is completely finished. (Applause) So, the money for finishing Nyagak is our money. The money for designing Karuma is our money.

In the past – this is no longer the case. For any vital project we do not have to beg; we do not have to borrow. Of course, if we get support, that is good. The Banyankore say; “Etajugire nyoko kobona ekirengye ofa agarirayo.” This means that a cow, which is not your mother’s bride price, even if they give you a hoof, you say, “Thank you very much.” (Laughter) Because after all, it was not your mother’s bride price; why should you complain?

I will show you the importance of what I have just told you now. We have been having demands from our people to pull electricity lines to different parts of the country. These demands were beginning to spoil our politics yet we could not meet these demands through borrowing and begging. That was the problem. But with the Energy Fund – I recently directed that all the major transmission gaps that have been existing must be filled. So I said, “Fanya”. Hence by the end of this year, the following lines will be connected – you will see what money means:

a)	Katakwi-Iriri-Moroto-Katikekile (Applause) that line will be finished; 
b)	Muyembe-Namalu-Nakapiripirit-Amudat; 
c)	Gulu-Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo; we may not finish it, but they will start on it; 
d)	Myanzi-Kiganda-Mubende; 
e)	Migyera-Nakitoma-Kafu; 
f)	Muhanga-Kamwezi; 
g)	Muhanga-Rwamucuucu; 
h)	Kashambya-Rugyeyo-Kyempene-Nyakishenyi;
i)	 Lwala-Kaberamaido-Dokolo-Amolatar-Namasale;
j)	 Lira-Aroi-Dokolo;
k)	Ibanda-Kabujogyera-Kamwengye.

Construction works will soon start on the following power lines: Nebbi-Nyaruru-Pakwach-Panyamuru, with a tee-off to Parombo; Nyapeya-Zombo-Zeu-Wara-Vurra; Arua-Marach-Koboko. [HON. MEMBER: “Terego”.] No, I will include Terego later. (Laughter) If the technocrats had not seen it, I have now seen it. We will also do Arua-Rhino Camp; Bukwiri-Kyankwanzi; Kakumiro-Birembo-Nyarweyo; and Masindi-Biso-Buliisa-Wanseko.

Now you can see that this is going to be done in just one year. (Applause) I really feel - the same problem of begging and borrowing for roads held our development back. The same problem existed for the roads. There were many roads that the people were rightly demanding, which we could not deliver through borrowing and begging. These were, again, creating misunderstandings between us and the people.  

Given our increased self-sufficiency, however, we are now doing or going to tarmac the following roads using our own money: Kampala-Masaka is being worked on now. You know that very important road was in danger of just shutting up because we had expected somebody to help, but he could not help. So we said, “Okay, thank very much. Do what you can, we shall do this one, do not worry, this is our own house after all.” 

The other roads include: 
1.	Mbarara-Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna. That is with our money, but I would like to thank the European Union for endeavoring to do for us the Masaka-Mbarara portion. “Afoyo matek.” Thank you very much. (Applause) 
2.	We will as well be doing Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi-Kisoga-Nyenga.
3.	Muyembe-Namalu-Nakapiripirit-Nanduget-Moroto.
4.	Mbarara-Kabingo-Kikagate.
5.	Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwengye-Fort Portal – the Government of Uganda is going to co-fund this with the African Development Bank.
6.	Ishaka-Kagamba-Ntungamo-Mirama Hill; Rukungiri-Bwambara-Kihihi-Ishasha and Kihihi-Kanungu and Nyakishenyi. (Applause)
7.	Kyenjonjo-Muzizi-Hoima-Masindi.
8.	Kapchorwa-Bukwo-Suam.
9.	Mbale-Bubulo-Magale-Bumbo-Lwakhakha.
10.	Rwekunye-Masindi Port-Lira-Puranga-Kitgum-Kidepo.
11.	Mpigi-Kanoni-Kabulasoke-Maddu-Ssembabule.
12.	Nyendo-Bukomansimbi-ssembabule.
13.	Matugga-Semuto-Kapeka, that one is already being done. This one was becoming a big problem between us and our fighters. Our fighters, the veterans of the Luwero Triangle - this road was becoming a problem; you get a promise from here, then it does not come.

And the amount of time spent begging, too much time. This minister needs to spend more time at home instead of going up and down -(Interjections)- Nakawuka, that is a good one. No, I did not include here but I will mention it in another way.

Nakasongola-Sasira; there is that junction. And Hoima-Kaisotonya to the oil - my daughter Nakawuki talked of Nakawuka. Nakawuka-Kasanje; that is a very important road but that one is going to be very modernised. It is going to be the new Entebbe road because you know we wanted to build a road along the lake to go to Entebbe but these rich men like Bukenya have built there. (Laughter)

You know all those developments, the Munyonyos, the what - so we cannot break down people’s houses. Therefore, we are now going to make a new Entebbe road from Natete, Nakawuka, Entebbe and it will be four lanes -(Interjections)- let my young daughter come and we talk. (Laughter) 

As I said in my address to the Army Council, Uganda is now unstoppable! (Applause) I salute the World Bank for offering to tarmac Gulu-Atiak-Bibia and also Arua-Koboko-Oraba. We had included the two roads on our list of self funding but the World Bank came and said, “No, we shall do this”. We said, “Very good, you do them. That is what partnership means”. So that reduces - we can put this money elsewhere.

I would now like to advise our development partners from Europe and the United States of America, if they really want to help Africa as they keep saying, to concentrate on energy, roads and the railway and to some extent on education and health. We do not need help on elections. (Laughter) Elections are a simple exercise.

Dealing with energy and roads as Uganda is beginning to do in a big way will lower the cost of doing business in Uganda, make investments more profitable and therefore attract more of those investors. That is what Africa needs. It does not need lectures about things we fought for. My young daughters here; Nakawuki is in Parliament because we fought and she is here in Parliament. (Laughter) Therefore, I do not need - really we are very polite people; you know Africans are very polite people. You sit down, listen to somebody talking really, but you try to be polite.

Now as far as Uganda is concerned, we are going to move and Uganda is going to develop. This 7 percent they have been talking about, we are going to 12 percent rate of growth. (Applause) Because if we could get a rate of growth of 9 percent with shortage of electricity, what will happen if we have got enough electricity? This is just common sense. If you study carefully that 9 percent, this high rate of growth is mainly in construction because there, you do not need much electricity. When you are putting up buildings, you do not need much electricity; hotels, transport but where you need electricity like in manufacturing - if we had enough electricity we would be talking of 11 percent rate of growth, 12 percent like China has been doing but you find people — we even waste a lot of time explaining to these people about this, about that. You partners, help energy, roads - 

I salute the World Bank for working on that road to Bibia and to Vurra. That is what I want to hear not lectures about what I know and I am an expert in. (Laughter)

We are able to do all this in a short time when our tax collection is only 13.2 percent of GDP. You can imagine how much more we shall be able to do when our tax collection is 20 percent of GDP and here I am not talking about this oil money. With the oil money, we shall move very fast. I will give you an example, this is not yet concluded but I will give it to you as an example. There are two oil companies; Tullow and Heritage. Heritage wants to sell their share to somebody else. But according to the agreement, you cannot sell shares if the Government does not agree because this is our oil, you remember. So Heritage wants to sell their shares and they have got an offer of somebody who wants to buy. This offer is of US $1.35 billion to buy the shares of Heritage so that Heritage gets out and another one comes in to be a partner of Tullow. According to our law, such a sale will attract 30 percent tax. That means from this sale, the Uganda Government will get US $400 million. 

Talking of self-sufficiency, once we get this money -(Interjections)- we are still discussing with Heritage because Heritage was saying that they need investment incentives but we said, “You are leaving. How can somebody who is leaving; how can somebody who is going away ask for incentives? You are going away.” But when I looked at what Heritage had put in, Heritage had put in US $130 million, but they were now going to get US $1.35 billion. So this is quite a bit of money. Therefore, we are going to move – brethren, do not fear –(Interjections)- be of good cheer –(Laughter)- this is in the epistle according to St John 16:33. (Laughter) 

Before I leave the roads – this list of roads which I read is not exhaustive. If you read my document, I say etc, etc, etc –(Interjections)- for instance there is an important road Musita-Nankoma-Majanji; I did not read that one. There are other roads like Jinja-Kamuli –(Applause)- this one of Mukono-Kayunga-Jinja; all those will be worked on -(Interjections)- some of them may be reconstructed completely, others may be rehabilitated and then reconstructed later. They will all be worked on. 

Social Sector

Do not worry my friends, this is a State of the Nation Address –(Laughter)

Education

Quality and accessible education remains a priority area of Government.

Primary education sub-sector: Mr Speaker, registration in primary schools continued to increase, reaching a total of 8,197,267 in the Financial Year 2008/2009 from a mere 3,068,625 in 1997. Gender parity in the enrolment has improved, with an increase in the proportion of girls in total enrolment at primary level. 

A total of 45,000 primary four teachers have been trained in how to handle pupils transiting from primary 3 to primary 4. From P1 to P3, the thematic approach is being implemented with the local language as the medium of instruction. In P4, the subject-based approach is being implemented and the medium of instruction is the English language. In the Financial Year 2008/2009, Government paid Primary Leaving Examination (PLE) fees for 463,631 pupils enrolled in UPE schools across the country.

Mr Speaker, Gulu Comprehensive School for traumatised children (now called Laroo Boarding Primary School for war-affected children) is fully-equipped with the requisite materials for teachers and learners. At present, the school has 460 learners who are offered accelerated learning through the seven-year primary school curriculum, in addition to teaching them vocational subjects such as carpentry, brick/block laying, building, cloth-cutting, making and tailoring, among others.

In order to increase the commitment of head teachers to their supervisory roles, Customised Performance Targets (CPTS) have been introduced. Those constitute agreements signed between the local governments and the head teachers and deputy head teachers. Under the agreement targets aimed at quality education and service delivery are set to be met within an agreed timeframe. By mid-December 2009, 85 percent of the head teachers in 12 sampled districts had signed the CPTS. These are agreements between themselves and the local government to ensure that they improve education. 

In the Financial Year 2010/2011, the following will be carried out, among others:
Payment of examination fees for a total of 500,000 pupils expected to sit PLE at the end of 2010. No headmaster should, therefore, charge parents and pupils for this fictitious charge because we have already paid for the children. 

Payment of hard-to-reach allowances to 2,398 teachers stationed in the hard-to-reach areas of Kalangala, Mukono (Buvuma and Koome islands), Karamoja region (Moroto, Kotido, Nakapiripirit), Kotido and Kasese districts in the mountains.  The allowance for these hard-to-reach areas is 30 per cent of the basic salary.

Construction of a total of 480 teachers’ houses in schools located in the West Nile sub-region under the Dutch-funded CROWNS project.

Secondary education sub-sector: Universal Secondary Education, now covering Senior 1 to Senior 4, is being implemented in 844 Government-aided schools; up from 791 in 2006. Private schools partnering with Government are now 642; up from 363 in 2006. The total number of beneficiary students had increased from 161,396 in 2006 to 452,137 by the end of 2009. A total of 5,797 qualified secondary school teachers were recruited in addition to 14,277 teachers who were already on the payroll.  So, the total number of secondary school teachers is now almost 20,000. 

Expansion was carried out on six seed secondary schools and six traditional secondary schools and so on. These ones you will read yourselves because I think you may die if I –(Laughter)- because you know how to read, you will read this yourselves. But let me say something about the Business Technical, Vocational Education and Training (BTVET) sub-sector. In this sub-sector – but what I did not read in the secondary schools, I am insisting that the Ministry of Education must put one secondary school per sub-county –(Interjections)– even if you cannot do it in one year, but at least show the plan. You may not do it in one year but show the plan. 

(a) In this sub-sector, Universal Post Primary Education and Training under which 46 public and 16 private BTVET institutions are benefiting from the programme; enrolment continues to go up. The highest increase, 86 percent in enrolment, was in Government-aided BTVET institutions while the private BTVET ones only registered four percent growth.

(b) Construction of a hostel block at the Public Health Nurses College at Kyambogo and Mulago School of Nursing.

(c)	Procurement and supply of infrastructural equipment to:
(i)	Arua School of Nursing and Midwifery;
(ii)	Bobi Community Polytechnic in Gulu District;
(iii)	Uganda College of Commerce Pakwach in Nebbi District;
(iv)	Dokolo Technical School in Dokolo District.

Mr Speaker, the priority activities in the BTVET sub-sector during the Financial Year 2010/2011 include:

(a)	Construction and equipping of five technical institutes in the districts of Lyantonde, Adjumani, Bukedea, Kyenjojo and Kiboga using the Saudi Fund for Development;
(b)	Construction and equipping two nursing institutions at Kaabong and Hoima;
(c)	Reviewing the BTVET curricular to respond to the labour market needs;
(d)	The plan is to have, at least, one technical institute, polytechnic, technical or vocational institution per district by 2018 -(Laughter)- you debate this and see how you can make the minister move faster. I will also come in and see how I can make her go faster. 

Higher Education Sub-Sector

To date, Uganda has a total of 27 universities, out of which five are publically owned and 22 privately owned.  Government appreciates the contribution the private sector has made in this sub-sector.

In the coming financial year, the priorities for the higher education sub-sector include, among others:
(i)	Kick-starting Lira Constituent College of Gulu University in a phased manner;
(ii)	Final preparations for the establishment of West Nile University in Arua District. (Applause)
(iii)	Kick-starting the preparation of the operationalisation of the loan scheme in all public universities; 
(iv)	Preparation of a comprehensive science and technology infrastructure needs assessment programme of public universities. Shs 950 million has been released in the financial year 2009/10 for Busoga University. The balance of Shs 1.5 billion to be provided in the medium term.  

In Special Needs Education/Career Guidance and Counselling, the main achievements include:
(i)	Establishment of a new department for Career Guidance and Counselling.
(ii)	Training of two teachers per institution (that is secondary, technical, National Teachers College and health training) located in the North, North East and West Nile on career guidance and plans for setting up Teso University –(Applause)- because Teso - these ones you can read for your selves. I do not have to go into all these details. 

I also covered health. It is here and you will read it for yourselves. But maybe rehabilitation of existing hospital facilities which started in financial year 2008/2009 is continuing. So far, all 11 regional referral hospitals have been provided with funds for capital development for rehabilitation and refurbishing of infrastructure in the hospitals.

Partial rehabilitation and upgrading of medical facilities to general hospitals is going on. The following hospitals are undergoing rehabilitation: Nebbi, Apac, Tororo, Bududa, Kambuga, Rushere and Itojo. (Applause) The health centres of Masafu, Kyenjojo, Buwenge, Katakwi, Bukwo and Naguru are to be upgraded to general hospitals. On the other hand, funds have been secured for the major rehabilitation works and upgrading of Mubende and Moroto hospitals and so on.

Plans are underway to rehabilitate and equip Mulago National Referral Hospital to enable it handle cases that have hitherto been referred abroad. Once completed, there will be substantial reduction on expenses for both Government and private persons. In order to decongest Mulago National Referral Hospital, two general hospitals are being constructed in Kampala and Makindye divisions of Kampala District. So, I think one of the hospitals is Naguru and then the other one is in Makindye. That is what – 

Should I talk about reproductive health? –(Interjections)- I will talk about these health units getting electricity; Arua, Koboko, Maracha-Terego, Nebbi, Yumbe, Pallisa, Budaka, Kumi, Bukedea, Kotido, Abim and Kaabong districts. You will read this for yourselves.

In a bid to improve procurement and supply of drugs to health facilities, Government recentralised this activity to the National Medical Stores to centrally procure drugs and other supplies for the entire country with a view to creating efficiency in the procurement process, distribution and availability of medicines and supplies to the population.  

In order to fight the rampant theft of drugs by health workers, in addition to the embossment: “UGANDA GOVERNMENT NOT FOR SALE” for the common user drugs, I recently established a unit under State House to keep track of service delivery in terms of drug supplies and delivery to the population in health centres and hospitals. Although the unit has only been working for a short period, it has done a good job and those caught stealing the drugs are already appearing before the courts of law. I hear some people were saying that, “How can a doctor be arrested?” But the Banyankole have a proverb which says, “Rufu kweba etahemukire omuziiki tabwerabwera” - If death is not ashamed to kill somebody, why should the people who come to bury be embarrassed? It is the death -(Laughter)- which killed the person. Why should you be embarrassed to come and complete the job? So if somebody is not ashamed to steal, then he should be arrested.

There have also been cases of district health officials having “ghost” health centres –(Interjections)- which receive drugs. There was one in the lake – yes. There was another one on Kampala Road. This is criminal. I am, therefore, directing the Inspector-General of Police to investigate all these cases of ghost health centres and hold criminally liable all those officials who have been involved in this malpractice.

I am also aware that the Mulago National Referral Hospital had by May 2010 not ordered for Shs 2 billion worth of drugs from the National Medical Stores, when I am sure there is need for the drugs at the hospital. I also hear that other districts are presenting incomplete orders in order to defeat the new system of centralised drug purchase. 

You see, what they are doing now is fill in forms wrongly and when the forms come they are rejected. So that way there will be no supply; that way they will say this system cannot work. Give us cash. What they want is cash. (Laughter)

This is in addition to continued inflation of the costs of drugs that are still purchased by district and referral hospitals through specification of trade names rather than using the prescribed actual scientific or generic names, and ordering drugs outside the basic essential drug kit.

What we have told these people is that concentrate on the basic drugs, the ones which are very much in demand. But they go and look for a drug which is exotic so that they go from the core list to the peripheral list. 

I also understand that health officials are smuggling drugs across the borders because we have closed the loophole by embossing them. So they cannot sell them here but sell them where we cannot go to check but this will be sorted out. 

In order to streamline drug procurement, I am directing the Ministers of Health to ensure that all drugs are budgeted for under the National Medical Stores in the Financial Year 2010/11. 

I have also directed the Minister of Health to ensure that all prescription is on quadruplicates – you see now what they do – there is a form called Form 5. In this Form 5, they just write your name and the drugs they gave you. There is no copy of this Form 5, which remains anywhere. So, I have now directed and I want quadruplicates. You must have a form with three copies so that you write the name of the person, the drugs you are giving him and where he lives so that we can be able to go and check whether that person is there first of all, and whether he ever got drugs from anywhere at the date you say he got drugs. 

When I told them to print these duplicates, they said they had no money. I said that is no problem; stop the seminars and use the money for printing the booklets. We are in a serious war. The “akinyam” had gone too far. (Laughter) “Akinyam”, the “cam cam” had gone too far.

I do not have to go into all these, you can read it for yourselves. 

In the health sector, Uganda received a breakthrough when Quality Chemicals Ltd, a local company in partnership with another foreign company, started making ARVs in Uganda. In the long run, the cost of those drugs will come down considerably, allowing increased access to the drugs by people with HIV/AIDS. Many countries have sent delegations to visit the factory. Since WHO recently approved the production of the drugs for consumption worldwide, the company will be able to export its products to many countries especially within Africa. Government has all along supported and will continue to support the noble cause of Quality Chemicals Company.

But the problem we are having now is that some people - I hear that this other group, what do you call them? The group of procurement, what do they call it? PPDA. They are now in a struggle with this factory. I want this to stop because this is our factory. We have our factory here, employing our people; you cannot equate it – the only things I want from that factory are two: firstly, is the quality of the drugs good? Secondly, is the price comparable with those – we shall have to buy from that factory instead of shopping for other drugs from I don’t know where. (Applause) So, on that one I will have to engage that procurement group - (Interjection)- rule of law includes the law of investment. (Laughter) I am sure that MP must have heard of such a story.

These drugs which they say are slightly cheaper than the ones made here – some of their countries subsidise them. We are not fools! I am not a fool. Somebody cannot subsidise his drugs and then say they are slightly cheaper. If they are cheaper, by how much? That is why we put a margin. If it is too much, then we can – so please let there be – the Bible says you should be wise.

I do not have to go into this. You will read all this for yourselves. I will talk about the police. (Interjection) Tear gas is a good way of dispersing trouble makers. If you do not want to be tear-gased, please do not make trouble. (Laughter) Go according to the law. 

The positive picture I reported in my last State of the Nation Address, as far as security is concerned, has not only continued to obtain but has improved even further in many areas. In this respect more and more persons who were internally displaced (IDPs) are settling back in their original home areas and the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan is now operational. We shall not allow Kony to return to Uganda, certainly not alive. He tried to send his group led by two commanders namely Aropu and Kararang. Aropu’s group was wiped out and he himself surrendered – he is now with us. Kararang was killed. Kony tried to send these groups to resume killing people in Uganda but we could not allow them; we finished them. Aropu is the only one who survived. He surrendered and he is with us now. 

The havoc which Kony occasionally wreaks in Congo or Central African Republic will be stopped. The world should not just sit back and watch. If some of these countries want to help, they should work with us and we shall finish the remnants of Kony. The step the USA Government has taken recently by Mr Obama signing a law authorising the American Government to help in the fight against Kony is a welcome development. (Applause)

It is now clear that Kony’s group has now been destroyed and no longer poses any threat to the Ugandan people with the on-going mop-up operations that the Uganda Peoples Defence Force (UPDF) is undertaking together with neighbouring countries. This marks the culmination of the National Resistance Movement and UPDF’s successful war against tumultuous years of grief and wanton mismanagement. 

Up to now, we have killed 380, terrorists – Kony’s fellows, captured 58 terrorists, rescued 630 abductees, captured 342 weapons of all types, 11 laptop computers, 44 military radios, and 118 terrorists have surrendered. When you look at these numbers, because our estimate of the population Kony had in Garamba was about 1,500, so if you total up all these – the 630 abductees who were  freed, those killed, those captured and the ones who surrendered, Kony is remaining with a very small group of people. But we shall also get him; we shall account for him 100 percent. Kony’s group is greatly degraded and they will be wiped out completely in the Central African Republic where remnants of them are. 

Work of Parliament

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I commend you for the work you are doing both as the Legislative Arm of Government as well as an oversight body. (Applause) The work accomplished since the last State of the Nation Address includes:

(i)	The passing of 20 Bills;
(ii)	Twenty-six ministerial statements;
(iii)	(iii)Twenty-six questions for oral answer responded to by ministers; and
(iv)	Thirteen Bills are still pending. 

Among the Bills Parliament has passed during the period under review, the following are of particular significance:

a)	The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007;
b)	The Whistle Blowers’ Protection Bill, 2008;
c)	The Contracts Bill, 2009;
ii)	The Domestic Violence Bill, 2009;
iii)	The Prevention of Female Genital Mutilation Bill – well, there is also another one;
iv)	The Emoluments of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009 - I do not know why they put it here.
v)	The International Criminal Court Bill, 2006. (Applause)

Regional and International Matters

Uganda has continued to enjoy excellent relations with her neighbours and has performed effectively on the Security Council where it has been representing Africa as a non-permanent Member. Uganda has continued to attract both regional and international conferences as evidenced by the following, among others:
i)	The 2010 International African Water Association Congress, 15th – 19th March 2010;
ii)	The 3rd East African Community Investment Conference, 28th – 30th April 2010;
iii)	The Smart Partnership Dialogue, 26th – 29th July 2009;
iv) 	Special African Union Summit on Refugees, Returnees and IDPS, 19th – 23rd October 2009;
v)	The 2010 AU Ordinary Summit slated for 19th – 27th July 2010
vi)	 The ongoing International Criminal Court Review Conference. 

Other Areas

Presidential Pledges  

I would like to state clearly that the principal agreement between the Movement and the people of Uganda is the 2006 Election Manifesto upon which the people gave the Movement the mandate to run the affairs of this country for the five years. On assumption of power, the commitments in the election manifesto became policy, which we have been implementing systematically since then. Consequently, the pledges I may make during my tours do not in any way substitute the commitments in the manifesto. On the contrary, they are simply a supplement to the fundamental commitments in the manifesto and their implementation may be immediate or gradual -(Laughter)- depending on what is required and what is available. 

But the main purpose of the presidential pledges is really a sort of demonstration. You know, before I proposed the introduction of UPE, I first piloted free education in two schools. One was Kanyaryeru Resettlement School where we had people who had come from Luwero but living near Mbarara. I built a school for them, Lake Mburo and I said, you give them free education and we see how it works. And I would pay the teachers, build the classrooms and the children would study free of charge. 

When I bought land in Kisozi, there was no school there. So, I built a primary school there and the children from the neighbouring area came and started studying there free of charge. I wanted to see what was required. Once I was satisfied, that is when I put it in the Movement manifesto in 1986 that it is possible to provide free education. So I use these donations to test. For instance, if I find people lacking a maize mill, I will say, okay, I give you a maize mill and see how it works. This is really the aim of this; it is partly humanitarian – some of the children are really badly off and once they come to accost me, I cannot extricate myself. 

Unfortunately, I do not take my holidays outside Uganda. When I get time, I go to my farms and when they know that I am there, they come. So, these donations are partly for my rescue. When the children come and besiege me, I say okay, give this one this and that one that so that – because the alternative is that I should go and hide in France like some of the leaders do. I take a holiday in – I have never taken a holiday outside Uganda. Never! So, partly compassionate, partly self defence, partly pilot to see how it works. This is how I really look at these presidential pledges. But the actual pledges are in the manifesto.    
	
I will use the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as an example. By March 2010, I had made 166 presidential pledges through that ministry. Out of these, 95 pledges had been fulfilled at a cost of Shs 1.6 billion; work had started on 38 pledges at a cost of Shs 666.5 million while funds were being mobilised to handle the remaining 33 pledges.

Elections slated for early 2011

In 2006, Uganda held its first election under a multi-party dispensation after having operated under a Movement system for a number of years. In less than a year’s time, we shall have the second Presidential and Parliamentary elections under the multi-party dispensation. Already, a number of activities are taking place in preparation for those elections early next year. My appeal is that we should all be working towards consolidating democracy further and avoid anything that may undermine what has been achieved so far.   

I would like to appeal to all Ugandans to do two things in respect of the forth coming elections: if you had registered before, go, and check on the voters register to ensure that your name is there. If you have never registered, especially young people that have just turned 18 years; go and register now. All the people that had registered before had their photographs and other details taken. Those that are registering now have both their photographs and thumb prints taken. The photographs and the thumb prints, using the centralised memory of the computer, will eliminate those that have been cheating with multiple registrations. 

In the trial time, it was most embarrassing to find a certain prominent Ugandan that had registered twice. I know the Ugandan and I doubt if this person has ever voted for the Movement. (Laughter) The one who registered twice. Oh! Nduhuura had registered twice.

I have been hearing some individuals saying that there will be no elections in 2011. I would like to assure you that as sure as night falls, there will be elections. (Applause) And nobody will disrupt these elections. We really must be serious. One cannot bring irrational demands, which he wants to impose on the country and threaten violence – that will not happen. There will be no violence –(Interjections)– why should Kiggundu go – I have been telling these democrats –(Laughter)– because I hear there are some democrats in Uganda – that instead of going to disturb the Europeans – those Europeans are really – when you go there, they give you tea and all that, which is good for our industry – but instead of disturbing the Europeans, they should come to the Inter-Party Forum –(Interjections)– I am not a member of IPC, we set up the Inter-Party Forum in 2006 and I chaired the first meeting.

As mature Ugandans, come and tell us what the problem is in that forum. But if you go to accuse me to the Europeans, that is up to you. This is Uganda; this is not part of France; this is not Scotland; this is not Northern Ireland; this is the Republic Uganda -(Applause)- the land of our ancestors. So, if there is anything you think is reasonable, please come to the Inter-Party Forum and we discuss it. I do not have time to go into the arguments because we can only have real engagement from there.

You are saying that Kiggundu is not neutral, but I never knew this man – the first time I saw him is when he invited me to attend the meeting of Association of Engineers as their chairman. This was the first time I saw him and that meeting was held in Kyambogo where they were trying to set up their headquarters. 

Initially, the Government had proposed the name of another person, Sebunya, who is now our Ambassador to Libya, but some of the people who are in the Opposition objected –(Interjections)– not Robert Sebunya, there is another Sebunya – that name. You go and check with the Hansard. That is how the name of Kiggundu came up; it was a consensus name. (Applause) Now, today somebody says that unless you get rid of Kiggundu, there will be no elections. There will be elections and if you have got any issue bring it for discussion in the other forum. You can only convince us; you cannot intimidate us; nobody can intimidate us. Nobody can intimidate us and when I gave this speech – this speech is deliberate; there is nothing accidental here. (Laughter)

In conclusion, I launched the first five-year National Development Plan in many decades. The plan was evolved through a comprehensive consultative process that was spearheaded by the National Planning Authority. This development plan will guide all of us as we continue on the journey to develop and transform our country. I, therefore, appeal to all those who are in positions of leadership to read and internalise the major aspects of the plan and explain them to the people. I am making this appeal because Uganda is our inheritance and each one of us has a duty to contribute to this development.

While a lot has been done and achieved, a lot remains to be done. It is the primary duty of all Ugandans to do what is necessary with assistance from outside only coming to supplement our efforts.  That is the way to go because perpetual begging and borrowing from others has never been a sustainable venture if one is thinking about actual economic and social development.

I am glad that the recently launched National Development Plan 2010-2014 addresses many of the critical issues that the NRM Government has consistently emphasised as critical to ensure the social economic transformation of our society. It is, therefore, important that the priorities stated in the NDP 2010, which have been the hallmark of the National Resistance Movement Government continue to guide the implementation of government programmes.

I say all this and I have made this rather short speech, for God and my country! I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President, the Vice-President and hon. Members of Parliament, in the first place I stand here to thank His Excellency, the President, for accepting my invitation to him to address Parliament. (Applause)

My standing here is not intended to pre-empt or prejudice the formal debate we shall have on this address, which His Excellency has given us. You very well know within our rules we shall have a day to consider the address. I have been impressed by the reaction given by the House to His Excellency’s address -(Applause)- and I thought it is similar - I always follow the President of America’s address to the Congress; normally, I see everybody stands up to [HON. MEMBERS: “Shame!”] But as I have said, it is not for me to assess the address, I am only talking about the norms.

I stand here as a Speaker to confirm that His Excellency, the President has duly carried out his Constitutional obligation under Article 101(1) and I confirm that in the five years this Parliament has been in existence, there has been no default. (Applause)

And today, the address was done timely on the first day the session was opened and I think it is good that it has been given before the Budget is read on the 10th, next Thursday. We shall, therefore, be equipped with necessary factors and gadgets to assess it and make your contributions to it. 

The address has been made on a number of programmes and we are lucky that this Parliament has necessary committees dealing with all the programmes His Excellency has done. So, the members of various committees will help us in dealing with the address.

I must congratulate His Excellency, the President for the achievements which he has told us, have been registered. (Applause) We have, therefore, noted the programme for the next financial year, we shall compare it with the blood, that is, the budget that will be given to us to see whether they will be achievable or not.

I must thank the President for accepting to fully participate in all the programmes that were drawn for this day. The President has accepted to be part of the official photo that is always taken and the President has also accepted to be part of the other ceremony in the celebrated Gardens of Parliament. (Laughter) And therefore, I would invite all of you including members of Diplomatic Corps to also be with us in the Parliamentary Gardens. You are all welcome.

But before I end and before I adjourn, I wish to appeal to Members of the Business Committee to come on Monday so that we can look at the pending work and decide how to handle it. Please, come and then on the following day, we shall resume work until we get the Budget Speech on the 10th. With this, I once again thank His Excellency and I thank you for turning up in big numbers. 

Following the National Anthem, the House will be adjourned to Tuesday, 08 June 2010 at 2.00 p.m. to resume work but please, complete the programme of the day by ending in the Parliamentary Gardens. Thank you very much. (Applause)

National Anthem 

(Two verses)

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 June 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)

