Wednesday 2nd June, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in the International Conference Centre, Kampala

NATIONAL ANTHEM

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair).

STATE OPENING OF THE FOURTH SESSION OF THE SIXTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Whereas clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution provides that a session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda,  and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may,  by proclamation,  appoint;  and whereas the Third Session of the 6th Parliament ended on the 15th day of April, 1999 upon prorogation of Parliament;  and whereas it is expedient that Parliament is summoned to commence the 4th Session;  now therefore, I, Francis Joash Ayume,  Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution hereby proclaim that the 4th Session of Parliament shall commence in the International Conference Centre,  Kampala on the 2nd day of June,  1999,  at 2 o'clock in the afternoon.  

Further in the exercise of the powers conferred upon me by the Constitution,  the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Act and Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I hereby proclaim and declare the said International Conference Centre,  including its fore court, the yard and garden,  to be precinct of Parliament for the purposes of the 1st Sitting of the 1st Meeting of the 4th Session of Parliament,  to be held today the 2nd day of June, 1999.  

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala this 2nd day of June, 1999.  Signed: F.J. Ayume,  Speaker of Parliament.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oath was administered to:

Mr Omony Ojok

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are through with part of today's proceedings.  I will adjourn the House for a few minutes.
 
(The House was adjourned for 10 minutes)

(The House resumed at 2.55 p.m, the Speaker presiding)

STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS BY H.E THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER:  Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda,  hon. Members, clause 1 of Article 101 of the Constitution provides that the President shall,  at the beginning of each session of Parliament,  deliver to Parliament and address on the state of the nation.  The Fourth Session of the 6th Parliament has,  by proclamation,  commenced today, the 2nd day of June, 1999.  It is now my pleasure and humble duty to invite Your Excellency to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation,  today the 2nd day of June 1999,  here at Kampala International Conference Centre.  Your Excellency.

H.E THE PRESIDENT (Mr.Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Mr. Speaker, Madam Vice President, hon. Members of Parliament, fellow Ugandans.  I have got a long speech here, 27 pages, so I will combine reading some parts,  and summarising others.  It will be distributed so that we can study it.  

It is now 13 years and five months since the National Resistance Movement rescued this country from the fangs of devastation.  By that time,  the economy had shrunk by 25 per cent since 1971.  The income per capita which had been US$ 184.5 in 1971,  was US$ 157 by 1986.  So it had shrunk.  The foreign exchange reserves were US$ 29.2 million,  only able to support imports of goods and services for only six weeks.  

The colonial economy of Uganda which in the 1950s and 1960s had been characterized by the three Ts standing for tobacco, tourism and tea,  and the three Cs standing for coffee, cotton and copper was,  by that time,  characterized by only one C,  that is coffee.  In 1971 for instance, the export of tea had reached the level of 23 million killogrammes.  In 1986 however, it was only 3.5 million killogrammes.  Cotton,  which in 1969/1970 had reached the level of 466,382 bales was only 28,841 bales in 1985/86.  

I have told you many times that the British built one little power station in 1954 at Jinja,  with a capacity of 150 megawatts.  By 1986, this little power station at Jinja was giving out only 60 megawatts of our electricity,  30 megawatts of that being earmarked for export to Kenya - according to the colonial agreement - and also at a very uneconomic rate.  To get the magnitude of this problem,  I should like to remind the hon. Members that the lighting of Kampala city alone takes 200 megawatts.  But in 1986 Uganda was generating only 60 megawatts.  A factory like Casements requires 3 megawatts,  powering a factory at Nytil requires 3 megawatts.  To further illustrate the magnitude of the problems we faced,  a country like south Africa generates 39,000 megawatts.  So in Uganda here we are generating 60 megawatts while south Africa generates 39,000 megawatts.  

Another comparison:  you take a country like Tanzania which at Independence in 1961 was generating only 45 megawatts.  By 1986 they were generating 650 megawatts and for us we were generating 60 megawatts.  This of course impacted most negatively on the social indicators.  The infant mortality rate by that time was 122 babies under one year,  dying out of every 1000 born alive.  In 1986, 100,000 children were dying per annum from six preventable diseases.  Only 58 per cent of school going age children were in school in 1986,  but today the figure is 85 per cent.  

All these miserable social and economic indicators were not surprising,  since the revenue which was being collected by the country was only four per cent of the greatly diminished GDP.  The GDP had diminished and we were collecting only four per cent of that as tax.  How then could development and social services be ensured?  There were acute shortages of sugar,  salt,  of soap,  paraffin,  transport,  textiles and other essential items.  That is when our people started the practice of depending on second hand garments - which some people call emivumba - for clothing.  That word must have started in Kabale or Ntungamo, because it means a river,  in Kinyarwanda.  The two districts border with Rwanda and people there normally engage in teasing their Banyarwanda neighbours.  They probably meant that those old clothes were illegally crossing through Kizinga-Kamwezi, across one of the tributaries of River Kagera.  

I cannot enumerate of the afflictions of the people of Uganda during that time.  If I was to do that,  I would then have to talk about the roads,  about the environment which was ruined, about the wildlife which was ruined,  about wetlands which were ruined.  Inflation as you remember was 240 per cent in 1986.  

Uganda has undoubtedly undergone a dramatic recovery since 1986 due to the encouraging policies of the National Resistance Movement,  in all the spheres I have enumerated,  and in those I have not.  Uganda's recovery since 1986 can be categorised in the following areas:

First macro-economic stability, the macro economy has been stabilised. Secondly, liberalisation; third privatisation;  fourth infrastructure, and then fifth, social services. This is mainly on the side of the economy. I have not talked about politics here, all that you know.  

Macro economic stabilisation has centred mainly on controlling inflation. Inflation is now 5 per cent compared to that of 1986 which was 240 per cent. This is very good for the economy. It means that the costs of inputs in construction or in any other form of investment, are predictable. You know how much it will cost you to put up a building, because the prices are not changing over night.  

This positive trend has unfortunately not reflected itself in the interest rates, due to the corruption in the banks, and also in the revenue authority. The worst culprits are the banks managed by Ugandans and headed by the Uganda Commercial Bank.  Since they do not collect loans from borrowers, it means that those few who actually paid,  must pay for those who did not pay. That is why the interest rates are high!  Because the defaulting rate is very high,  the few who paid, paid for those who did not pay - is it good economics?  And why do they not collect the debts? It is corruption between these banks. They do not assess the projects,  they give out money carelessly.  

Well, there is also corruption by the Uganda Revenue Authority,  by not taxing properly all the goods that are coming in.  This means that the smugglers who bring in goods and sell without paying tax,  can even be able to borrow at high interests and be able to pay back;  because they would have avoided taxes.  And that is also another big problem.  Tax evasion through the Revenue Authority is helping to keep the interest rates high,  in spite, of the low inflation rates.  

The closure of the insolvent banks should not scare us.  I hear that some people are scared that closing banks is bad for the economy.  Actually,  it is good for the economy because by burying those who die,  you are keeping the city clean.  You cannot keep dead bodies in houses,  I told you that before.  Even if it is your father or your son - the one you like most - when somebody dies,  bury him please. There is no other way out!  You cannot say, 'I love this one, I will keep this one in the house.'  No way!  You loved him but he has died, so what?  You bury!  This is what leadership means!  

Leadership means taking high decisions. It is not fearing to go and face the crowd,  saying the crowd will be angry. Okay,  they will be angry,  but I will go and tell them why this person is buried - because he died. 'The doctor came and pronounced the person dead,' I will say. And there is a way we measure death.  I am told when the brain is no longer working, that is when you die,  clinically dead. If the bank is dead,  it should be buried,  we should agree on that one.

First of all,  the depositors will get all their money back.  You should not worry.  Any depositor who has got money in the bank, the Government will give you your money.  The Banyankole say, 'owayemera okutega ayemera okushuura';  meaning, the one who undertakes to hunt must undertake to check on the trap all the time.  There is no way people will lose their money.  And some people had some other ideas,  but I will not accept them.  I rejected them because this is not the fault of the people that put their money in these banks.  These banks had been licensed by the Government.  If the Government licences doctors who are quack doctors and they kill people,  then the Government is responsible!  Since the Government licensed quack bankers then they should pay.  This is what it means.  There are many proverbs in Runyankole but I do not want to say some of them here.  Although there was one which was very appropriate,  I do not want to say it also. 

All the depositors will get their money.  But maybe the Minister of Finance was talking about this in Parliament,  that there must be some auditing first.  They must audit those books so that they know who took what and so on,  because some of them have already paid themselves - especially the big ones.  They have already taken out of the bank more money than they actually had.  That is why we must actually audit first,  causing the delay.

And then some people say, 'oh! This will affect us politically.'  No, it cannot affect us politically.  I will go and explain to the people that, you know in Runyakole when somebody dies they become 'kaributi.'  You no longer mention his name. I will go and tell them that, 'these are kaributis,  they died and the death certificate is here.' The Cooperative Bank died, the one of Kiggundu died,  so what do we do?  I will go and tell the people and explain to them what it means. If we keep dead banks in the house,  it is not good because what leadership is for,  is not to tell the people only what they like.  

If somebody dies what do you do? First we do what we call okubika. You announce the death.  Have you seen people fearing to put ebirango on the radio? The bank has died;  first you kubika, then bury.  I think liquidation is what you would call okuziika. So what do we do as leaders? Because as was the case in some of those banks like the Cooperative Bank,  the Americans do not trust us.  Sometimes they came and put in a lot of money in that bank but all the money went to the drain.  What do we do now?  Omuntu afudde bamuziike.  Do not worry about that.  I will go and explain to the population and you will see,  we shall get more votes for that -(Laughter).

Secondly, healthier banks will come up,  and finally since Government revenue collection is improving,  we can always put in place special funds for targeted interest groups.  Some people are worried that headed by these Ugandans,  International Credit Bank of Kato,  Teffe - I think Teffe was the one which died first -(Laughter). Some people are worried that because these banks collapsed, the African business people will have nowhere to borrow money from.  No, the State will put in place something,  let the economy remain healthy.  As long as we are collecting more revenue,  we can find ways of how to channel money through healthy groups.  That is what we should concentrate on,  rather than saying that we should concentrate on loans and support through the head agencies. 

During all these years,  the economy has been growing at a very fast rate.  The average rate of annual growth has been 6.5 percent.  This financial year which is about to end,  the rate of growth is estimated at 7.8 percent, which was remarkable given the exigencies of the times. You remember that is when we were in Congo,  people said the economy was going to be in a bad situation but the estimate is 7.8 percent. I think many people worldwide are envious of this performance. 

The average annual rate of industrial growth for many of these years has been 12.6 percent. On the side of agriculture,  the rate of growth has been 4 percent.  This agriculture has not been growing as fast as it should because we are still depending on the peasants. And the peasants do not get guidance from professionals, they do not get guidance from the leaders,  that is why the performance is not so high.  Okay, 4 percent is slightly higher than the rate of population growth,  but it is not good enough. 

In the field of construction,  the annual average growth rate has been 7.8 percent.  The economy would have grown at an even faster rate if it was not for the lack of patriotism, lack of efficiency and lack of vision on the part of state officials directly charged with facilitating investments. This is,  however, a subject I will come to later.  

Nevertheless,  it is good enough and actually remarkable that the GDP has more than doubled in the last ten years from approximately US$ 2.1 billion to US$ 3 billion which is of course a doubling of one to two.  I need to, however, remind Ugandans that in Belgium for instance,  a very small country in Europe, their GDP is now US$ 230 billion and here we are talking of US$ 3 billion a very, very low level of production.  All the same,  it has doubled from one to two.  It is 100 percent growth.  We have covered one mile from zero, so we are very far.  The GDP of Belgium is US$ 230 billion;  and here if you combine the GDP of Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania even Nigeria it will not add up to it  -even if you include South Africa.  That is why Dr. Nyerere said, 'we need to run while others are walking in order to catch up.'  
By liberalising the marketing,  by liberalising foreign exchange operations, by liberalising social services for example allowing private schools, allowing private universities, liberalising transport and liberalising infrastructure like telephones - and of recent we are liberalising power stations,  we may look at liberalising the water supply later as well as privatising Government companies - we have actually unleashed the tremendous energies of the people of Uganda.  We have freed the energies of the people of Uganda to build the economy.  

Recently when we were in Jinja,  we had an interesting case.  One of the leaders brought to our attention the fact that Uganda Breweries wants to secede from the water supply of Kampala,  from Uganda - what do we call it,  Mr. Onek's company?  The Uganda Breweries wants to set up their own water works,  because they are tired of the deficiency of the Water Corporation.  And when we brought it up,  it was unanimously agreed in Cabinet to let Uganda Breweries secede; 'let them have their own water works, what is wrong with it?'  So they are now going to have their own water works and we may have to change that law so that they are not arrested for doing a good thing.  According to the old law, they could be arrested by the Water Corporation,  but with this liberalisation,  wacha watu kufanya kazi zanyu.   You can see this clearly in the boom of private construction not only in Kampala but in all parts of the country that have been peaceful,  even the half blind can see how much Kampala has grown.  From Namanve to Kajansi, sometimes I drive there and see how tremendously Kampala has grown.  

When we took over the Government in 1986,  Kampala was only ending at Nakawa on this side and Najjanankumbi on that side.  In fact I remember when Muwanga and Bazeleo kept me on the roadblock at Kireka for some hours - maybe some of you do not remember some of these things because you did not suffer in the same way some of did.  When I was kept at the roadblock at Kireka,  I remember all this area between Kireka and Nakawa was a swamp.  There was not a single building.  There were only three buildings at Kireka itself - where I was kept - about three or four buildings,  and I was squatting at the last one which was facing Nakawa.  There were no buildings there at all,  even in Ntinda.  Recently,  I drove from Corner Kamdini - Corner Kamdini is when you cross Karuma to Lira - and I saw quite a number of new trading centres which have sprung up along that road.  In fact, I forgot to count them,  next time I go,  I will count the new trading centres.  From Kamdini to Lira, they must be like eight, seven,  or so trading centres which have come up,  built in brick and iron sheets which have sprung up in that area.  

Many of the privatised companies are doing well.  The other time the hon. Member for Kumi,  Omongole, his report on privatisation only dealt with coffee and this UCB. I think he should expand it to include the whole privatisation process.  If it is about privatisation,  it should handle the whole horizon and see how the privatised companies are doing,  because that is when we can know that this policy is correct or not correct.  You cannot just study a narrow area of problems and then you say there are problems in privatisation.  Yes there are problems,  but what is the overall picture?  Many of these,  according to my information, many of the privatised companies are doing well.  

Take Pepsi Cola for instance, they are able to pay taxes to the tune of Shs 12 billion per annum.  In 1993, before they were privatised, they were paying only Shs 200 million per annum,  they are now paying Shs 12 billion.  They can almost run Makerere alone.  We can run Makerere almost relying on Pepsi Cola,  which was privatised.  Of course taxes are one side of it.  There are others,  like the owners have their own profits,  and so on.  

On the side of infrastructure,  we have repaired a big chunk of the trunk roads.  We have repaired the little power station at Jinja,  we have also upgraded it,  and you know we are building a new one.  We have plans to cause the construction of new power stations on the basis of private ownership.  And I hope the Minister,  Syda Bumba,  and the Committee of Parliament which is involved,  have resolved this issue please,  because we have waited for too long.

On the side of the social services,  not only have we introduced UPE (Universal Primary Education),  but we have ensured universal immunisation of the children.  That is why almost 6 million children are now in primary school,  compared to 3 million previously.  

The infant mortality rate has also declined from 122 children dying out of every 1,000 born alive,  under the age of one year, to 88 children.  This is a very big change.  This 88 is a national average.  We are including people in Moyo who are still having problems,  they are not even raising children.  I think it also includes Karamoja.  The Karamajong I do not think they immunise children,  but the average is 88 now,  compared to 122 in 1986.  Of course in Scandinavia,  only five children out of 1,000 are dying before their first birthday.  In the case of those countries,  it is less than 10,  but for us, the Banyankole say, 'Orikuruga okuzimu tagaya mushana';  the one who is coming from underground cannot say this sunshine is not enough.  

What has been happening in the economy means that minimum recovery has been realised in a number of areas.  You remember that was our programme in 1986.  Our programme in 1986 was not development,  we were not aiming at development,  no.  Our aim in 1986 was minimal recovery - a minimum recovery programme,  that is what we called it.  We are just human beings,  like other people.  So what this performance means is that the minimum recovery of the programme has been realised in a number of areas.  However, NRM's long term target is not minimum recovery but transformation of the inherited neo-colonial economy into a modern, integrated and self sustaining national economy.  That is our real target.  But in order to aim at that target,  we were to first have minimum recovery,  and that is what I have been talking about.  

On the side of security and defence, these two words confuse people.  Defence is fighting enemies who are strong enemies.  Security is catching thieves and criminals,  that is what security is about,  law and order.

On the side of security and defence,  I would like to say that our defence posture is quite good.  This is how we have been able to maintain the borders of the country in spite of numerous challenges.  No hostile force,  regional or local,  can occupy any part of Uganda and exclude the authority of the central Government of Uganda.  It would be crashed promptly and convincingly.  This is what happened at Bibia and Corner Kilak in 1986/87.  You know this group which was led by a friend of mine who died,  Eric Obyal.  They came and they stayed at Corner Kilak,  claiming that they were challenging the Government.  They were destroyed.  This is what happened at Mpwondwe in Bwera,  in 1996. You remember those fellows who came from Congo and occupied Mpondwe and they said they wanted to proceed to Kasese and capture the airstrip there?  They were finished.  

The same thing happened to the force of Brigadier Isaiah Paul of Sudan in 1990.  There was a Sudanese officer who went through Kaya and through Logenga and entered a little bit into Uganda.  They tried to go back to Sudan but they did not go back, they got stuck there.  They just went back on foot.  That should be crystal clear to those who comment on the security and defence situation in the country.  The only challenge to the defence posture of the country that we are yet to find a solution to,  has been the question of high altitude aircrafts from the Sudan.  This is why the Sudanese planes have been violating our air space with impunity.  However,  we are soon finding a solution to this problem as well,  although the security situation has not been uniformly good.  

In the greater part of the country,  security,  law and order and the respect of human rights have been unprecedented, judged against the background of incredible violation of human rights in the country during the times of Amin and Obote.  Ever since 1986,  however,  there have been areas of banditry in the country by nomadic groups using indiscriminate violence in the form of abductions,  mutilation of people,  killings,  rape,  arson, robbery and other criminal acts.  Some of the areas like Pallisa, Teso,  Lango,  Tororo,  Busia,  Arua and Madi have been rescued from that form of violence.  However since 1996,  the following areas were added to the list of banditry infested areas.  These are Kasese,  parts of Kabarole and Bundibugyo.  These areas have, of course,  been endemically affected by banditry since 1962,  in the form of Rwenzururu.  

The only difference was that until recently,  there were no guns in the mountains.  Due to regional conflicts like the anti Amin war of 1978/79, our own civil war of 1981/86,  the Rwanda war of 1990/94 and the Congo war of 1996/97 with the involvement of the Sudanese army from its bases at Kaaya,  Baazi, Morobo and Yei - before they lost them in 1997,  a lot of guns were pushed into the Rwenzori mountains.  The guns were absorbed by the old structure of the Rwenzururu.   After decisively defeating the head-on attack of the bandits at Mpondwe in November 1996, the bandits split into small groups and went into the mountains.  


The massive mountains do not have a single road.  The army therefore had to do everything on foot:  movement of troops, conveyance of logistics and other combat activities.  This type of terrain,  although difficult,  is actually favourable to the Government forces, because it is not traversable everywhere.  It is only traversable in some areas.  The Government forces can therefore block those passes which are traversable,  to the chagrin of the bandits.  This requires experience on the part of the troops and proper frost resistant clothing for the troops who are up in the mountain.  The Army is finally in the process of forming mountain brigades,  known as Alpine troops in Europe,  to be able to permanently deal with that problem.  Many of our commanders have,  since this problem,  started sorting out their perceptions in this respect.  You know when a new problem comes up,  people do not have the same thinking;  some think like this, some think like that,  but the commanders are now clearer in their perception of that problem.  

In spite of the difficult terrain and inappropriate equipment,  equipment meaning appropriate clothing,  the army has been able to penetrate mountains and flush out several groups of bandits or push them to unhabitable zones where survival is very difficult.  In fact some rebels have been found frozen in the high reaches of the mountains.  As a consequence,  the remnants of the rebels are desperate and have tried to escape from the mountains in order to launch diversionary attacks in the lowlands.  The army has been able to cope with these diversions while at the same time continuing to control the mountains.  One of the rebel remnants who fled to the lowlands have been arrested,  including a woman known as Nabakooza who was responsible for the Kichwamba massacre.  That girl has been arrested.  

We are continuing our campaign against the bandits in the mountains,  and also in the lowlands surrounding the mountains,  as well as in Congo,  and the other side of the mountain.  I have already asked the intelligence people to also study the social background of some of these young people who get involved in these problems.  You may find that there is some social problem we need to address,  because some of them are quite desperate,  like that girl.  When she was arrested, you could see that she was quite desperate.  So, one wonders why these sort of children become that desperate;  I am taking interest in that side of this problem.

As they face a lot of pressure in the countryside,  and having faced the visibly looming defeat,  the bandits - especially those of ADF - shift into the urban centres,  especially Kampala.  They use home fabricated bombs and hand grenades to attack popular gathering places in order to kill innocent people.  This of course exposes the terrorists character of these groups.

On the side of Government Security Forces,  I have had to personally visit these terrorist attacked sites in order to make my own assessment.  My conclusion is that it is easy to defeat this mode of terrorising people and arrest those who persist.  In fact I told the security people that they have not been responding appropriately to this problem, because these people have repeatedly attacked places where people gather.  And the issue is that these are easy to deal with because they are using only two methods. 

One method is improvised bombs where they use a sort of fertilizer,  aluminium sulphide,  and they even mix it with some gun powder and put it in the corner of a water pipe.  This is a very easy method to deal with,  it is not all that difficult.

The other method is the grenades.  These grenades are plenty because of the wars which have been scattered all over the place, the wars here in Uganda and in the neighbouring countries.  These are easy to deal with especially as far as the public places are concerned.  I have told the Police, they should guide those who own these drinking places on how to behave,  and it is a little bit difficult.  This may not eliminate them,  but it will make it impossible for them to target these drinking places.  It is not all that difficult.  

I am appealing now to those owning drinking places - somebody was saying, 'after all these people are drinking in unlicensed drinking places,' and I said, 'no, that is not the point.  If they are drinking there,  they are comfortable there,  there is no problem.  Just tell them how to contain themselves. It is very simple.'  The fact that this has happened more than once,  security forces should have waken up and done something about it. But they are now going to do something about it and I would like you to mobilise people.  Because if I bring a bomb and leave it where people are drinking,  why are people who are drinking in that place not alert?  Put a little fence,  put an entrance to ensure that somebody who comes in is checked.  What is so difficult?  It is very simple.  But you find somebody has come, he has left,  we do not know what he has left behind,  why?  Why do you not check them?  Why does the Police not give guidance to the people on how to check?  If for instance we were drinking here,  we put a fence there to ensure that nobody enters except if he comes through the door and is searched,  it is not all that difficult really.  

Even Owino market has got a gate although a lot of people go there.  It has got a gate here,  a gate there.  So we can actually check those people.  You can even put modern methods of checking.   All these have never thrown grenades at Mr. Museveni, yet they are always aiming at Mr. Museveni.  But they never get to where he is.  Because even when I had a huge rally at Kololo of one million people,  those people were checked.  What is the problem?  You remember when Mr. Ssemwogerere was doubtful as to who was more popular in the country,  we had a rally of one million people there at Kololo, but everybody was checked.  So, what is the problem?  

These gentlemen,  the Policemen,  and the other people who are working with Government,  are going to refer to popular vigilance measures.  This may not eliminate the bandits, they may try to target other things, but we shall follow our appropriate measures.  The Police has also arrested some of these people,  and there are other clues which they have left behind.  We shall get them even if they shift to other modes of terrorism.  There are also other simple ways to defeat the various forms of urban terrorism.  However, it requires patriotism, discipline and efficiency by the security forces.  

One area I may have to ask about - I have already asked the Attorney General to give me some ideas - is the mode of trial.  In fact when our people asked Nabakooza why they were doing all these,  she said,  'we know that if you catch us you will not do anything to us.'  That is what she said!  They know that the system is very liberal, they know that they can kill people and we shall do nothing.  Of course you know this is because we are working with you here,  and with the Judges.  But before,  we would not have such games.  When we were still in Luwero,  there was nowhere somebody could kill our person and we do nothing about it.  So the Attorney General will have to think of how we can expedite dealing with these bad people. There is some idea which I have floated to him and if it comes,  please support it.

Under the Armed Forces' law, we have got a way we try people who break it. This is the NRA law of 1992. There used to be an old law left by the British,  but this was by Obote's,  the Armed Forces' Law of 1964.  We made amendments and it became the NRA Statute of 1992.  Under that Statute,  we say that - that law is mainly for soldiers,  but somewhere we say that even if you are not a soldier - if you are accompanying soldiers and you misbehave and you are endangering the work of the army,  then you can also be tried as a soldier.  

Then the law also says that even if you are not accompanying the soldiers,  if you voluntarily choose to carry the weapons normally meant for the army,  they you have become a voluntary soldier,  so you can also be tried under the Armed Forces' Law.  I am looking forward to you,  the political class,  agreeing that we try these stupid fellows under the Armed Forces' Law of 1992.  Things will be quicker,  people will know the difference of the Law. But if you go on with these - the way we are doing things now - I think really we are endangering our people unnecessarily.  That is my suggestion.  I have given it to the Attorney General.  He should bring it to Cabinet and to all of you, then if you support it,  it will work miracles because these are voluntary soldiers and they bad ones.  They are not even good soldiers,  but bad ones,  killers.  So, why not handle them under military courts?

Another area that has suffered tremendously from banditry has been the Acholi.  The bandits of Kony have wreaked havoc on the population:  cutting off their ears,  their noses,  killing people,  raping,  abducting.  They have done all this in the company of the Sudanese Government.  In the last two years however, UPDF has inflicted very severe losses of these bandits.  Even some of the hard core bandits who have been organizing this have been killed.  For example, our army killed a bandit by the name of Lagira who was the one who abducted the Aboke school girls last October.  We were able to account for this one.  Another bandit leader by name of Odur was also killed.  I think here we were working with the Karamojong brothers in the area of Molerem at a place called Acan Pii.  Acan Pii is near the Kotido-Lira border.  That is why you hear that there is some peace in the North,  because the bandits are quite weakened.  We are also improving infrastructure in that area by reopening the roads and building new ones so that the area is accessible.  

In spite of my reservations on the question of forgiving all bandits without distinguishing between the ring leaders and misled,  I have now agreed,  on account of wide spread demand, that all bandits benefit from the general amnesty without distinction.  It will be very wise,  therefore,  for the bandits to take advantage of this amnesty without any delay,  because you remember we agreed that it should be for some time.  It will not be open ended.  So those who are in touch with bandits,  advise them to take advantage of this consensus because now I have joined the other group that says we forgive all the killers.  Yes,  although I have been a reluctant person to join that group, I have now come.  So there is a consensus.  Let us now see whether this method works.  If it does not work,  then all of you will come to my side later on,  because that is what democracy means. That is how we maintain democracy.  If it does not work quickly then I expect everybody, even Aggrey Awori,  to come join me.

As you can see, there is no doubt,  hon. Members and Mr. Speaker, that we have achieved our minimum goals of 1986,  by ensuring minimum recovery.  However, we have not yet transformed the fundamental character of the neo-colonial dependent economy,  except in the areas of UPE.  I think UPE is very, very fundamental.  If it is sustained and developed into USE, Universal Secondary Education,  Uganda will no longer be the same.  It means that the people of Uganda will now be universally literate.  Beyond UPE and the minimum recovery which we have realised,  we need to cover the following areas in order to launch Ugandan on an irreversible drive to sustainable growth and transformation.  These are the areas of weakness which we need to address,  the ones I am going to enumerate.  

As I already said, the first problem is that we have not yet,  in some parts of the country,  created conditions for the very minimum socio-economic recovery,  which is what I referred to under the heading of security.  Here I am talking about the north, the north-west, the north-east and Luwero.  There is no insecurity in Luwero,  it is very secure, but there is just need of social economic support.

The Kasese and Bundibugyo areas have also now been added.  These areas do not have conditions of recovery.  There are all sorts of problems in the rest of the country but at least they have conditions of recovery,  because they have got peace, if only there was proper leadership at the local level.

In order to redress this situation,  there are five measures which we can take:  the first measure is restocking.  These areas should be restocked with cattle.  Fortunately this is not a big problem because we have plenty of cattle in other parts of Uganda.  It is therefore a question of making some money available,  buy these cows from the cattle surplus areas,  to the cattle deficit areas.  I would like this to be reflected in the coming budget.  We should make a sizeable intervention in this area.  We used restocking to redress the situation in Teso and the cattle we took there seems to have created an impact already.  We should examine how we can spread this programme to other areas of the country.  

We must know where to apply the key in order to stimulate growth.
In my opinion,  the crucial area of intervention is the homestead.  If homesteads have sustainable incomes,  things will start moving by themselves.  That is what we call capacity creation.  In the coming budget,  we should ensure that we are able to buy a sizeable number of cows and strengthen these cattle deficit areas.  

The second measure is the provision of agricultural implements.  I propose that we use oxen in areas where they are appropriate and couple them with implements of agriculture like bulldozers.  
The third measure is feeder roads.  Fortunately, all the districts in the areas I have mentioned - which have got problems - have got road equipment, although much of the time this equipment is not being used.  Some leaders do not see the provision of such equipment as a very big contribution to their area.  Ministerial posts are more important than road equipment.  They say that getting a part of the 'national cake' is having Ministers,  but road equipment is not part of the 'national cake'.  

The fourth measure we need to take is to end cattle rustling -(Applause)- in order to redress the bad conditions in some of these areas.  Recently I said that 4,000 more soldiers should be added in the area so that the district boundaries between the Karamoja district and other tribes are secured.  Inside Karamoja itself - in the new financial year as I told you - we are going to create especially equipped battalions,  equipped with some light armoured vehicles in addition to the infantry soldiers there, which will enable us to conclusively end this problem in Karamoja.  Fortunately it is a semi-arid area and cross country driving is easy.

The fifth measure will be eliminating Kony and ADF.  We have already done some good work on this,  but we need some equipment such as helicopters and certain types of life armoured vehicles,  to complete these tasks.

The lack of security on roads has also been a hindrance to ending the cold banditry.  But we are now building roads and this will give us an advantage over these bandits.  The same lack of road access is a problem in the Rwenzori mountains where there has never been a Government presence, and all the way up the mountains has to be done on foot.  I have talked with hon. Nasasira,  when he comes back from the trip he is on,  he will discuss with the others like hon. Kiyonga,  and then we shall see how to open up some of the roads in the mountain of the Rwenzori within the means of the budget.  This means that we need to build up our manpower in the army a little bit,  to be able to cover all these areas adequately.  You remember in 1992 we had reduced manpower in order to save money to buy equipment.  We now have quite good equipment that we need to bolster up the manpower a little bit.  

Another area we should address is funding the youth and women councils.  Whenever I go upcountry,  this is a universal demand.  They are always asking me about funding the women and youth councils.  In the new budget,  we should ensure that we do something about that.  This can be tackled in two parts:

Part one will be to give them some equipment such as bicycles or motorcycles,  using some formula,  at the county or sub county level,  so that they are able to mobilise the population.  However, I think that the more important part would be Entandikwa,  specifically for the youth and the women, as a portion of the funds for an area,  such as the constituency level.  The purpose of this would be to enable them generate homestead incomes. The Banyankole say that, 'Rwamukuru wawe tekuta aha mugongo',  if your brother has got cows and you do not have, it does not mean that you are rich.  So, it is not enough to be on these popular activities,  and you do not have anything in the home.  We should therefore encourage all these people  -our leaders at the local level - to have some income at the homestead level.

In my Manifesto I introduced the idea of school leavers fund.  Last year there was Shs 0.5 billion for this fund in the budget, but it has never been operationalised.  The money is there but it has never been utilised.  This fund should be operationalised.  
We are now coming face to face with real problems of the neo-colonial economy. Up to now the politics in Uganda has been politics of lies and diversion - religion, tribe, personality.  But the NRM has changed this first by creating some peace,  and then by expanding education at the primary level, the secondary level and also university level. We are going to have a large number of educated people coming on to the labour market,  so we shall have to get them jobs,  we shall have to build the factories where they can work.  

We are now going to discover that the politics in which some of our people have been engaged is of no use. Uganda is going to be a modern country by pressure of the population,  an educated population.  It is alright to have an education and then you can feed them on religion,  on tribe.  But when people are educated they want jobs,  and we have to address the question of jobs.  I have been telling you about power,  can you believe that a country has got 60 megawatts,  and it is a member of the United Nations?  Imagine 60 megawatts!  The President of 60 megawatts is also in the United Nations, 21 gun salute, what have you!  Hini mambo yamuginga kabisa.  

And the more backward you are, the law..., I do not want to say some of the things,  because Makerere will very soon be producing 8,000 children with University degrees every year,  and that is Makerere alone.  We shall have to find jobs for them,  that is the real pressure.  This neo-colonial economy can no longer work, it can no longer meet the aspirations of our people.  The neo-colonial economy means that you only produce raw materials for export, and you have a bureaucracy to ensure that they are exported, this is what you call Public Service.  This is the structure of the economy up to now.  Although I have repaired it, we have not yet transformed this economy.  

More and more people are getting high level training but they are not able get jobs because the economy is completely underdeveloped.  There is of course also no proper career guidance in addition to the underdevelopment of the economy.  Because although there is unemployment as of now,  there are still sectors,  like education,  which do not have enough manpower.  I was in West Nile recently, and people there are complaining that they do not have teachers.  There are no teachers in Karamoja either, and yet here in Kampala there are unemployed graduates.  Let them go to Madi and Moroto and teach.  What are they doing here?  If you say you have no job here, go and work there.  

That aside,  that this underdeveloped economy cannot,  after limited rationalization,  absorb the labour force into employment,  is a fact.  The education opportunities the NRM has created will now force us to face the issue of the neo-colonial economy and building a fully developed economy in the context of regional integration.  Uganda is also a small market of 20 million people.  20 million people cannot support a car industry. Even this man,  the one who is producing bicycles,  is not having enough sales - this Road Master.  We need a big market.  So we are now going to address the question of regional integration.  If you want to talk about federal,  we have to talk federal in a big way,  not in this small way.  Federal here does not mean anything.  If you want federal I will show you where federal should be.  I have already written a paper about that.  

This fund of the school leavers should therefore be managed according to laid down criteria so that the school leavers can borrow money, start a small enterprise and bring the money back.  While awaiting more large scale employers, the fund will help the school leavers to create self employment.  

It is also true that our exports have not grown as required.  We have increased coffee exports from 2 millions bags to 4 million bags but we are still exporting semi-processed coffee.  We are not adding value to our coffee,  or significantly,  to the cotton.  The Government workers frustrate the few investors who come here.  We have managed to bring some investors because when I go abroad and I talk about investment opportunities in Uganda, quite a number of them respond.  But when they come here, they are frustrated by civil servants and political leaders who may not have a mission to develop their country.  Many investors just give up and go away, or those who persevere get into a lot of problems:  problems with Customs,  problems with Immigration, problems with the Land Office,  with City Councils and wherever they turn for assistance.

You still find that elements in the political class and the civil servants neither know nor care about the role of the investors. The investors of course also make their own mistakes because they sometimes sign documents without first reading them properly to discover the implications of the agreement.  But what is the Government doing to protect these investors?  If they have problems,  as somebody who is in charge of the country which we are,  we should find means of solving them quickly so that we can develop our economy.  

This Government,  from my own experience, is not doing enough beyond the reforms mentioned above, to facilitate the investors in the country.  The value of our exports is only US$ 700 million,  while our imports are almost US$ 1.8 billion.  How is this situation sustainable,  and what is the Government and the whole political system doing to reverse this state of affairs?  Many of the investors who are here, are in many cases here in spite of the system,  not because the system has necessarily assisted them.  The US$ 700 million which I am talking about of course does not include the private inflows which are the ones which boost the availability of foreign currency.  There are remittances from abroad,  of private people who bring in their money,  that is what helps us.  But we cannot go on depending on that.  We must depend on the export earnings,  those are more reliable.  We therefore need to expand our exports as well as protecting, supporting and encouraging them in every way possible.  

The investors may have their problems, but it is us to distil the value they can bring into our country,  and reject the negative elements in those investors.  This is the duty of the Government, this is a duty of all the leaders, including Members of Parliament.  If you take the example of coffee,  we would get almost 20 times the value of what we get now if we were able to export processed coffee.  

The present NRM system must realise its historical mission;  each group of people has got a historical mission to fulfil.  In the life of a human being,  the mother becomes pregnant, in the hospital the midwife is the one who delivers the baby,  the mother nurses the baby at home,  when the child grows,  she or he will be eventually married,  and the human cycle will continue, with each individual fulfilling their role at  different historical stages.  If the midwife had not done her work, the child would have died during delivery.  

What we should all ask ourselves,  is the historical role of the NRM system beyond the minimum recovery - the one which we have been able to accomplish?  The historical mission of this Government and of the Movement was and is to transform this economy from being a neo-colonial economy to one that is self sustaining and internally integrated.  We said so in point number five of the Ten Points Programme;  but here we are still losing value on our products,  and then going abroad to beg for the same money from those who have made it from us in the first place!!  
We have got many ready exports which we could promote easily.  Recently in Jinja I told the Cabinet that in 1986 an Italian professor came to see me - he was a Minister of Overseas Development - and told me that he had US$ 14 million to give us in the form of assistance.  Without asking anybody,  I told him to build a fish processing factory on Lake Victoria,  and that is how the fish processing industry started.  I was sure that even without technical study,  since fish is plenty here,  it is exportable and it is edible, there was nothing more to investigate.  I was sure that if we built the factory we would get money,  the project would expand our exports.  At that time there was not a single fish factory in Uganda.  The only other one had been the Tufmac,  and it had collapsed long before.  There were some mistakes in that particular factory at Masese, but the movement for building fish processing plants had started,  and it has now taken root,  in spite of all the problems they have been having  - here again citing lack of support from the whole system.  

In the same way,  we have been able to make a breakthrough in the areas of milk.  We can do the same in the area of beef,  beef is just waiting there, the cows can be exported any time.  Goats, fruits.  If you go to a place like the North,  mangoes are just rotting.  In Muchwini mangoes are rotting,  in Achet mangoes are rotting,  in Atiak, when I was there,  I saw mangoes rotting.  I went to Anyeke in Lango,  I found mangoes were rotting,  in Moyo mangoes are rotting, in Arua, everywhere mangoes are rotting, and we are not earning a single penny from those mangoes!  Yet when you investigate the value of the fruit exports, it is a tremendous amount of money we are losing.

I am told that these particular mangoes are not good for the factories because they have got a lot of fibre.  Very well,  let us plant the right ones,  the ones which do not have fibres.  If they want more mango flesh,  let us plant the right ones,  instead of people just sitting there.  They are sitting on gold, yet they do not see it,  and they are quarrelling about the 'national cake', they think it is Ministerial posts.  Mangoes are a national cake, it is actually that national cake!

Another problem that we must resolve is the competitiveness of our industrial products.  Some of the products manufactured here are cheap and competitive when they are not challenged.  However, when they face imports they become too expensive.  The question is why are these goods expensive?  They are expensive for a number of reasons.  

Reason number one is that during the 1960s and 1970s there was a theory of import substitution.  The idea was that instead of buying somebody else's product from abroad, you should produce your own substitute goods.  However, this meant that you were substituting imports in a captive market.  A captive market means a market where there is no competition,  where other competitors were excluded.  The problem of this theory was that it was not sustainable and it caused a lot of problems for the South American economies.  Although the goods were for import substitution, they still needed inputs from abroad.  If you are not exporting,  where will you get the dollars to buy the inputs you need to sustain the import substitution industries?  That is why these days there is more talk of export oriented industries so that you have industries which sell in the local market but also export their products.  You will thus earn dollars to sustain your operations,  and also balance your goods as far as imports and exports are concerned.  

The main problem with these economic strategies was that they were all generated by outsiders and without thinking,  the African countries adopted one or the other wholesale.  But mainly they adapted import substitution.  The South-east Asian economies also adopted the export oriented economic strategy and they did well for a while.  But one question they did not address was whose market were they exporting to, and for how long would that go on?  The answer - as the South Asian economies discovered recently - was that the American market where they were exporting was not their market.  And with other imports from China going into the American market due to the changed international situation,  the economies of the South-east Asia ran into a lot of problems.  

Although there were some other problems,  the biggest problem - I still contend - was small sizes of markets.  So, where are we to get the markets from,  our own markets which we are sure of?  The answer is economic integration, so that we have got our own regional market.  If we can get an external market,  that will be good,  but a big regional market is crucial for our economic development.  

The other reason why our goods are expensive is that while Uganda was on fire,  Kenya was stable. The Kenyans borrowed money 30 years ago, built factories, paid the loan and the interest and they no longer have loans to pay.  While we were fighting,  they were paying their loans and we were buying from them.  Currently in Uganda on the other hand,  you have factory owners who still have got loans to pay and these are compounded by the unstable exchange rate. If you borrowed money when the dollar was at Shs 500, to pay back today you need to buy the dollar at Shs 1500.  This is another crisis for the Uganda manufacturer. 

All these reasons make our product uncompetitive.  How then is our Government helping our local manufacturers to make their good competitive?  You must resolve the question of lack of competitiveness of our industries.  They came into a situation where we had historical disadvantages,  and it is the work of the Government to help those people overcome those disadvantages,  especially if they are in a strategic sector such as coffee, textiles, and power generation. 

Another point we need to put more emphasis on is poverty elimination in the countryside.  Let us take the area of Arua.  I was there recently and I could not see how the people raise income.  It is good that in Arua these days they have got cassava.  Indeed in all parts of the country especially in the north,  there is a lot of cassava.  They know the cassava mosaic resistant variety,  but when you see on the side of cash,  they do not have many cash crops.  The population is growing very fast but they only have small gardens of tobacco - a quarter of an acre for a household - from which they may raise only Shs 250,000 in a whole year. And yet you find that in that area there is a lot of public investment.  You know when I am travelling around in the helicopter,  I see a lot of new schools which the Government has built with bricks and iron sheets.  So, there is a lot of public investment but there is no guided private investment taking place in the right areas that will bring optimal results. 

In the cotton growing areas,  you find that a household can only get Shs 300,000 per annum,  and that is if they grow a whole acre.  If - as it is often the case - they only grow a quarter of an acre,  they will only get Shs 120,000 per annum for the whole family.  I have been talking to the Cotton Development Authority and I have told them that in my opinion,  cotton should be grown by big farmers because peasants cannot grow cotton profitably for themselves.  They may profit the factories,  the factories will get raw materials,  but the peasant will not get much for themselves.  The Cotton Development Authority should contact big farmers who can grow it on a large scale,  the ginning should also take place - in my opinion - on the farms so that the ginneries do not take the value which should be going to the farmers.  

But if the small farmers cannot grow traditional crops profitably what can they then grow?  As I said in the case of Lango,  in the case of Acholi,  in the case of Moyo,  they are now talking of clonal coffee,  which is very good.  From one acre of clonal coffee,   you can get up to Shs 4 million per annum in a good season.  The Government must give clear guidance to the small farmers about crops that give them the highest returns because at the moment they do not get much from the crops they are growing.  

Another area which we are addressing although it is not yet implemented,  is the question of the strategic roads which are important for the economy,  but also for national security.  There are roads like Karuma to Arua which will start very soon, Busunju to Hoima which will also be started,  and Mityana to Fort portal.  The road to Bundibugyo is still a big problem because it is not passable,  and we have not yet solved its funding.  But we are looking around to see how we can fund construction of that road,  from Fort Portal to Bundibugyo.  I am glad the road to Kapchorwa has at last been linked to the rest of the country. 

On the side of energy,  we must resolve the question of power so that we have got enough electricity for our country.  Some of the high industrial costs that are causing us problems are due to erratic power that ruins machines and makes operations very costly. Incidently even the terrorists take advantage of blackouts.  Like the grenade they threw at Nakulabye,  they threw it when it was dark.  So lack of power in the town is also abetting insecurity.  We must resolve the question of the proposed Bujagali and Karuma power stations.  We need both of them,  and we have got enough demand from within the country and from the neighbouring countries,  to make the projects viable.  
Another problem is on the side of the environment.  The situation of the environment is getting out of hand.  Take an area like Arua which should be a fertile place but it is now on the brink of an environmental catastrophe.  The population is very high, 700,000 people in a fairly small area,  and they are cultivating in the streams,  yet it is a high area. The streams in Arua will simply dry up,  because they are not like the ones of Kabale which can withstand torture for a long time. Those streams of Arua are on a high ground,  they are not in the valley. In other areas of the country if you look at rivers like Kagera and Manafa,  they are all brown,  after being destroyed by massive silting.  They must be protected,  and the environment protection law must be put in practice.  

In fact, the only thing that this Government can boast of in the field of environment has been to restore the old forest reserves,  some of which like Mabira forest, had almost disappeared.  However,  when I pass through Mabira these days or when I fly over it in a helicopter,  I am able to see that Mabira is regenerating.  So, we must look keenly at this question of the environment.  Why do we have saw millers in Budongo and Karinju forest?  What are they doing there?  Why can we not make those forest reserves a nature reserve so that nobody goes there,  except tourist who are going to see the beautiful nature?  Those forests are protecting very important eco-systems,  they are like mountain tanks.  There is water stored there which descends in small streams into lake Albert and lake Edward. 

The other day we were having a debate here in Parliament about the valley dams,  but these are mountain dams already.  Why do we destroy mountain dams and then we go to construct valley dams?  God has already constructed dams for us.  These are mountain tanks storing water for us in those huge forests.  By allowing people to cut trees there, we are destroying a mountain dam.  When we were faced with this problem in the Rwenzori mountains, I remember the forestry people were talking about 'sustainable harvesting of trees'.  I decided that we should make it a national park.  If people want to sustainably cut trees, they should plant their own and leave the ones which were planted by God,  alone.  

The name of Karinju forest is Imaramagambo forest.  Which means that when you go there, you are lost for words at its grandeur and size.  Why destroy such a wonder of God?  If we can plant pines and they will grown within 10 years,  we should declare Budongo and Karinju, national forest reserves so that we can protect our eco-system.  That was the solution for Mount Elgon and Rwenzori,  which would later turn into national parks.  

On the question of corruption,  the real problem of corruption is, in my opinion,  investigation - as I have said before.  Some people were saying that there was lack of political will to fight corruption.  Lack of political will means that there are some people you fear to tackle,  because they are too strong for you.  I do not see anyone here whom we fear to tackle, sita muwona. My position has always been that in a civilised Government,  we must always do things according to the law because that is what we fought for.  We fought for law.  In order to work according to the law, we must have investigations,   prosecutions,  and adjudication.  

Recently I appointed a Judicial Commission of Inquiry into the Ministry of Internal Affairs,  into the CID.  This was because I was getting a lot of reports about the investigators being the ones who block,  or abort,  investigations.  If we want to solve the problem of the corrupt,  we must get people of integrity in the Police Force,  even if it is from outside the Force,  and train them as investigators.  That is how we solved the problem  - as I have told you many times - in the Revenue Authority.  We had to deliberately recruit people from outside and train them and put them in the Revenue Authority.  

Recently when I was talking with the Ministers in Jinja, I also told them of another example of how we built a petroleum unit within the Ministry of Energy.  When we came into Government, Obote was about to sign an agreement with Shell,  about petroleum exploration in lake Albert.  I refused to sign that agreement because I had nobody to advise me on petroleum matters.  When I asked for expert opinion on what the agreement would entail,  they brought to me a man from the Bank of Uganda.  I asked him, 'are you a petroleum expert?'  He said, 'I am the one who deals with import papers for petroleum.'  That is how he had come to be referred to as an expert,  processing the import papers!  This shows you how our system had collapsed.  

After that, I called hon. Chango Macho who was the Minister of Energy at that time,  and we put an advertisement in the papers looking for people with first degrees in chemistry, geology and geophysics.  We then sent them to universities abroad for masters degrees in petroleum, now they are able to do the work themselves.  They are able to do all the detailed studies of petroleum,  the only thing they look for are investors.  Additionally,  we have also trained lawyers and economists specifically in petroleum,  so now we have people who can negotiate all contracts.  This is what I call capacity creation.  In this case we are just looking for people with the requisite academic qualifications.  

When we are fighting corruption however,  we are not only looking for qualifications, we are also looking for people with integrity.  So, let us get people with integrity,  train them in the technical or professional fields' needs so that we are able to fight corruption at the levels of investigation, prosecution and adjudication.

May I conclude by saying that NRM has achieved a lot in the form of minimum economic and social recovery for the greater part of the country.  Let us however eliminate the weaknesses I have enumerated above,  to ensure the transformation of Uganda's economy and society.  Thank you very much.     

THE SPEAKER:  Your Excellency the President,  hon. Members,  this brings us to the end of today's proceedings.  But before I adjourn Parliament,  I would like to make some two announcements, one by way of reminder,  the other by way of information.  

The first one is that there will be a meeting of the Business Committee,  on Friday the 4th of this month,  to chart the programme for Parliament.  

The second is,  there will also be a meeting of the Appointments Committee,  to finish the business which we had left undone,  and that meeting will also be on the 4th of June, Friday, at 2.30 p.m.  

Your Excellency,  and hon. Members,  I would like to take this opportunity,  on behalf of Parliament,  to thank you for performing the function that you have just completed,  and also to thank the First Lady for gracing the occasion with her presence. 

By way of information,  I am sure many of you may not have been in position to recognise the presence of our Colleague,  the hon. Patrick Kiggundu,  the Member for Kyotera county -(Applause)-  who has made it to this meeting, and I think we should thank God and pray ti Him for his speedy recovery.  Thank you very much.  
I therefore adjourn the House to the 8th of this month,  on Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.47 p.m. and adjourned till 8th June, 1999 at 2.30 p.m).
