Thursday, 2 June 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair).

MOTION

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, we shall proceed on the White Paper, looking at it chapter by chapter and I will - of course, you that we do not waste time where there is no need to waste time, but you concentrate on where you will have amendments, so that we can perhaps move a bit faster.

CHAPTER ONE:  HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATION

MR OLUM (Nwoya County, Gulu):  I beg to involve Rule 8 of our procedures to enable us to debate a matter of national importance and that is the famine situation in Uganda.  Mr Chairman, we have received reports over the last two weeks regarding this matter.  We in the Sectoral committee, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries together with the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, became very concerned and we convinced a meeting in fact, several meetings to discuss this very important issue.  

We did communicate our report to the Leader of Government Business, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, sometime back.  Because the gravity of this matter we should like to seek a debate so that the national can be informed of what is going on.  We have been waiting for a statement from the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs or the Ministry of Agriculture, but we have not seen any authoritative statement.  The nation is confused because of the press reports, which we are receiving.  

For that matter, my Committee has requested me to seek guidance so that we can spend few minutes to talk about this great situation, so that first of all, inform the nation authoritatively and correctly and two, we find some immediate solutions to our problems and three; so that we can seek a long lasting solution to this endemic case of famine which occurs in Uganda over and over.  So, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But does this one have any support?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Yes, yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Very well, we go ahead and move your Motion.

MR OLUM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. During our deliberation with the two ministries concerned, we were informed that government was aware of the impending situation that would arise in Uganda as far as food shortage was concerned.  Sometime last year in November, a team of officials from both the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs were dispatched to the areas where famine was suspected to take place within the next six months or so.  These officials judiciously carried out their duties, they carried out some detail surveys in 16 districts and they tendered their report to Government.  In this report, the officials indicated that for about four months, government would have to face the task of feeding at least 1.8 million people in 16 districts.  The officials went further to indicate the amount of food which will be required, 88,000 tones of maize flour was estimated as a minimum requirement for the people in the 16 districts, and 21, 000 metric tones of beans were estimated every requirement during the four months period.  These reports were made available to both government and to International Agencies that normally help us when we have such a crisis.  

Due to the delay in taking action the first visible sign of any government action was taken in March and this report was made available in November.  The amount of money that was required at that time was UShs 67 billion, if we were to feed the people in those areas, 1.8 million people including the logistic and so on, would take about which is UShs 750 million.  

In March this year, government released UShs 300 million to try and carry out some sort of patch work because people were reported to have started dying in those areas.  Our Committee received some very alarming reports, some through press, some through Members of this House and some through the public.  I have been reliably informed by Members from Moroto that 167 people died in Moroto from hunger.  

Our Committee was also informed that 460 people have died in Kotido, in Kumi the figures are being disputed, but at least, we know over 10 people have died from hunger in Kumi.  Soroti over 20 people are reported to have died from hunger, and only yesterday, if you read the New Vision, the Assistant Central Government Representative of Kitgum is reported to have said that 15 people have already died from hunger in Kitgum.  

My Committee is very concerned first of all, because we have not received a clear statement in this House from the Ministries concerned.  A statement will go a long way in clarifying the situation in briefing us to the situation and also the reassuring the people in the affected areas.  I think what the people in those areas need to know is that we are with them, we are concerned about their plight and we are doing something.  We appreciate what government has done so far, a second of UShs 300 million has been released, we applied from the Ministry, but this is nothing, but a drop in the ocean.  The first consignment that went out was 5000 bags of maize flour and 2000 bags of beans, this is hardly enough to even cater for one district.  

Now, we would like to request government and I am happy that the Minister of State for Agriculture and Animal Industry and Fisheries is here, we have been consulting with them with making our report available to all the ministries concerned and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  We would like them to come up and inform the nation authoritatively.  This is important because sometimes we get a statement from one government, Minister saying there is no such famine in Uganda, and yet the machinery of government through the officials have given us figures which indicate that we are a crisis, there are several actions which we would like this House to direct government to do.  

So, briefly I would like to read those resolution which our Committee did not go through first that Council direct Government to release UShs 2 billions requested by the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs to alleviate the situation, and to solicit for further funds, so that we can avert this bad situation.  Two, the Council directs that the 16 famine stricken districts be declared disaster areas.  I know this may sound rather drastic, but in order to focus our attention on what is going on and in order to really make people realise that we have a problem here, there is no need for us to hide our heads in the sand.  We should face this situation and then come to the aid of these people by associating ourselves by declaring those disaster areas.  

Three, the Council called on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and that of National Resources to strengthen the weather information systems, so that farmers are aided when to plant, when to harvest, how to dry their crops.  This kind of information is very much lacking and very often when you listen to the weather focus; you cannot make such sense out of it.  I think we need a much more determined effort to distil the right information to the public so that the farmers can act accordingly.  

Four, Council calls on government to instruct the districts authorities to institute the bye-laws which requires every household to have some food reserved.  They are already in our books, by-laws which need to be implemented; one of them is the household storage of vital food crops like grains and serials, and then also, there are by-laws regarding the planting of food crops like cassava and yams, this should be revived because this will go along way in trying to help alleviate the famine situation in the country.  

Five, the Council directs the cabinet sub-committee on disaster preparedness to address itself seriously to disaster problems and to recommend specific means of alleviating them.  Because really the public is not aware that there is such a committee and maybe by publicising this Disaster Preparedness Committee, people may come but with views which could help the sub-committee and this House could also come out with definite proposals which will make this nation really prepared for disaster.  

We have had problems, for instance, in this country regarding food shortages but we do not have in place any single government strategic food reserves.  We would have sold off everything by the end of the season; we are waiting for the next crop.  It is high time that the government thinks seriously of some means preserving some food.  Seven; Council calls on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to intensify efforts in addressing the issue of having storage facilities.  We know over the last three or four years, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has put up very elaborate facilities on this subject.  But I think it is time that we actually put this into practice.  We all know what high-sounding ministerial policies are and what is lacking is to put them into practice.  

I think yesterday, hon. Rwakakooko was lamenting here that we really lack that information, ability and the capacity to do it.  And I think when it comes to food reserves for our people, we should not experiment in good English but I think we should go on the ground and help the people so that they can store sufficient food for difficult times.  

Eight, Councils calls on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to particularly value the cotton production in the famine stricken areas so that the farmers are not desperate, so that the farmers are discouraged from selling crops as a substitute for income.  We all know what used to happen.  We used to have cotton as a cash crop and food used to be stored at least in sufficient quantities to be able to meet the farmer’s needs.  But now farmers have no other means of earning cash and we feel in the committee that if the cotton industry is revived, it will do two things.  

One, it will be a source of income to the farmers to meet their needs like clothing, school fees, medical facilities and so on.  And two, the cotton fields which have been harvested are a good environment for growing millet and you get a much better yield from that field than if you had a fresh field.  So, the cotton industry then will help us at least in those two ways so that the farmers will have enough crop for their own consumption.  

Nine, the Council calls on government to expedite a re-stocking exercise so as to enable each family hone to acquire a pair of oxen especially in areas like Pallisa, Kumi, Soroti, Gulu, Lira, Apac and Kitgum where ox cultivation was so developed that the farmers in those areas actually have forgotten how to use the hand hoe.  This sounds very funny but they are not used to the hand hoe in some of those areas.  Because they were able to cover a larger area with oxen and I think by this talking, may be starting with the provision of animals, we can increase the food production in those areas.  Number ten; the Council calls on government to endeavour assisting and promoting commercial farming, agricultural mechanisation.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The Motion is of such great urgency that the Chairman of that Sectoral Committee is at least dragging us in some long-term strategies when he has introduced a very important subject of people dying now.  So, I would request for a clarification from the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee, is it proper for him to continue giving longer term strategies of fighting famine when we are now concerned with immediate people who are dying?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, order.  The best you can do, hon. Member is to speed up.

MR OLUM:  What we are endeavouring to do here, I think if you follow the resolution there are three stages; one is the immediate release of funds so that we can buy food for the starving people, that is important.  Then we have the medium arrangement and then the long term.  I think these go hand in hand because if we do not tackle them together, we are going to have another cycle the other way round.  

So, I would like to end with the last resolution, that is No. 11 - the Council calls on the government to provide sufficient funds in the national budget for stocking food for emergency.  This may solve contrary to our privatisation policy but what the committee is seeking here is that the government should put money aside so that we have, we can purchase a certain amount of food which can be stored.  If we do not have a disaster the following year, we can sell off that stock and buy another stock so that at any one time in this country, we can say we can feed our people even for one month or two months and I think this is something that we in the Committee feel we should think about and try to implement it so that in future we do not start looking around for, like in 1979/80 we had to buy yellow maize from Mozambique to come and feed our people and begging.  

I think these are some of the important resolutions, which we thought this House should consider in the interest of this country so that we can together work out a permanent solution to the famine and food shortage in this country.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR SIBO (Nominated Member):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I beg to second this Motion.  I consider it as a very important Motion, the country is seeing a disaster on our hands.  I believe really it is a shame that a country considered as the food basket of East and Central Africa now to be facing famine and indeed to have lost a number of lives because of hunger.  

In the proposed resolution, a number of proposals have been made for immediate action to remedy the situation.  There are also some other measures being proposed for short term basis  - on relatively short term basis but I believe also that we want to seriously consider measure which should be put in place to ensure that this kind of thing does not happen again.  We have consistently in this House asked for food policy and in this food policy, it is not only double production that we require but minimum food that would be required by the whole country to ensure that everybody in this country is well fed at all times.  

We are told that part of a reason is that there has been drought in this country.  That is absolutely correct and that can be expected because it is nature, we do not control nature but believe the President has often said it here in this country that although we cannot control nature, we can at least try and live with nature and reduce the natural calamities by introducing technical know-how in the country.  When the drought comes, we should be aware of it and we should be prepared for it.  Indeed previously a number of laws and even by-laws were put in place to ensure that there is always adequate supply of food for everyone in this country.  Drought may happen in one part of the country, but we should be able to move food from one part of the country to that area where there is famine, that arrangement should be made there.  

There are a number of reasons we have been told that have led to this famine.  One of the reasons apart from the drought we have been told that there has been uncontrolled selling of food that a lot of food has moved from Uganda to Kenya and that a lot of food has moved from Uganda to Rwanda and to Zaire.   It is true that while there is market, food will continue to flow there but we should know the extent which we should allow food to be sold out and the extent to which we should know that at least that materials level we need the food and should be stopped.  

So, it would appear that there have been uncontrolled, uncoordinated movements between a number of ministries, the Ministry responsible for production and the Ministry responsible for marketing.  The market is just selling whatever is available.  The production Ministry just produces, and perhaps is not bothered whether people should really stipulate that so much food must be retained for food, so much food must be in storage at anyone single moment so that if there is famine, then we can open the storages to release food for those areas which are affected by famine.

A number of stores have been built in this country.  There is a very big store in Nalukolongo, there is a big store in Tororo, and there is a very big store in Kasese and a big store I think in Gulu and in Jinja indeed.  So, these stores are empty at the moment.  These stores were specifically constructed to preserve food.  These stores, it is true were constructed to be sources of supply for silos that we should at least, know that in those stores, if we want to sell, we should seek up to a certain minimum level, below which we cannot sell but this kind of policy s not there and that is what we are calling for.

We are also told that there are no laws to cover storage facilities but indeed they are there except that there is no coordination between departments at the district level.  At the district level the department of Agriculture is not coordinated with the department of trade or any other department that is responsible for food.  There should be that coordination.  

At the moment, for instance, we are told that there are no extension workers that at the grassroots the people who were responsible - the agriculture is out.  I went there they have been retrenched or do not exist, so production again is not properly supervised.  Lack of that extension supervision is part of our problem.  So there is no fieldwork.  Numerators that used to exist are no longer there, and they are not there at all, and I am told even the field assistants were abolished last year.  Why were they abolished when we still need them, when indeed we are strengthening the district in order to ensure that the district is producing adequate food?  

I think really this lack of specific policy and also the lack of guidelines at the district level is a fundamental missing link.  I would like to urge the Minister of Agriculture to try and address himself or herself to this particular missing link.  

So, in my view really the problem is in management.  The problem being management, there has been - I think, we lack effective management at the top, we lack effective management at the district level and that is our problem.  I think we should address ourselves to that problem.  

I do not have to talk much more because all the measures that I spelt out in this Motion are very, very urgent and they also speak for themselves about what is missing.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR AKURE (Jie County, Kotido):  Mr Chairman, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to say only few things arising from the Motion brought up by the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  We have heard figures of death cases in Karamoja.  Indeed, we informed Government in advance since November last year saying that there is a lot of hunger in Karamoja Region.  In one of the counties in my district, that is Dodoth, we have lost 460 people as it has been said by the Chairman of the Committee.  Moroto is 167.  Therefore, the government has never taken action, although we went physically to the Minister concerned -(Interjection)- No, that is unfair.  We went there, we told him what is happening and he has all the copies or the correspondences from Kotido district and I think even from Moroto he has the same report.  

I am wondering what step the government is taking, whether they are leaving the Karimojong to die as if they are not part of this country.  I am not really aware.  People in those counties, many of them have landed to Kenya in search of food because there is a programme in Kenya, which is distributing food, and most of them have run there.  On the other side of Dodoth, still at Kiteny, most people have crossed to Sudan to look for food.  Also in Moroto - Upe County has been deserted.  You would imagine during election, this CA election only 800 people voted in Upe to send a CA delegate to Constituent Assembly in Karamoja.  

So, really it is a pity that the government is not taking action, these people are dying no steps are being taken.  We have quarreled and I think we are being victimised to become partly enemies, why do we quarrel and yet we have the reason to quarrel.  They normally say, the Karimojong are always lazy, what about these other districts which are affected?  Does it mean that they are not digging?  The Karimojong always they are digging, but it is only the drought, which has become the problem.  Mr Chairman, it is a pity if people are dying -(Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that, the area he is talking about like Teso, normally we had our cows.  We are not beggars but because when the brothers, the uncles from Karamoja took our oxen, we have been vandalized, that is why famine came.  So I think people should be taught to make sure that we respect each other so that when there is a case like this one, we can assist people like Karamoja with food. (Laughter)

MR AKURE:  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Do you accept the information, please?

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that time and again it is snot only agriculture of food which government has been informed, but invaluably on a number of things and government just keeps a numb, like this numb at anything unless it is from the right circles which are clearly known to the government.  So, unless government itself is going to change its ways of operation by having more ears and listening especially to Members of NRC, I am afraid that it is really going to be a very big task for us.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes, hon. Member, please carry on.

MR AKURE:  Mr Chairman, I know as we talk now the figures are going to increase because this is the worse time the country is now facing.  In our case, normally this is the worse period for us.  We shall only have new harvest during the month of September and I am sure if the government is not going to take measures to ensure food is sent to these affected areas, I am afraid we are going to lose a number of Ugandans just because of this hunger.  It is really a pity that government is aware of what is happening and no steps are being taken and I do not know what type of people we represent here and what do they feel about us and what do they think about government.  

We must take government to test because there is no way when people are dying the government is not taking steps.  The people concerned are not bothered.  I do not know whether they think God can come from heaven and give us food, I do not know!  It is a pit if our people are dying and we are not taking any action.  I do not know what the world will say, the World Food Programme through Ministry of Education told us to bring some food but this was about 800 metric tons.  This 800 metric tons goes to Health, to Education and some other activities - the programme that was signed by Uganda Government.  

Now, we found that perhaps the only way to help these people was to give some of these children some type of home rations, but we tried through that and we found it was not helping and instead it was escalating hunger.  So, now people have run away especially in my district.  Those counties which used to have a population of about 120,000 people, it is less than that; they are about 70,000 who are now within the county.  The other 50,000, they are in Kenya and Sudan.  I do not know, and I would like to tell the government to take action very seriously otherwise, we are losing these people and who is going to be responsible?  It is we.  Therefore, I want to call the Minister concerned to ensure some action is taken immediately.  

I was also made to understand that they used to have emergency funds in the Ministry of Social Welfare, but I am told they have scrubbed these funds and these funds normally was used to alleviate the situation whenever there is hunger, they get this money and now that Ministry says they can do nothing because they have spitted the whole thing and the UShs 300 million they gave them, it is not enough.  I am told that they sent some 400 bags to Kotido a week ago and then Moroto, I do not know whether they left this morning or tomorrow.  This is same amount of food going to Soroti, Kumi, I do not think that these bits - after all, when this food reaches there, people are given in mugs.  Now, a family of 10 people, how do you get a mug, is it sensible really?  I do not think it is sensible.  Therefore, I think government should take action.  Thank you, Sir.  

BRIG. MOSES ALI (East Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to add a few points on this subject by saying that this country has been one of the luckiest on the continent.  Everybody is ware that they say that when Churchill was passing here, he said, this is the Pearl of Africa because of the fertility of the land, the rainfall and so on.  But since then this country has depended on the peasants, even during colonial days.  Nobody has imported food to feed these people here.  But now, this burden seems to be becoming bigger to these peasants because if we do not change our policy of depending on peasants only, then there is going to be a national disaster.  I want the Minister for Agriculture to think, not just to sit in Entebbe and receive statistics that are calculated from the offices.  These farmers initially they grow their own food for consumption because that is what they live on.  But because of inflation, which has now inflated the prices of these various demands, he has no alternative but to sell almost all the food because there is no alternative cash crop, which used to be cotton in our area especially.  In Buganda, they have coffee, which is more permanent.  But now, when the price of coffee or the marketing of coffee has been dropped, it discourages farmers.  So, they are only their demands.  

Now, when they go to hospital, they just take some money.  You cannot go until you see some food.  When you want to go from one place to another, you must seek to get money for transport, your child is thrown out of school you must sell some food.  So, there is no food and this food will not cater for these people until the next season.  So, we are bound to head for disaster unless we change the policy from Entebbe.  

Let us have a national policy on agriculture, but how do we protect?  How do we relieve these people?  We think of other countries.  The Kenyans have big farms, the Zambians have big farms, Zimbabwe they have a lot of farms.  We talk of unsuitability of weather.  We should create irrigation system in the place; supplementary moreover.  A lot of water is just draining near us.  I do not understand how this country which is selling maize worth 20 million dollars and then all of a sudden you begin to run to FAO, to World Food Programme, Oh! we are hungry.  How do you sell that maize?  Where did you get the maize to sell?  This is contradictory and if we also over beg, Mr Chairman, we shall compromise our credibility.  Everyday begging, everyday begging, even food that you have grown, you want to beg.  How?  That is very bad.  

So, I want the Minister for Agriculture and the government to think very seriously and encourage some people who would help these peasants by commercial farming.  If we have 500 commercial farmers in the country scattered all over, I think they will help the government not only to guarantee food security but also to earn foreign exchange that is very much needed and start paying our debt, which is growing every day.  

I think something is also wrong that we get less for our maize that is being bought by World Food Programme because the World Food Programme does not bring cash here.  They bring wheat to barter it with maize and Uganda Grain gets the wheat and buys the maize at their won price.  So, farmers have been squeezed from all directions and the wheat price is set at the mercy of the farmer.  So, you can see whatever maize he takes to sell in order to get his things, will not be enough.  So, tomorrow he has to bring more and we only get wheat which the farmer cannot manage to buy the bread.  So, I think this is a tip of the iceberg.  We must take this very seriously to avoid serious disaster in future.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MBURA-MUHINDO (Busongora County, Kasese):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to thank the Mover of this Motion for having brought it at this moment to give me an opportunity to the feelings of the people of Kasese on the same subject.  It is unfortunate that we have been living by accident.  Food is a very, very essential element in our life.  You cannot be healthy without eating but it is unfortunate that this very livelihood has been forgotten and we have not planned for it.  

A lot of talk has been going on food security but what have we done?  There seems to be nothing on the ground.  The best we have done is to borrow money, put up very large buildings but just to accommodate air when air can accommodate itself elsewhere.  Is this what we are really planning for this country?  It is a shame.  Now famine has been caused by two major factors.  One of them is drought and also we should not forget heavy rains that some of us have faced.  

Now, in Kasese, apart from the drought, we had an addition in heavy rains and not to mention the earthquake.  Now these three factors, they displaced people.  Two, the farmlands were destroyed by floods and three; communication has been destroyed.  Many bridges were washed away and as a result of this, we are also lacking food because when I stood up to speak, my Colleague here was saying Kasese, you have plenty of food.  What are you going to talk?  

I am sorry to inform you and the House that in Kasese although we have been a greener basket, we are now lacking food.  The earthquake, the heavy rains and the washing of the bridges have caused food shortage and the people of Kasese are appealing to the government that please, we have been supplying food to the whole country, can we now have it back?  Maybe whatever we sold to you, can you bring it back to us so that we can also feed?  And this goes to show that really there has not been serious planning because to find a district that was producing a lot of food and in about one month, it is also begging for food, it is a very big shame.  

And my appeal, apart from food is that can we have these bridges repaired through the efforts of the government?  I am aware that the government is trying to repair the bridges on the main roads; that is the road to Kabalore, the road to Mbarara, and they are trying to repair those.  But do not forget that most of the food comes from the rural areas where these bridges have also been washed away and the cost of repairing these bridges cannot be borne by the local administration.  The local administration cannot afford when they even go on without paying their workers.  How about repairing bridges?  

So, an appeal is being made that since we have a disaster committee, this committee should look into the repair of some of these bridges because if they are repaired, then we can manage to get food from other parts of the district.  The sub-counties of Muhokya, the sub-counties of Kasandara, Kyambura and even in Kasese Town because of these floods, they cannot feed themselves.  So, this appeal is being made through you and to the government, and I would like to support some of the resolutions that have been given by the Chairman and I think those if well taken, in short tem and in a long run, we shall be able to have peace for our people because, hunger is the biggest insecurity.  I thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak.

MR KALULE SENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, we read in the Old Testament that about 200 years before Christ was born, Egypt, there was a man called Moses and in that country, they had food reserves that were able to feed the people of Israel when there was a very great famine.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, if the old Testament he is quoting is the one we are used to, the man who created food reserves was Joseph.  You said Moses. (Laughter)

MR KALULE SENGO:  So, Mr Chairman, I mean Joseph.  But do not blame me, I am not a very good scripture man or Bible reader.  The point I wanted to move is that now 4000 since that time, when those people were able to have food reserves, we in Uganda, 4000 years later, we cannot be able to have food reserves for our own selves, for our people that are starving and I think this is a very great shame.  I happen to be a Member on the Committee on Economy and I am also a Member on the Sectoral Committee on Agriculture.  For three years, we have been proposing that government should have food reserves to cater for these emergences but I do not know why after all these three years, with all the recommendations we have been making, nothing has been done.  This gives me a fear that the recommendations we make tend to end in our Sectoral Committees and they are not followed up.  So, I would suggest that in future when recommendations are made in the Sectoral Committees, let the people concerned follow them up and do something about them.  

As things stand, we have an emergency before us.  There is what we call management by crisis.  I know the Minister for Finance - it is unfortunate that he is not around - I know he might stand up and argue that he does not have money in the Treasury, but then, what should we do?  Should we leave people to die just because there is no money in the Treasury?  I think when we are in a situation of this kind; we are even allowed to create temporary inflation.  So, if this means that the Ministry of Finance has to borrow and feed these people, I would suggest that they do it.  

As we pointed out, it is a shame to see that some people are dying in certain parts of Uganda when in other areas we have plenty of food.  This is a fact.  Since this is an emergency, I would suggest that, let the Ministry mobilise lorries, if need be, let them go and buy fresh beans.  Moving fresh beans from one area of Uganda to Soroti, to Karamoja does not require a week and these beans can stay for a week and a half.  So, let them move immediately, buy the food from the people and take it there.  

Now, one of the weaknesses with the government has been the low prices which they offer for food, and that is why even with the money they released, they have been finding a problem acquiring enough food.  This is just because the prices they offer to the farmers are very unrealistic.  So, I would suggest that, let the government be realistic, let them give good prices to the farmers and then they will not find the problem finding this food.  

This also goes to explain why the World Food Programme has been able to buy food here and they have been sending this food to the neighbouring countries.  This is because the prices they are offering are slightly better than the prices, which are floated by the Central Tender Board.  We have a proverb in my place where I come from, that a person who feeds you will always dictate terms to you.  If we are going to wait as a nation to beg from the World Food Programme, to keep on giving us food when we are producing food here, I do not think we shall ever be proud of our independence.  

So, I would suggest that we pull up our socks, start feeding our people and this question of saying that too much food is being sold outside should not arise because if too much food is being sold outside, what does it mean?  It means we should encourage our people to grow more because the market is there.  So the argument of too much food being sold outside does not hold water.  Let us encourage them to grow more so that we are able to sell more and so that we are also able to feed our people.  

One way of increasing on food production should be by assisting the farmers.  There is talk of commercial farmers and the recommendations that have been made.  Commercial farmers are going to be very productive if they are also assisted by government.  But what do we have now in place?  I am imagining that commercial farmers are the people that are able to employ to use tractors but look at the cost of a tractor as we talk now.  The cost of the tractor is prohibitive.  Even people that would be able to buy tractors and produce food cannot do it.  The interest rates in the banks are just impossible and as you know, farming is a risky business so that if the interest rates charged are too high, the man will not risk borrowing money and putting it into agriculture. 

I want also to comment on the weather forecast.  I have always complained about the way these people give us the weather forecast.  I do not know whether it is because they do not have the equipment or what.  But if you take the trouble to read the weather forecast here in the papers, you will find a man saying it may rain or it may not rain.  The winds might move North or they may move Southwards or the clouds will meet here and the rain may come or it may not come.  Now you end up getting even more confused.  You do not even know what the man is talking about.  

So, if we are going to get out of these problems, let these people of the meteorological department be specific.  Let them employ people who can tell us exactly what is going on but we are tired of these statements, which are contradictory.  A man makes about four statements talking about one thing and they do not even know which is which or what he is talking about.  It is unfortunate I did not know we were going to discuss this Motion but I would have brought you one of the articles about the weather forecast and you would have laughed because the whole thing is a jumbo; you cannot even know what the man is talking about.  

In conclusion, I want to propose that as a matter of urgency, let the Minister for Finance as it is recommended here, release funds, buy the food.  In fact, let the Ministry concerned just float out tenders in the Papers and I am sure if he does that and he offers good prices, food should be flowing in by next week so that we save the lives of our brothers and sisters.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MRS LOY KIRYAPAWO (Women Representative, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion.  I think it is now the right time for Ugandans to realise that disasters that we never thought about are now starting to happen in Uganda.  Many governments of Uganda has never bothered to feed the population of Uganda, because we are all convinced that the weather which we have here in Uganda is excellent, too rainy seasons, so nobody bothers to know how people are being fed.  

But right now, that is why we see that now it is a song of non-traditional cash crops.  People are being encouraged; I think this has been exaggerated on the non-traditional cash crops.  People are being encouraged to cultivate for sale and not for food and as a result, we find that we may have a very bad harvest but after the harvest, we are already - some of the areas are already crying of food.  You find that we have reserves.  Why did you waste money to construct – (Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, while the Member is developing a good point in trying to get food security and food production, I would like to give her information that production of cash crops should go hand in hand.  The level of work performance of our people is indeed very, very poor.  We should now not be talking about food in exclusion of cash.  We should be talking about both because there is also poverty or money hunger if you want to call it.  

MR KIRYAPAWO:  I thank the hon. Member for that information but I think it is food first.  I am sure there are many people who are going naked, but they are feeding and they are surviving.  I do not think that you can survive just because you are properly dressed.  So, what I am saying is that, we have put too much emphasis on cash and we forget out stomachs.  That is why you find that our reserves, we have them but they are empty.  Whereas we are encouraging liberalisation, there are no internal buyers for our produce.  You find so many lorries moving towards - I come from Tororo District - it is a border district and what I am talking about, I know.  How many lorries cross over whereas there are no lorries within the country that are busy buying this food for storage?

MRS MATEMBE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give is that whereas there is emphasis on cash because certain - I agree with hon. Pinto that there is hunger in the pocket.  The major problem is not that emphasis but lack of productivity of the people down there.  Because, I happen to move around in some areas, you find with due respect, many men drink in the morning at 10.00 O’clock -(Interruption)- Mr Chairman, protect me and I am not allowing that information.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Is it in order for the hon. Member who is giving information to say that our people are lazy when I remember in 1989, because of bad policy, bad marketing policies, our people produced so much but there were no buyers of some of those crops?  Some of the beans just rotted.  Is it, therefore, in order for the hon. Member to confuse the situation and say that our people cannot produce?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Member was expanding on her point.  I think you were too speedy.  Please, you are in order.

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, that was history.  I am talking of the present time and I have an opportunity to move around and what I am talking is really – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, give your information.

MRS MATEMBE:  Many people wake up in the morning by nine, they are already drinking and men especially.  You find the women already overworked, emaciated, they are the people trying to work and produce food for this country. How do we expect to have surplus even to store in those silos when there is not sufficient production because many men are busy drinking very early in the morning instead of producing.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  While the Member is talking about production, I think we must also help these farmers with the tools in order to produce enough because when somebody is using just a hand hoe, I do not know how much he can cultivate.  Now, when we are talking about - I want even to inform my hon. Sister that whereas we are blaming these men for this drinking, the brewers mainly are women. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please hon. Members.

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Now, that makes me move to another point I have.  The imbalance in the distribution of agricultural development.  Some areas have got, I am sure too many of these agricultural projects whereas some areas have been neglected.  I think it is high time we balance everything especially in agriculture.  We may if you went to the Eastern side of the country and the Northern, we know it is animal traction, which is mainly used, but how many animals do we have?  And if you look at the other side, how many tractors are there -(Interruption)- in the remaining side of the country? (Laughter)  

So, there is an imbalance in agricultural projects for development, which we must all look at and see how we balance so that we get enough in the whole country.  I am sure there was an irrigation scheme in the Ministry of Agriculture, I do not know and I would seek clarification from the Minister to tell us what happened to that scheme because such a scheme, the irrigation scheme would assist in such periods of drought then we could use this irrigation.  The area if Karamoja, I am sure a scheme would even relieve the neighbouring districts from being harassed with cattle rustling because always whenever there is cattle rustling these people move in for pasture for their animals but maybe if there was irrigation scheme in Karamoja, this movement will be restrained and they will be busy also cultivating instead of roaming. (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Your time is over hon. Member.

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  and also when we talk about problems which accelerated this famine, we should not forget the insurgency and that is where I can call upon all of us that we must accept changes.  When there is a change, instead of struggling for him or her to be here, that is a waste of time and bringing problems like this one.  You find that in these areas there has been that period of insurgency, people have been running about, people have been put in camps and in the camps, there are no gardens and in the camps people need to be fed.  

So, as politicians we should look into such a thing.  How do we stop this, how do we sensitize people that when there is a change we must accept the change?  I am sure that one will help us. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Your time is already up hon. Member, you have already made your point.

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  The other thing I want to talk about, this is -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Member.  Take your seat please.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Mr H. Kyemba):  Thank you, for giving me this opportunity to say a few words in respect of this resolution.  As the hon. Members will know, we were not given any notice regarding this particular resolution and my comments will therefore, not necessarily be the response of the Minister for example, responsible for Relief or Trade and Industry with whom we share responsibilities in this particular area of famine which has led to this particular resolution.  My comments are based basically confined to the responsibility of the area in which I have some responsibility.

I would like to associate myself with the hon. Members that have congratulated the Chairman i bringing up this particular resolution so that hon. Members can air their views on this important subject.  This is the way the NRM work, we want to hear and to follow up things so that we do not keep things under the carpet.  So, if there is any information and I am sure those in the government will leave no stone unturned, we will go all the way to make sure that not one life is lost because of any activities. (Interruption)  I am saying not one life more.  Of course, we are not going to return those who have died, I am saying we are not going to leave a stone unturned to save one life more of any Ugandan.  

I do not intend to go into detail of what has already been covered but the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has been working for the past two weeks with the National Resistance Committee on Agriculture as a result of which this report has been made available to me and to the Members of the House, I do not know whether they have got their copies.  I know a copy of it has been leaked to the press anyway.

The reasons leading to the present situation, the reasons are many and have been covered extensively.  Prior to all this, we must all pay credit to the small farmers of this country who have maintained our agriculture over the years -(Applause)- without them, we would be getting this kind of situation over and over again but with the simple peasant farmer in the village we have been able to survive and Uganda has been regarded as the food basket of this region.  Indeed that is why it is rather surprising that we have to deal with these present difficulties.  The difficulties have arisen from, as I said, many of the reasons that are being explained.

The food policy that we have always followed in the Ministry of Agriculture is obviously to ensure food self-sufficient for our people and sufficient reserves for our people.  This has been holding and is being holding for a little while except that in the case of Karamoja, we have persistently had to provide food for them under the World Food Programme which is in fact, the only region basically as hon. Members will know that has persistently depended on food from elsewhere.  Even with that, the government is trying to address the issues that lead to shortage of food.  We are planning to put up for example, a number of valley dams so that water is available for these cattle holding areas so that less movement in search of water is catered for.  

So, these issues are very much in the minds of the Movement that is leading this country.  We are very much aware that the people of Pallisa, Kumi and Soroti lost a lot of their cattle, which was very important for animal traction.  As a result of that many of you are aware that His Excellency the President granted part, in fact, the entire sum of 0.5 million dollars to start the restocking exercise in those districts in the North and North East.  These animals were imported from the National Ranching Company of Tanzania and the distribution was launched with everybody watching openly at Ongino and at Arapai.  The Minister of State responsible for Luwero who was presiding for the Minister of State for Presidential Affairs and myself witnessed that particular exercise being launched.  As a result of that number of animals were given to farmers.  I agree they are not enough but this was supposed to start a very important programme for re-stocking the North and North East.  As I speak to you now, my information is -(Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the Minister holding the Floor that, these animals actually, as you say, they were open for any person, it ended up by giving to traders who bought them and slaughtered them.  Secondly, the farmers in Teso could not control these animals because the type of the zebu from Tanzania unlike the one we have in Uganda could not persist the pest around so they died most of them; so people were discouraged.

MR KYEMBA:  Mr Chairman, I do not know what the hon. Member from Soroti wants the Minister of Animal Industry to do when the entire exercise was put -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Is the last speaker in order for him to say there is no solution because the zebu cattle in Soroti died; there is no replacement of them at all.  Is he in order?  What should we do, can he give us what we should do?  Is he in order to leave us agape?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think the hon. Member had expressed anxiety over the matter and he is in order.  Continue hon. Member.

MR KYEMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  As I was pointing out, Mr Chairman, this exercise was launched and was intended to assist those areas who were in particular difficulties with regard to this restocking and as I speak to you, the exercise was intended to establish a revolving fund so that animals could be available over a wider and a wider area for animal traction which is encouraged by the Ministry of Agriculture and as we stand here today, the sales have results in the availability of UShs 130 million on the account which is available to buy more animals again for recycling within that programme.  

This programme is in the hands of a Committee consisting of the RC V in the areas concerned and there is no way, if there is any malpractices being exercised that you can bring the blame to Entebbe or to Kampala in the President’s Office, the blame must be dealt with on the ground in the area where this allocation is taking place. (Interruption)

MISS ALIU:  Information.  Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon. Minister holding the Floor that out of 3,000 animals paid for by the government over 1,000 animals have never arrived in Uganda since 1990.  What is happening to that balance of animals?

MR KYEMBA:  Mr Chairman, if the hon. Lady had waited a little bit, I have just got to go to that particular point in the next minute or two.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Further information.  Mr Chairman, out of the 3,000 animals which were paid for, when the accounts were presented before the Public Accounts Committee we found that the cost of one animal was prohibitive, it would buy three animals if they were purchased locally.  We advised and instructed that when the LC expires, it should not be renewed.  Now, we have about UShs 3 million waiting this new Commission, the Teso Commission so that we can buy locally other than buy animals, which Ugandans cannot afford.

MR KYEMBA:  Mr Chairman, Sir, if the hon. Member could allow me just to answer briefly because this is not a Motion which could take time, I was going to go precisely to that.  The exercise that was carried out brought in 1,170 heads of cattle.  The remainder which were supposed to be brought in were never brought in and a decision was made that this money should be available for use to purchase animals locally and this amounts to 322,206 dollars in addition to the 130 million shillings which has resulted from the sales of the animals here.  All this money is available and we hope that it will not again be misused as some Members are warning us by the committees that were set up because we tried as best as we could to set up Committees that will be answerable to the people in the area.  We gave them guidelines, professionally on how and to whom to sell the animals.  If eventually these animals got taken by others, then I hope the leaders of this country who are represented in this House will take it as their responsibility to monitor and in any case, you are supposed to monitor the sale of these animals.  

One of the reasons when we were discussing this particular issue was that the hon. Members were supposed to be part of the monitoring team to see that things went well in their areas and I hope they continue to do so.  

Now, if I can just end with the comments on the issue before us which is the immediate famine problem, I would like to assure the hon. Members of this House that the Ministry of Agriculture, of course, is responsible for production, we will continue to produce depending of course on the support that you normally give us in this House with regard to funds; we will continue to do so but with regard to emergency situation, I know the Minister responsible, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister are all very much concerned about the reports that are coming in and steps are being taken to establish where the need is greatest so that the lives of the Ugandans are not lost in any mysterious way.  I would like to assure you this because I know that we are all concerned about it. (Interjection)  There is he Minister of Relief, he is not here and I cannot speak for him now, but I know that the Prime Minister’s Office is taking up this matter very seriously to make sure that we do what is necessary to save our people.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Mover of the Motion to reply.

MR OLUM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me an opportunity to talk on this very important Motion.  I would like to thank all the Members of this august House who have contributed on this very important Motion.  A lot of points have been raised and I hope the government has taken note of these points.  However, there are four points which I would like to retaliate for emphasise purposes.  The first one is that famine does not come over a night.  Very often, there are signs that appear, which alert you that there is going to be a famine.  It is, therefore, very important that this country should gear up for this early warning sign so that the people are given advice in time and people prepare for this difficult period.  Our problem has been in trying to monitor and to disseminate the right information to the population so that they are prepared for these disasters.  

I am happy to note that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has now instituted early warning alert department at Kawanda.  We hope that these units will be able to provide all the necessary information regarding weather, like rain fall and related conditions so that the farmers know exactly when to plant, when the crops have failed the farmer should be given the right advice what to do so that the country really is aware of what is happening so that we are not taken by surprise.  Even this present situation was very much predicted, it is a pity that those concerned did not take appropriate action to alleviate this problem before it became worse.  We really regret the death of so many Ugandans, which has occurred as a result of this situation.

Another point, which did come up in the debate, was the production pattern.  I think this is where the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, should come out through their extension to advise farmers.  I know e used to have in the Ministry of Agriculture the advice to farmers, what kind of cropping pattern they should have.  I will give an example.  In Pallisa, Kamuli and Iganga, the growing of swamp rice has affected the peoples’ way of living and the Ministry of Agriculture should really go out and try to study what we call a farming system which will incorporate the rice production because this is not something that people are used to, their labour allocation becomes very difficult, they spend more time in the swamps chasing the birds that they can no longer grow millet, they no longer grow cassava and I think this something that cannot be ignored.  

The farming pattern in this country should be studied, the extension worker should go out an advise the farmers.  This is their task.  I think if we tackle this problem, we will be able to help the farmer to have a mix of crops not just one mono-culture so that we can avoid the occurrence of this situation.  

The third point, I think one point that was raised by hon. Matembe is something that we cannot ignore.  That is the idle labour force in the rural area.  You find a lot of young, able-bodied people are not producing including even women - I would like to say that because now we are talking about labour force in the rural areas.  We used to have in this country the control of drinking; that is drinking hours.  It is a pity when you go in the rural areas, you find those who are engaged in production are old women mostly and a few old men toiling in the fields.  I think Members can remember when they were carrying out their campaigns during the CA. the sort of workers used to see in the rural areas.  

Most young men either have migrated to the trading centres or to urban centres or are engaged in petty trade and yet the vital area of production is being neglected.  I think the hon. Members could take note of this and may be they could try also to help mobilise the workers in the rural areas so that more production is brought to this nation and we can develop.  Definitely drinking hours in the rural areas need to be something that should be tackled.  I find sometimes Kasese, Kasese has reached Nwoya County. (Laughter) They travel all the way from Kasese and bring this staff and it is in all the rural areas and a lot of other products like the lira lira, where they used a lot of raw materials, that is cassava and millet, this is a source of food you know, it is not a laughing matter, if we are using a lot of maize and cassava for drinking purposes, then you are definitely going to have less food to eat and you are also not going to have time to dig.  So, this is something that we should not laugh off but really address sit more seriously as a nation bringing control of drinking hours, there is no reason why a man cannot drink after a hard day’s work but should not start drinking in the morning and have no work at all, he should not be able to eat.

The last point that I would like to talk about is the issue of the emergency funds.  We should at least have in place the minimum required amount of money that the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs requested for that is UShs 2 billion a month should be made available and then the regular emergency funds that used to be in the Ministry should be restored.  We have been informed that in the past, the Ministry was availed UShs 60 million on a monthly basis for emergency, that money was available.  Then the Treasury dropped that amount to UShs 30 million a month and now it is UShs 19 million, which is hardly enough.  

I would like to thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to move this Motion and also I want to thank the Members who have contributed very ably on this Motion and I hope that the points that have been raised will be taken care of and then we hope that in future, we shall try to avoid this kind of occurrence by making sure that we have got in place some minimum of food reserve for our people and I am happy that the Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Affairs has come in and may be for her benefit, I would like to say we commend your effort for what you have tired to do for the people at this moment and I would like to commend the Ministry of Agriculture for what they have done in the face of this problem, they have distributed a lot of seeds in those areas which are the total crop failure, at least, they have something to plant and together we can promote some awareness of food production, food preservation and maybe we could talk about the most famous phrases which we used to have in the past, double production and freedom from hunger.  I hope those words will come back in our vocabulary so that we are constantly reminded that food is a necessity and you need to produce it, we need to preserve it, we need to have stocks for it.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).  

(The Motion is passed without amendment).

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE GOVERNMENT WHITE PAPER ON EDUCATION POLICY

CHAPTER ONE: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATION

CHAPTER TWO: NATIONAL GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF EDUCATION

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr Chairman, Sir, we first of all, cannot hear what is being said.  Secondly, we do not know whether we start with Chapter One or with the introduction or the Minister’s speech because there are some corrections there also.  So if the Clerk can speak a bit louder, we shall be grateful, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Use the microphone and start with the introduction.  Okay, hon. Members, I think you better also pay attention now because we really want to start.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Sir, I am proposing on Roman xii on the Minister’s speech third paragraph -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  We do not have Roman xii.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr Chairman, it is page Roman xiii, third paragraph, the first sentence, but the last two words which reads, ‘social service sector’ after that, I want these words to be added - at the end of the first sentence of the third paragraph, the sentence ending with service sectors.  You did not get it? (Interjection) Yes, so – (Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of procedure.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  With regard to the Ministerial Statement in this report, surely we can only take it as it is. We cannot subtract or add words.  We cannot amend what he said.  I would think that that is not procedurally correct Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I did not know exactly what the hon. member wanted.  You had not finished.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Yes, then we do not know what it is included here and whether we should have read it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  What did you want to say about?

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  After that sentence, I want to add that the government also spent heavily on containing the insurgency since 1986.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, hon. Member, I do not think you are in order on that one.  It is a statement by the hon. Minister.  I think we proceed to the main text.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of procedure.  May I suggest that we go chapter by chapter?  We read the recommendation by recommendation because that is what is very important so that we amend the recommendations rather than having to say chapter and we jump to another before we go through recommendation by recommendation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You could wait until we come to chapters now.  We are moving to that.  I have overruled that.  You cannot amend the Minister’s statement.

MR KALULE SENGO:  Mr Chairman, I wanted the Minister to - because according to page 2 of the introduction, paragraph 5, the first phase of this education review programme should have started in 1992.  We are already in 1994 with only three years left.  I do not know whether the Minister is aware of this problem and whether he is going to propose a different time frame work.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA: Mr Chairman, hon. Members, I think it is obvious that if the programme was supposed to start in 1992 and we are now in 1994, the starting period will have to be adjusted and I was discussing with my officers would not like to state another period of starting until the Paper has been passed and in which for it is passed.  Then we shall come back here with the legislations proposing when it should start.  So, I would rather leave that one open, then when the Paper has been depending on which form it is passed, then we shall go to another re-paragraphing of the phases.  Thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Very well, hon. Member, can we proceed to chapter one?

CHAPTER ONE:  HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATION

CHAPTER TWO:  NATIONAL GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF EDUCATION

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to raise the attention of the Minister on page 7 on broad aims of education. On sub-Section 1, Roman figure, the White Paper is talking about to promote and understanding and appreciation of the value of national unity, patriotism, and cultural heritage with due considerations of international relation and benefit.  On two, it goes to say, to inculcate moral, ethical and spiritual values in the individual and develop self-discipline and integrity.  

It is important for the Minister to note that these recommendations are for the purpose of action but the Ministry should also make it as a programme to put in their syllabi about moral education and this moral education used to be given to us when schools were under Missionary schools because sometimes they would even teach us religious studies and so on.  

Now where you find students demonstrating on the street, students collecting some faeces painting it on the windows of their fellow students is very unbecoming and it is not only the Education White Paper where we are going to implement all this when the morals of the students are not good.  For instance, I have a very interesting thing where the students were, I think celebrating the Afro-stone.  The Afro-stones were demonstrating celebrating their day and the Lumumbists came and confronted them and they started fighting.  

Now, this sort of situation, unless we teach our students to behave and even to understand the purpose of democracy, then this White Paper will be rendered useless if we do not first of all inculcate the more disciplines within our own students.  Thank you.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  I was proposing that on the moral ethics, there be added that the value -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Did you circulate that on that?  It is not necessary because you did not even circulate the thing.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to stand to second hon. Matayo Kyaligonza’s point.  Even if he has not circulated the information, I feel that we should include religious studies and therefore part of the moral rehabilitation in our schools.  We have been very highly corrupted because of not teaching religion in our schools and I would go to the extent of saying that even those schools should be returned to Missionaries or Church of Uganda or Catholic Church so that they inculcate moral standards in our schools.  

Quite a lot has been going wrong than we have been talking all sorts of things, telling lies and scheming because we are not taught moral principles or religious principles like we used to do when those people, the missionaries were teaching us.  So, I would like teaching of religion to be included on the national goals and objectives, Mr Chairman.  I thank you.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, it will save us a lot of time currently religious education is taught in all primary schools and secondary schools, and it is a subject offered at A’ level and University as a matter of fact.  Secondly, in the broader aims of education, it is there, teaching of moral, ethical and spiritual values.  In the context of primary education at page 52, there is the teaching of social studies, religious and moral education.  So the provision is there.  But obviously - and I have been discussing it with the Bishops and I mentioned it to them.  There is a difference between passing religion as a subject being religious.  A crook can sit religion and get a distinction and a mulokole in the village who is morally upright can fail a subject in religion.  There must be a separation of the two.  

So moral values and religious values cannot only be taught in class.  They have to be integral in the homes, in society, in offices and in the conduct in Parliament.  If you leave it to the teachers alone, it will be one-sided and the way we conduct ourselves in Parliament, the way we conduct also contributes to moral and ethical values.  If one goes to a school and tells children to do one, two, three, for example, in the days of 1960s, when politicians would tell children of a particular religion to go and abuse all the men of another religion based on a party.  That contributed to the breakdown of moral and ethical values in our society.  But for us in education, we provided for it, brought in the aims and the contents.  But it is the duty of every citizen to ensure that moral and ethical values are inculcated.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for us to continue debating this very important White Paper when we are short of quorum?  We are only 69 when the quorum is supposed to be 90.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I suspend the meeting briefly and I ask the bells to be rung.  Now that we still do not realise a quorum, I adjourn the House up to Tuesday at 2.30 p.m. in the afternoon next week.

(The Council rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 June 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

