Thursday, 4 June 2009

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

NATIONAL ANTHEM

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

STATE OPENING OF THE 4TH  SESSION OF THE EIGHTH PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA  

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni; the First Lady, hon. Janet Museveni; Your Lordship, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly, Abdulrahman O. Kinana; the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business; the Leader of the Opposition; hon. ministers; hon. Judges of the Courts of Judicature; hon. Members of Parliament; Members of Diplomatic Corps; the Chief of Defence Forces; the Inspector-General of Police; the Commissioner-General of Prisons; leaders of political parties; religious leaders; distinguished invited guests; ladies and gentlemen, I welcome you all to this double-purpose occasion.

PROCLAMATION BY THE SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

2.33
THE SPEAKER: “Proclamation by Edward Ssekandi, Speaker of Parliament, Republic of Uganda. 

WHEREAS Parliament was prorogued on Thursday, 21 May 2009, thus marking the end of the third session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution empowers the Speaker to appoint the date of commencement of a session of Parliament;
 
AND WHEREAS Clause 1 of Article 101 of the Constitution requires the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation at the beginning of each session;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of powers conferred on the Speaker by Clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed that the fourth session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda commences on the 4th day of June 2009 within the precincts of Parliament.

Notice is hereby given that the President, under Clause 1 of Article 101 of the Constitution, delivers to Parliament an address on the state of the nation.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala, this 4th day of June 2009. 

Signed, Ssekandi.”

2.35
INVITATION BY THE SPEAKER TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO GIVE AN ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION TO PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: “Your Excellency, 

WHEREAS under Clause 1 of Article 101 of the Constitution the President is required to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation at the beginning  of every session;

AND WHEREAS the Speaker has just proclaimed the commencement of the fourth session of this Parliament of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Speaker of Parliament, do hereby invite Your Excellency, the President to deliver to Parliament, an address on the state of the nation, this 4th day of June 2009, as envisaged under Article 101(1) of the Constitution. Your Excellency.”

STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS BY H.E THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA TO PARLIAMENT

2.36
H.E THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition; the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly; hon. Ministers; hon. Members of Parliament; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 101(1) of the Constitution of Uganda, I stand here to deliver the State of the Nation Address, 2009. 

Before I go further, permit me once again to convey to you and the entire Parliament my deepest condolences and sympathies over the death of the following Members of Parliament: the hon. Kibirige Sebunya of Kyadondo North, then Minister of State in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, who passed away on 8 October 2008; the hon. Kyakuhairwe Kyaaka Vicky, Woman Representative for Isingiro District, who passed away on 21 November 2008. 

Over a period, many lives have been lost through road accidents, which could have been largely avoided had the motorists been more careful. Here, I would like to give you some technical advice: when I am on a murram road, I never allow my people to drive at more than 80 kilometres per hour. (Laughter) And when I am on a tarmac road, I never allow them to drive at more than 100 kilometres per hour. This is technical advice; free of consultancy fees. (Laughter) Why do you over-speed? It is not good at all. 

Lives have also been lost through collapsing buildings under construction, which calls into question the monitoring and supervision of construction work sites and building plan processes of local authorities. 

On a more disturbing note, a number of ritual related murders, especially of children, have been reported. We recently achieved a breakthrough in the Kiboga area and child sacrifice suspects were arrested. We need to propose an amendment to the Constitution in this Parliament in order not to allow granting of bail in such cases as in treason, rape, defilement and embezzlement except if the mandatory days are exceeded -(Interjections)– the ones who do not want peace in Uganda are saying no. (Laughter) Anyway, we are going to bring the amendment and it will be your responsibility to either accept it or not but for us. we shall have done our political work because it is now like a game when somebody who is accused of murder is released on the so-called bail after two weeks. That is why the people take the law in their hands and lynch some of these people. So, I would propose that we handle it in a more systematic manner. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members I would, therefore, request you to stand up and observe a minute of silence in memory of the departed persons I have mentioned above.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

MR MUSEVENI: May the Almighty God rest their souls in eternal peace. 

While the impact of the global economic crisis in the developed world has been adverse on many economies of the world, the Ugandan economy is alive, well and strong. (Applause) The doubting Thomases –(Laughter)– are about to touch the stars to prove that this is true. Provisional data by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics indicate that the Ugandan economy has continued to grow at a robust rate of seven percent per annum –(Applause)- despite the global economy crisis even though there has been a slight decline in the growth that had been projected during the fiscal year 2008/2009 when growth was estimated to be 9 percent per annum. 

Uganda’s economic growth performance was much higher than that of other countries in the region and in the rest of the world. The size of the Ugandan economy is estimated at Shs 29.8 trillion by the end of June 2009 as compared to Shs 24.7 trillion in June 2008. This means that the size of our economy has expanded 8.4 times since the NRM took power in 1986. (Applause) Per capita GDP is now estimated at US $ 420 up from US $264 in 1986. This means that the size of the economy in dollars is now US $38.8 billion by the PPP method - that is the Purchasing Power Parity method - or 15 billion dollars by the official exchange method. 

The resilience of the Uganda economy in the midst of the on-going global economic crisis is mainly because of the diversification of the Ugandan economy and particularly the export sector and the services sector. This is in contrast to the economies of some nani naweza ku pandisha hi? Countries that have already experienced a contraction or negative growth in their national economic output. To take some examples, the economic output of the United States of America, Europe, Japan, et cetera has actually shrank and many jobs have been lost. 

In contrast, in Uganda, although some businesses have experienced some fever, our continued impressive performance in the face of the global economic crisis is a manifestation of the sound economic policies of the NRM Government. (Applause) Awo omuganda w’agambira nti ayagala okwetuga yetuge. (Laughter) It means that I am doing well and anybody who is not happy may have to hang himself. Those who are jealous, what we call “ettima”, “ennugu” and in Runyankole it would be “itima”.

Mr Speaker, the source of this strong growth in Uganda has continued to come from the industrial and services sectors. This is very important. While the agricultural sector has shown significant signs of activation - remember my words - I am not saying growth – because the agriculture of Uganda has been mainly subsistence. So I do not want to use the word “growth” because the agriculture of Uganda is not yet growing. It is mainly traditional. That is why I am using the word “activation”, meaning we are now going to activate it to make it modern through what I will talk about later.

In the industrial sector, formal manufacturing registered strong growth of 8.3 percent, manufacturing registered another strong annual growth of 7.2 percent during last financial year although slightly less than 7.6 percent growth recorded in the previous year. The growth in this sub-sector was mainly as a result of the increase in growth of the food processing sub-sector. Growth was also registered in the textiles, clothing and footwear as well as chemicals, paint, soap and foam products among others. 

The mining and quarrying sub-sector achieved a growth rate of 9.2 percent over the year. A more recent study of the industrial sector gives an indication of the resilience of the economy to external shocks such as the global economic crisis. The index of industrial production, which broadly tracks the performance of the manufacturing sector, had an increase of 6.9 percent in the quarter of January to March 2009 relative to the corresponding period in 2008. This suggests that overall manufacturing production has so far not been affected by the on-going global recession. 

In the food processing sub-sector, the index of edible oil and fats production, dairy production, grain milling and sugar processing increased by 37.2 percent, 51.1 percent, 39.6 percent and 33.9 percent respectively in the quarter of January to March 2009 compared to the same period in 2008. 

Cotton ginning registered a remarkable recovery with an annual increase of 245 percent in the quarter of January to March 2009, albeit from a small base reversing the decline the sector suffered in the previous four quarters since January 2008.

Based on revised GDP data, the share of agriculture in total GDP continued to decline from 15.7 percent in fiscal year 2007/2008 to 15.1 percent this financial year even though the agricultural sector grew annually by 2.6 percent. Although the agriculture is growing, industry and services are growing more and therefore agriculture as a percentage of the total economy is getting less and less because industry and services are growing. This reflects the continued structural transformation of the Uganda economy as other sectors continue to grow much faster than agriculture. The evidence for undeniable fact that agriculture is growing is the fact that the recent agricultural and livestock census recorded the existence of 11 million head of cattle – ngombe million kumi na moja - 12 million goats, 37 million poultry, and 3 million sheep and pigs each. If you do not want to eat either, you do not have to worry. Nobody is forcing you. The Banyankore say, “Ezimbire akatama tezibira zindi kurya.” If a certain cow has got a swollen mouth, it may not eat but the cows which have got healthy mouths eat. So you do not have to worry. (Laughter) Hon. Members – I can see that some of the MPs are rather young; they may not know, let alone remember where we have come from. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, this compares much more favourably to lower number of livestock that were being estimated before the census of livestock in 2007, which gave the following figures: 7 million head of cattle, 8.3 million goats, 27 million poultry and 1.7 million sheep and 2 million pigs. That had been the estimate, but when they did the actual census, they found that the figures were much higher. This example illustrates the fact that even though the share of agriculture in the total economy is declining, there is still substantial growth of agriculture. The cattle population – I would like to inform those who may not know – in 1986 was only 3 million head of cattle. Now it is 11 million.

The services sector, which now accounts for 51.2 percent of total GDP, continued to register strong growth estimated at 9.4 percent per annum during Financial Year 2008/2009.

Growth in the transport and communications services sub sector is estimated at over 20 percent in the current financial year, a continuation of equally good performance in the previous year. This was mainly driven by the posts and telecommunications sub sector, which is estimated to have grown by 32.2 percent during the Fiscal Year 2008/2009 compared to 22.6 percent for previous financial year.

Over a five-year period, this sub-sector has registered an average growth of 24.4 percent per annum thus achieving the fastest steady growth over the period relative to other sectors of the economy. There are now 8.6 million telephone connections in Uganda by December 2008 compared to 5.2 million connections in December 2007.

You should be informed - and those who are old enough should be reminded - that telephone connections in 1986 in Uganda were only 28,000 lines; it is now 8.6 million lines. (Applause) Now, you can now see the ennugu very clearly. (Laughter) If there were any doubt, this one now settles it; that there is the ennugu side and the growth side -(Laughter)– because how can anybody deny, argue or even talk that now there are many telephones in Uganda than in 1986; how can you argue about that?

Government’s objective in this sub-sector is to increase coverage of telecommunications and internet services access throughout the country by licensing more service providers, and through the public/private partnership arrangement, increase coverage. This policy objective has achieved impressive achievements so far. As more players are licensed, coverage has increased and increased competition has resulted in reduced unit cost of using these services. 

The tremendous improvements in the telecommunications and internet services have triggered the development of a number of consumer products in other sub sectors including the banking sector and other sectors. This is increasing connectivity as well as productivity in the economy as a whole.

Mr Speaker, the financial services sub-sector is estimated to have increased by 21.7 percent during the last fiscal year, compared to a growth of 24.1 percent per annum achieved in the previous year. 

Total deposits within the formal financial sector grew from Shs 5.2 trillion, in June 2008, to Shs 6.1 trillion by March 2009. While lending by formal financial institutions to the private sector grew from Shs 2.9 trillion, in the last financial year, to Shs 3.7 trillion by March 2009.

It is not surprising that two new international banks were licensed since last financial year, which will lead to increased competition in the financial sector and a long awaited reduction in the interest rates.

Uganda’s investment climate continues to be attractive and profitable. Total fixed investment grew by 9.2 percent during the Fiscal Year 2008/2009, higher than the growth of 6.5 percent recorded last financial year. The share of investment to GDP is now 26 percent of which private investment is 20.4 percent. Private construction is estimated at 15.9 percent of GDP and this would have been higher, if remittances from Ugandans working abroad had remained at last year’s level. In spite of the drop in remittances from Ugandans abroad, still you can see what is happening in the construction sector.

Private investment in machinery and equipment increased to 4.5 percent of the GDP compared to 3.4 percent of the GDP in financial year 2007/2008. This means that private investors are focussing on increasing productivity of their investments which is also good for creating jobs as profits continue to grow. 

Foreign Direct Investment remains strong, reflecting continued sound economic fundamentals and therefore strong investor confidence in the economy. Foreign Direct Investment is estimated at $736 million during this financial year. I was waiting for some reaction from this side -(Laughter)- but it seems the temperature is going down as I bombard them with more facts. (Laughter) This comes on top of US $778 million worth of foreign investment achieved last financial year. So in the last two years we have attracted more than US $1.2 billion worth of investment here in Uganda. (Applause)

I have been informed that because countries in Europe are in recession, private companies in those countries are exploring investing in Uganda where they can make profit. 

Equity capital is estimated at US $557 million this financial year while reinvested capital from company profits increased by nearly 10 percent in the same period. The reinvestment of company profits in Uganda is a good sign of investor confidence in the economy. 

Despite the concerns at the beginning of the global recession that our exports were going to decline because of reduced demand in developed countries, this has not materialised. I am happy to report to the nation that our exports of goods and services continue to grow and are now estimated at US $2.8 billion for the Financial Year 2008/2009 compared to 2.6 billion in the Financial Year 2007/2008. (Applause)

Most of the increase was on account of regional informal cross border trade which is estimated at US $1.2 billion in this financial year compared to 1 billion in the Financial Year 2007/2009. This is an annual increase of 16.3 percent. So actually, our exports are increasing by 16.3 percent in spite of the global problems.

Uganda’s export of manufactured industrial products to the region - this is very important - especially Southern Sudan and Congo which account for 70 percent of the informal cross border trade, is estimated at US $831 million in the Financial Year 2008/2009.

When Uganda is exporting industrial products of US $831 million, and I remember that at best, in the first years, around 1995, the money we earned from coffee when the prices were very good was US $500 million. Now, from industrial products, Uganda is earning, in one year, US $831 million, that is not something. However much you put on spectacles of ennugu you cannot fail to see this. (Laughter) 

In that case we shall have to design Braille for the blind where you just touch. (Laughter) If the Speaker allows m,e I will have to bring a Braille machine and write. The blindness of the eyes is not the biggest problem but the blindness of the heart. (Laughter)

There was a slight decline of US $36 million mainly because of fish. While the demand for fish and the price have shot up, the stocks in our lakes had declined but the government is addressing this by strengthening regulation.

The export of maize and beans has increased by 55 percent and 34 percent respectively in this financial year. 

The volume of coffee export shipments increased by 5.2 percent from 181,000 metric tonnes last year to an estimated 191 thousand metric tonnes this financial year - my people should correct this; there is a comma here and not a full stop. (Laughter)

However, the coffee receipts were lower because of the fall in coffee prices on the international market. 

Tea export receipts are also estimated to have increased by 11.3 percent in the same period while export volumes increased by 7.1 percent.

Cotton export receipts registered impressive performance with an increase of nearly 40 percent during fiscal year 2008/2009 while export volumes increased by 89 percent in the same period from about 12,000 metric tonnes in financial year 2007/2008 to 22,500 metric tonnes in the Financial Year 2008/2009.

This strong rebound of the cotton sector is attributed to improved acreage and improved seeds. All this growth in the economy is taking place in spite of the mistake of delaying Bujagali dam some years ago. 

How much more would have the economy grown if those mistakes had not been made? (Laughter) Some people are saying “Awori”, no, I am amazed to hear some of the people talking like this only one day after Namugongo. (Laughter) Yesterday we were at Namugongo being fed and I saw some of the MPs there being fed with the word of God and part of the word of God is that a Saul can become a Paul –(Laughter)- and the Bible also says that those who refuse to repent and persist in their mistakes are the ones who don’t have many chances up there. (Laughter) 

The NRM Government has established a track record of maintaining low inflation since 1992/93. Inflation has averaged at 5 percent per annum for the last two decades. More recently, however, primarily as a result of strong demand from the region, food prices escalated. Up to April 2009, the annual increase in the general price level was 13.4 percent. The price of food including processed food increased by 26.1 percent in the 12 months to April 2009 and while that of beverages increased by 12.6 percent in the same period.

Food crops and related products which include fresh food, milk and flour recorded a general price increase of slightly over 30 percent while the prices of food staples escalated by 66.3 percent per annum in the twelve months to April 2009. The annual inflation level which excludes food, fuel, utilities and electricity because these face volatile price movements commonly referred to as core inflation was 11.3 percent by end of April 2009.

Although oil prices dropped substantially to below 70 dollars a barrel, and subsequently below 40 dollars a barrel, the fall in prices was not immediately passed on to the Ugandans until January 2009. There have also been persistent problems with the oil pipeline between Mombasa and Nairobi and the problem of pirates off the coast of Somalia high jacking ships at sea which has pushed up the cost of transporting oil through the Gulf into the Indian Ocean. These factors resulted into high oil pump prices which translated into persistently high transport costs. 

However, the situation has dramatically improved in recent months. Since December 2008, prices of some known food items started coming down while the rate of increase decelerated in some others. The pump prices of fuel have dropped, that is to say, negative growth by 6.4 percent for the year ending April 2009 compared to an increase of 21 percent recorded in the corresponding period in the previous year. As a result, transport fares increased only by 4.5 percent during the same period which is less than the average inflation rate compared to an increase of 23 percent in the previous year, April 2007 to April 2008.

Communication charges also registered zero growth in the same period but recovered from a 1.5 percent decline a year before. During the period January to April 2009, the monthly general price level of rent, fuel and utilities as a group dropped by 1.5 percent on the average while that of transport and communication fell by 3.0 percent in the same period.

The outlook on inflation is, therefore, positive. With this trend, it is projected that inflation will revert to single digit figures within the course of the next financial year. Owing to sustained demand for foreign currency from both corporate and off-shore players, and high domestic import demand, the shilling weakened or depreciated by 29 percent between April 2008 and April 2009.

Other factors include the general strengthening of the US dollar against major currencies on the international markets since January 2009 reduced remittances from Ugandans working abroad and other current transfers from NGOs. It is important to note that while the shilling has weakened or depreciated between October 2008 and May 2009, the real effective exchange rate, in other words, the relative trade weighted value of the shilling vis-à-vis the currencies of the trading partners which measures the competitiveness of the export sector, strengthened or appreciated in the same period.

On an annual basis, the real exchange rate appreciated or strengthened by 2.6 percent between March 2008 and March 2009. It is important to put what is happening on the exchange rate in a proper perspective. Although the current events in the global economy sparked off the recent exchange rate movements, it is important to note that the shilling sustained general appreciation, that is, strengthening between June 2003 when the exchange rate reached nearly 2000 per one dollar and August 2008. This appreciation made some exports uncompetitive. The Shilling’s gaining value is not all that very good for our economy because if it becomes too strong, it affects our export earnings. The importers are happy but the exporters are not happy. So we must know whom we want to please and where the interest of Uganda lies, does it lie with importers or with the exporters? (Interjections)- This side (the Opposition) says that both are important. Now you can hear where the fundamental mistake is. I hope what they are saying is being recorded because I am going to use it in an explanation to the Ugandans. 

How can you say that importers have the same importance to the economy as exporters? It is not possible! This appreciation made some exports uncompetitive as export producers barely recover their input costs. The recent depreciation therefore has the positive effect of making our export sector more competitive. Therefore, the exchange rate will continue to be determined by supply and demand in the foreign exchange market and there will be no Government shift in the exchange rate policy. Government will not intervene in the foreign exchange market to support the exchange rate at an administratively predetermined level.

The Bank of Uganda will continue to routinely and modestly intervene in the market only to deal with fluctuations which may cause sharp volatility in the exchange rate. This policy stance is to ensure that we preserve our foreign currency reserves currently at $2.4 billion which is equivalent to five months of imports. Our reserves will not be used to subsidise imports as Government strategy for reducing prices is to support increased production in the domestic economy through measures which I am going to explain later. 

In order to address the most critical growth constraints in the economy, Government focussed on increasing resources allocation toward the infrastructure development, particularly roads and energy -(Interjections)- oh, which roads? The honourable member from Lango could answer you there. (Laughter) I hope the Speaker will give him a chance at the right time because constitutionally this is my day and the constitution is very clear that on this day nobody speaks except the Speaker, the Clerk and myself. (Laughter) In order to achieve the twin objectives of increasing expenditure on infrastructure and to prevent fuelling inflation pressures, government will continue to implement efficiency improvement measures in order to create the necessary space to allow increased resource allocation to priority areas. The strategy includes among others ensuring that budget performance is improved through strengthening the link between public spending and results in addition to re-orienting budget allocation more towards targeted priority areas. The specific measures that are being implemented to achieve the above objectives include that expenditure releases are based on credible work plans established on an effective monitoring system to track and evaluate expenditures vis-à-vis intended targets. I have directed the Prime Minister to ensure that the results of each Government agency are discussed by Cabinet on a quarterly basis which the President will chair in person.

Although there have been domestic revenue shortfalls during the current financial fiscal year, planned priority programmes and projects have been implemented without resource constraints. An implementation capacity has been enhanced to improve the speed at which projects and programmes will be implemented.

The NRM Government has since 2006 general elections clearly pronounced itself on the goal for achieving prosperity for all Ugandan households. This has so far and will continue to require Government concerted interventions in the following areas:
1.	The holistic integrated development of agriculture and rural development.
2.	Development and maintenance of infrastructure including rural, national and regional roads, energy and communications.
3.	Development of the human resource through education, skills and vocational training.
4.	 Continued peace and security for all.
5.	Good governance including the fight against corruption and the rule of law.

The ultimate goal as far as agriculture and rural development are concerned is to ensure that rural households in Uganda earn an income of at least Shs 20 million and have livelihoods that enable them meet the basic necessities of life. To-date the following actions pertaining to agricultural development have been implemented.

The restructured National Agricultural Advisory Services, that is, NAADS, has completed the roll-out exercise to cover all districts with a renewed emphasis on ensuring that 30,000 demonstration farmers organised in farmer groups or cooperatives will every year be provided with the necessary planting or breeding inputs also with skills and knowledge to transform their production systems into commercially viable agricultural ventures. This intervention – we had to insist on these six homesteads per parish –(Interjections)- even if they are NRM, they will help to demonstrate because these are demonstration farmers. I have got experience in this matter and that is why I keep inviting you to come and see what we have done in some of the areas. 

The problem in the rural areas is not so much lack of money but lack of knowing what to do. People do not know what to do. Therefore these six homesteads per parish are very crucial so that the other homesteads can learn from them before we roll out money for the others.  I have told some of the people who meet me in the Movement caucus – unfortunately I cannot access some of the people because they belong to other caucuses – I have repeatedly told the Movement people that in – I remember what caused changes in some places like for instance in Ankole. In 1960s there were only 57 ranches in Ankole and 17 in Kabula, which at that time was under Masaka. This was a total of about 70 farmers, but they are the ones who woke us up. My father and I were not part of that ranching scheme, but I remember when I went there in 1965 I saw some of these ranches – at that time I was in senior five – I went and told my father, “No, those people are doing better than we are doing –(Interjections)- okay, it was during Obote’s time but the program had earlier -(Laughter)- the programme had started in 1958 actually by the colonialists and one of the ministers who was involved – (Interruption)– well, I do not want to interfere in the UPC matters. (Laughter) I will tell you another time.

So, these six homes per parish are really very crucial because they will provide a local demonstration nucleus for the whole of the parish. You remember we used to have something we called district farm institute. Now instead of going to the district farm institute, you will now have a local demonstration in your own parish by your own peers.

This intervention will ensure that farmers are able to produce economically viable volumes of produce and can be linked more easily to agro-processing industries and consequently access the market with higher value goods.

By February 2009, 5,875 producer cooperatives across the country had been promoted, registered and developed - an increase of about 900 cooperatives since the resumption of the restructured NAADS Programme in December 2008. 

A further 103 secondary cooperatives had also been promoted, registered and developed for purposes of value addition and collective marketing by February 2009, giving an increase of 65 from end of December 2009. 

Other critical elements to increasing household incomes has been then provision of high yielding pest and disease resistant varieties of planting materials and breeding stock developed through the national agricultural research system. The support to value adding processors of agricultural produce, improving market access and the provision of micro-level finance through savings and credit cooperative organisations is core to this effort.

In respect to these areas, I am glad to report the following: new high-yielding pest-resistant varieties of rice, coffee, banana and cassava have been developed by NARO for multiplication. In order to achieve better market access for farmers to sell their produce at premium prices, the warehouse scheme is being progressively rolled out. Three warehouses have been registered, licensed and are fully operational. They include: Agroways Limited in Jinja, Masindi Seed Growers’ Association in Masindi and Nyakatonzi Growers’ Co-operative Union in Kasese.

The objective of making available microfinance infrastructure has been largely achieved and there are now, currently over 1500 SACCOs across the country with a membership of almost 650,000. By end of December 2008 these SACCOs had been created in every sub county, municipality and town council divisions of the country, except only in 56 local governments out of the 1,085 authorities. 

A total of Shs 65 billion has been lent out by these SACCOs from savings Shs 55 billion and SACCOs’ own share capital of Shs 22 billion. I understand that there are additional 2000 registered, but privately-based microfinance institutions that are providing financial services to Ugandans across the country, bringing the total savings from this sector alone, to over Shs 100 billion.

Mr Speaker, I have also noted with concern the continued ineffectiveness of public servants in government departments and agencies at implementing programmes and projects that we have directed them to do. This is constraining the delivery of much-needed inputs and infrastructure for agriculture and rural development. I advise honourable members to actively get acquainted with the projects and programmes that have been planned for their respective constituencies and for which resources have been provided, but which the public servants are sabotaging for either personal gain, and sheer ineffectiveness. This leads to poor implementation of projects and programmes in rural areas. Let me reiterate that I will not hesitate to take punitive action against public servants who are not performing their duties with utmost commitment and dedication and do not deliver intended results in this sector. (Applause)

When we look at ourselves – the National Resistance Movement leading all the Ugandans, divided up the country into 214 electoral areas, each of which is represented by a member here. It is the duty of the member from each of those 214 areas to ensure that the money allocated to their area reaches where it is supposed reach. In one of our languages; in fact in all our languages we have words like olubimbi or katala. If I do my katala here and I provide the money, I expect honourable members to also do their little katala of following up that money. Of course I will follow it with other methods with the accountants and so on, but it would be good if you could also follow this money.

Mr Speaker, I will turn to three areas of infrastructure that are critical to both immediate and long-term growth, development and socio-economic transformation. These are transportation infrastructure, energy infrastructure and national information technology infrastructure. In direct support to agriculture and rural development, 20,000 kilometres of the 40,000 kilometres of district roads would have received routine maintenance while 850 kilometres will have been re-gravelled and rehabilitated by the end of June this year. This will ensure that our farmers and other traders and business people can access district and nation-wide markets more efficiently without delays and also lower the cost of transportation of rural production.

The Road Fund has also now been fully constituted and in the next financial year will be operationalised to provide road maintenance funding for national district and urban roads and later community roads.

With adequate funding, the road maintenance backlog will be dealt with in the medium term which situation has previously constrained the efficient transportation of goods and produce. 

Honourable members must be on the alert for the restrictive plans and maintenance programmes to be financed by the Road Fund in their districts and constituencies to ensure that they receive their due share of allocated funds and that these funds are used effectively. (Applause) You can do a good job for your area by monitoring this money. This will also be good for you because you will get some popularity at the cost of the state. (Laughter)

At the national level, in this financial year, construction for upgrading to tarmac of Matugga-Semutto-Kapeka Road commenced while similar works continued on the following roads: Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana-Kyanika - somebody was asking, “Where are the roads?” I am now going to tell you or you talk to me well, we can see. (Laughter) Now an hon. Member is telling me about the Mpigi-Kasanje-Kisubi Road, which I have used twice to capture Entebbe. We used it in 1979 and I used it in 1986. Unfortunately there have not been very good MPs from that area -(Laughter)- because in the government there is competition for resources – anyway I know that area and although the representation has got some issues, I will follow it up myself. (Laughter)

Somebody was asking about Soroti-Dokolo-Lira Road. This is now under construction -(Applause)- Kampala-Gayaza-Zirobwe Road -(Applause)- Kampala Northern By-pass (Laughter). The reconstruction of Jinja-Bugiri -(Applause)- and the rehabilitation of Kawempe-Luweero-Kafu roads is near completion. The reconstruction of Kampala-Masaka Mbarara and Busega Mityana roads has commenced. (Applause)

The contracts for the rehabilitation of the following roads have been awarded and work has already started on some: Mbarara-Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna for rehabilitation; Mbarara-Ishaka; Masaka-Kyotera-Nyendo-Villa Maria; Lira-Kamdin road; Kawempe-Kampala; Kampala-Mukono; and Mbarara-Bwiziwera. 

Contracts for the upgrading to tarmac of the following road projects will be awarded during financial year 2009/2010: Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Lamyal Road; Gulu-Atiak-Bibiya-Nimule; Ntungamo-Mirama Hill-Kagamba-Ishaka; Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba -(Applause)- so I think our daughter Bako will now be able to see the road. Kapchorwa-Aswam; Nyakashita-Ibanda-Fort Portal; Mukono-Katosi; Mbarara-Kikagatte; Mukono-Kayunga; Rukungiri-Ishasha; Muyembe-Namaru-Moroto; Jinja-Kamuli; Tororo-Mbale-Soroti; Busia-Malaba-Bugiri; Kafu-Karuma-Gulu. 

In view of the age of the existing bridge across the River Nile at Jinja, the design of a new bridge across the river will also commence while the Aswa-Awoja and Agu bridges will also be rehabilitated. (Applause) The design for the construction into dual-carriage ways on the following roads will also be completed during the next financial year. These are: Kampala-Entebbe, Kampala–Jinja, Kibuye–Mpigi and Kampala Northern by-pass.

During the next financial year, the design for upgrading to tarmac of the following roads will start: Nyendo-Sembabule, Masaka-Bukakata, Mbale-Magale Rwakhakha, Olwiyo-Gulu Kitgum, Hoima-Kesitonya, Mpigi-Kabusoke, Maddu-Sembabule, Musita-Lumino Busia Majanji, Kyenjojo-Hoima Masindi-Kigumba, Tirinyi Pallisa-Kumi Pallisa-Mbale, Moroto-Kotido, Rwekunya Apac Lira Kitgum, Soroti Katakwi Moroto, Namagumba Budadiri Nalugugu, Kamuli Bukungu. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, in order to expedite the implementation and operationalisation of major road projects, I have directed the Ministers of Transport and Finance to consider the development and maintenance of some major roads on a public private partnership basis as a long term strategy of developing and maintaining some of the road corridors. These arrangements will be entered into if alternative free public roads exist. 

Furthermore, the ministries of Finance and Works are supporting the Kampala City Council to study the introduction of a rapid bus transit system through public private partnership. (Applause) This will address the excessive traffic congestion in the greater Kampala metropolitan area which remains a challenge in the transport sector. 

In regard to railway transport, the governments of Kenya and Uganda are concluding the resolution of the problems associated with the Mombasa-Kampala railway to ensure that concessionaire fully operationalises this vital link for trade and transportation of regional goods. 

Studies for reopening of Kampala-Kasese and Tororo-Pakwach railway lines have also started and the development and implementation of the respective Uganda aspects of the East African regional railway master plan will commence next financial year.

We have for a long time talked with the government of Tanzania about the Tanga-Musoma railway line. This is important as an alternative to the Mombasa line. We need to discuss with the government of Congo about the Kasese-Kisangani line and with Rwanda about the Kasese-Gisenyi lines.

The design for the ship to replace MV Kabalega and repair works on MV Pamba and Kawa are also on-going. Government is considering the development of Port Bell and Jinja ports so that they have got the capacity to handle containers as part of Government’s effort to develop the southern route to the port of Dar-es-Salaam. The ferry to Mbulamuti–Nabuganyi that is between Kamuli and Kayunga was also procured during this financial year. So, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker is very happy. (Laughter)

Additional ferries for the following crossings will also be procured in the next financial year: Bukungu, Kagwala, Okile, Muntu, Kumi and Katakwi on Lake Bisinai, Rwampanga, Namasale, Obongi-Magilarok although the area is not well represented by hon. Fungaroo –(Laughter)- Amuru and Rhino camp.

The construction works for the 250 mega watt Bujagali dam and power house are progressing according to schedule and the project is to commence electricity generation in December, 2010.

With respect to Karuma Hydro Power project, construction of a larger sized 700 mega watt dam will commence by December 2010 –(Interjection)- yes, we have to do this because you know there is a problem with some of these companies. The other Norwegian company, Norpak, is a good company, but I think they are businessmen and for them they wanted to construct a dam of 250 mega watts and in so doing they would use only 30 meters of the height but the height is 80 meters. So later on when we understood this we said, “No, we want to use all the 80 meters which will give us a yield of 700 mega watts”. 

Some people were saying that we should do it in phases but when you do it in phases it is very expensive. It is better to do it once and finish with it. So that is why we delayed. We said, “No, you make the studies not for the 250 mega watts but for the 700 mega watts”. That is what they are doing, to dig the soils, and all that, to do the technical studies.

It will be an expensive project, more than one billion dollars but we are saving the money; we have put the money in the Energy Fund and we shall fund it by ourselves –(Applause)- if other friends come in, they are welcome, but they must follow our plan. What we don’t want is to be diverted by endless – you know those Banyankole have their proverbs, they say “endimi nyinji etukurize obushera”, when you are making porridge, somebody says, “put in more water”. Another one says, “No, the water is too much,” another one says, “No, put in more fire” – then the porridge gets spoilt. We need one tongue, the government tongue, not so many tongues especially for energy we shall never make that mistake again. We can compromise in other areas but for energy; no. What we say is what will be done. There will be nobody to –(Applause)- fortunately I have got support from these big numbers of people –(Applause) - and I would welcome, really some support from – because it will be good for their souls also, for God to know that these people supported something right.

So the delay of Karuma is worth it – I was very much in a hurry to start the construction but when I saw the difference in the power yield, I said no, let us wait and do the bigger project. And I wish all of you would support this because it will give us more electricity.

In order to solve the interim power shortages before the Bujagali hydro power project comes on board, construction of two more heavy fuel thermal plants of 10 mega watts at Tororo and 50 mega watts in Jinja will be completed. This is in addition to the 50 mega watt heavy thermal plant that was commissioned in September 2008 and the 50 mega watt diesel plant at Mutundwe.

You need to know that government has achieved a major transformation in electricity generation since the crisis of 2005 by replacing more expensive diesel thermal plants with heavy fuel ones while we progress towards fundamentally resolving the long term energy needs by constructing hydro power plants.   

In the medium term, the cost of electricity to consumers will be more affordable and enable more Ugandan producers and rural households as well to access and use more efficient energy such as electricity with a greater positive impact on the environment.

The following renewable energy projects have been completed and are now producing electricity. Kakira and Kinyara renewable co-generation schemes are currently feeding 12 mega watts and five mega watts respectively on the grid after satisfying their internal demand. Kinyara is planning to upgrade its capacity to 10 mega watts. Those who have been sabotaging my plans for sugar plants should know that they are not only sabotaging the production of sugar but also the production of electricity –(Interjections)- this is a formal occasion of politeness, so when you say who are they, although I know who they are, I will not say, especially after Namugongo. We are all here because yesterday we shook hands at Namugongo to wish each other peace. I will, therefore, not spoil the occasion by pointing fingers. Honourable members know the situation.

This sugar is not just sugar for drinking – it is electricity; it is industrial input. We also have Kisizi micro-rural grid, which was upgraded. Lugazi is now planning to upgrade its capacity to 8 mega watts and all these add to electricity. 

Government has also decided that since the private investor in the Nyagak small hydro power project is experiencing cost overruns, government is going to co-invest in the project so it is commissioned by the end of this year. Therefore, hon. Bako will be having electricity by the end of this year and I am sure she will be able to say “Awodifo–Apoyo”.

Government will continue to implement the rural electrification programme to ensure that all district headquarters, production areas and communities which create nuclei for rural social transformation are supplied with electricity. Good progress is being made as demonstrated by the following: Government has completed the extension of electricity services to Kibaale, Kanungu, and to Kalangala Districts. Government is in the final stages of completing the construction of the following major rural electrification programmes: Corner Kilak, Kalong, Pader, Abim; Fort Portal, Karugutu, Bundibugyo, Nyahuka; Kyotera, Mutukula and Kasensero; Mbarara, Kikagate, Ntungamo; Soroti, Kaberamaido; extension of West Nile mini grid; Bukungu Fish landing site; Buhweju Tea Factory. 

The following schemes have been completed: Rugombe, kyenjojo, Katooke; Munteme, Kagadi; Masaka–Bukakata; and power extension to Oyam District headquarters.

The following townships will also receive electricity through the rural electrification programme next financial year; Kalongo, Corner Kilak, kalaki, Lwala, Bwera, Mpondwe and Mabale, and Kilewa. 

Government has also completed plans for a high voltage transmission line – 132 KV from Opuyo Soroti to supply Katakwi, Moroto, Katikekile, Amudati, Nakapiripirit and Namaru which will be built commencing Financial Year 2010/2011. (Laughter) 

In the petroleum sector, Government has continued to support petroleum exploration in and around Lake Albert. Investment in this sector was about US $500 million as at the end of 2008. Since June 2008, ten additional wells have been drilled and confirmed. These are Tayi Tayi 1, Ngege 1, Karuga 1, Kasameme 1, Kingfisher 2, Kigogole 1, Njiri 1, Jjobi 1, and Rie 1. Some of these will have been front-tested and the remaining ones will be tested in the course in this year.

The new commercial oil discoveries in the country have given us the opportunity to solve Uganda’s energy problem in the long run. In that regard, Government is focusing on the development of a refinery in order to produce a wide range of petroleum products for transportation, power supply and domestic use. 

Government is carrying out a feasibility study to determine the optimum size and type of the refinery that we need. Now when we found this petroleum – well before I have told you the story of petroleum on how in 1986 I refused to sign an agreement with Shell because I did not have any petroleum scientist on my side. Since there was no petroleum scientist , I told Shell that, “I can’t sign an agreement with you because I have nobody on my side who knows anything about petroleum”. That is when I instructed the Minister of Energy to send our young people –(Interjections)– from Uganda –(Laughter)– I could not have sent the ones from Congo because I had no authority over them. (Laughter) I sent these young people who had degrees in chemistry, geology and physics to do masters degree in petroleum studies and they are the ones who discovered this petroleum. 

Now that we have found the petroleum, the debate has been: do we just export crude oil or we build a refinery? Now some people were trying to tell me stories about this and that, but I was not listening to those stories. So recently when I visited Iran, I asked the President of Iran, “Mr President, you have been producing petroleum for a long time. There are some people who say that building a refinery does not make much economic sense. What is your experience?” He told me that in Iran they already had nine refineries and were building another seven so that they could have a total of 16. And here we were being discouraged from building just one; you can see. Some people think that Africa is a play place where people can go and play games, but NRM is not in that league. (Applause)

Government is carrying out, as I have already said, a feasibility study to determine the optimum size and type of refinery that we need. In the short term, the other production scheme is being modified from the earlier concept of having a mini-refinery and limited production of light products such as kerosene, diesel as well as heavy fuel oil to the production of non-associated gas, which will be used for power generation. This we can do quickly because we have found there gas fields, which are by themselves; they are not linked to the crude oil. We can start with these ones straight away to get the gas and use it to produce electricity. 

The scheme will focus on the production of two gas fields: Nzizi and Ngasa, which will be utilised to enhance the country’s electricity needs. So, that will help us to also deal with this issue of electricity. Production of this gas is planned to start towards the end of the year 2010.

Mr Speaker, in 2008 prices of crude broke all-time record high and hit $ US145 per barrel. Within the country, the challenges of supply constraints when the Kenya pipeline could not deliver sufficient requirements of fuel were significant. Therefore, in order to improve our strategic fuel reserves, the Jinja storage tanks will be revamped, upgraded and restocked through a public/private partnership arrangement. The Jinja storage tanks will be integrated into the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline system that is being constructed. A new large storage facility that will serve all oil companies will also be built at the pipeline terminal at Nakilembe, west of Kampala facing Mityana side.

In addition to the Jinja storage and Kampala-Nakilembe tanks, Government will build, in phases, four new regional storage facilities in the central, eastern, north and west of the country starting in Financial Year 2010/2011. Government will stock those facilities to ensure that the country’s fuel security is assured. The storage facilities will be linked with the pipeline network to the oil refinery to be constructed near the oil fields in Western Uganda.

With respect to the extension of the Kenya-Uganda Oil Pipeline from Eldoret to Kampala, the design and environmental impact assessment have been completed and the required funding for the project has been secured. Construction has started and the extension will be completed in the second half of 2010. If the Kenya Government agrees, the pipeline will be constructed with ability for reverse flow to transport the products of future refinery in Muttanzige area – the real name for Lake Albert.

So what we are going to discuss with the Kenya Government – because once we build our refinery, we are not going to be importing petroleum from Mombasa. Now, the question will be: what will the pipeline do? And the ones who have been in the pipeline are worried. They are saying that now if we build a pipeline for a country, which will be producing its own petroleum in a few years’ time, what will be the purpose? That pipeline was designed for Uganda and the whole area getting petroleum from outside, but we are going to produce our own petroleum. So what happens to the pipeline? 

Therefore, what I am proposing to Kenya Government is that if they agree, then the pipeline is constructed in such away that when we start refining our petroleum here there is what we call reverse flow. Instead of bringing from Mombasa to here only, it will take from –(Laughter)– Muttanzige to Nairobi at least, then the Kenyans can distribute among themselves. (Laughter)

During my address to the National Executive Committee recently and also my address to the European Union African Union Summit in Lisbon, I pointed out that I cannot accept Uganda to continue being part of the suicidal and rather unserious schemes promoted in Africa.

While the United States uses 14,000 kilowatt hour per capita of electricity, in Africa, the kilowatt hour per capita on the average is only 547. This kilowatt hour per capita, KWH per capita, is a measurement of how much electricity each one of us is using. You take the electricity produced in the country and divide it by the population. So, the kilowatt hour per capita of the United States is 14,000. The kilowatt hour per capita of the whole of Africa is 547. This figure includes South Africa which has got a lot of power. Uganda’s kilowatt hour per capita is now 60 and the United States’ is 14,000. All the African countries are like this except for South Africa. 

In 1986, the total power being generated by Uganda was only 60 megawatts. The total installed capacity of electricity generation in Uganda today is now 560 megawatts if you include the thermal stations which I have just mentioned. 

When Bujagali is completed and it adds another 250 megawatts, the total reinstalled capacity for the whole country will be 8.10 megawatts. Even when we add Karuma, the power generated will not be enough to cope with the needs of the population of Uganda which will be 54 million people by 2025.

In order to know the amount of power, we need to look at other countries, for instance, the first world countries and the middle income countries. A country like the United Kingdom produces 55,000 megawatts to support its population of 60 million people as well as its industries. A country like Malaysia, a middle income country, generates 17,000 megawatts today. If we take the target of a middle income country like Malaysia which has got a kilowatt hour per capita of 3,330, you can see that our population of 54 million by 2025 will need to generate at least between 17,000 and 24,000 megawatts. 

So, what is happening in Africa is just a joke and I do not want to be part of this joke. (Laughter)  I am because I was sharing power with some other people. (Laughter) Some people made me to appear like a joker because I brought the plans and they were stopped and I did not want to go back to the bush and start fighting. (Laughter) 

You see, hon. Members, this is very serious because even when we talk of Karuma, after Bujagali the total production, if you add these diesel stations, will be 810 megawatts. Even if you add Bujagali, 700 megawatts, that will be about one thousand something. This cannot run a modern country. A country like Malaysia is now generating 17,000 megawatts and here we are. We spent years talking about one project of only 700 megawatts. This is not serious. 

I do not want to believe that there are people who do not want Africa to develop. I do not want to believe that and that is why these days I do not listen to anybody. The only people I want to mobilise are the Members of Parliament who support - because I cannot carry out these programmes alone, constitutionally. (Applause) 

I told all my friends - for instance when we were going to construct Bujagali some people were beginning to bring stories about the environment and also that there were some spirits. (Laughter) I told everybody concerned that this dam would be built whether anybody wanted or not. And we are going to build these dams. 

The only need is to mobilise ourselves and sort out the confusion among ourselves. Otherwise, I do not want to believe that this is a conspiracy to keep Africa - all these people, they know this. They know it. A small country like Norway, which has got only 4 million people, generates 26,000 megawatts. Imagine that! 26,000 megawatts for 4 million people and here we are, already 30 million, and we are talking about one little dam of 200 megawatts and it takes 10 years to solve that? This is not serious. 

So I am bringing out these figures to show you that - those Banyankole have their proverb, “Otakumanya ngu bamutsigyire ati bandinzire” meaning, “The one who does not know that he is left behind thinks his friends are waiting for him.” (Laughter)

The world has left us and we should really take it as treason for anybody to try to sabotage any power project in Uganda. As I say, for this 17,000 the plan should now target production of  20,000 mega watts or 24,000 mega watts by 2025, it should be in the plans and we build and build. This must be the minimum we must aim at. As I say, this is the minimum. We in fact need much more energy. Therefore, I am informing the hon. Members of Parliament, the Ministry of Energy is already directed by myself to develop accelerated power development programmes that will see us use all the sites of the Nile: Ayago, Murchison Falls, et cetera and all the sites on the small rivers: Bugoye, Muzizi, Kikagate, et cetera -(Laughter)- all the gas and heavy fuel potential and all the other sources. 

The honourable members should know that all the rivers in Africa have a hydro power potential of only 456,000 mega watts. This is not enough to power a modernized African society of 1.3 billion people by 2015. To show how really Africa is in a big problem, I have taken the trouble to find out all the potential of the rivers in Africa and the potential is 456,000 mega watts. Of course very little of it is now developed. But even if all of this potential is developed, it will not be enough for the African population. Why? In the United States, there are only 316 million people now but they are consuming 1 million mega watts of electricity. Here we are, the whole potential of all the rivers in Africa is only 456,000 mega watts – the potential, never mind what is being produced now. 

So what is the plan of Africa, of Uganda? We shouldn’t go on like this. Fortunately, the people of Uganda gave me a chance to lead this little place –(Laughter)- and I am going to use it to show the rest of Africa that we cannot go on sleeping like this. And I told my partners outside that we are going to build these dams whether you like it or not -(Applause)- it is not up to you. The present plans and talk are mere jokes. We need real seriousness, cheap energy and transport will mean lower costs of doing business in Africa and therefore more competitiveness. 

The first phase of National Backbone Infrastructure and e-government infrastructure project was completed this financial year, Mr Speaker. The National Data Transmission backbone infrastructure when completed in 2010 will consist of 2100 kilometre fibre-optic network linking all the major towns throughout Uganda. The data transmission backbone will ensure that high bandwidth connection is available in all the major towns of Uganda at a reasonable rate. The first phase was completed in 2008 and involved the laying of 168 km of fibre-optic cable to link the towns of Mukono, Bombo, Entebbe and Jinja to Kampala and the establishment of an e-government network across 27 ministries and departments. This has improved communication within Government through use of data, voice and video conferencing applications leading to improved efficiency and reduced costs of communication.

In the next financial year, the second phase of the National Data Transmission backbone project will involve the laying of 1,500 kilometres of optical fibre cable to link the towns of Mayuge, Iganga, Bugiri, Busia, Mbale, Tororo, Luweero, Nakasongola, Masindi, Gulu, Mpigi, Masaka, Mbarara, Ntungamo, Kabale and Katuna.

Phase three of the project to be implemented in financial year 2010/2011 will involve the laying of 408 kilometres of fibre optic cable to connect the towns of Kumi, Soroti, Lira, Bushenyi and Kasese while the rest of the districts will be connected by terrestrial links.

Development of the human resource remains central in the NRM Government’s Prosperity-for-All programme. In the past, we have universalized primary and secondary education and ensured that access to health facilities throughout the country is made much easier by availing facilities and removing user fees.

In education, Mr Speaker, Government remains committed to transforming the Ugandan society by prioritizing the provision of basic education. We have continued to register positive achievements as illustrated by the following: under Universal Primary Education, the number of children enrolled in primary school stood at 7.5 million in 2008 representing a percentage of 143 percent from 3.1 million in 1996. 

There has also been a reduction of gender disparity in access to education at primary level which now stands at 49.9 percent for girls and 50.1 percent for boys. So now it is almost 50:50 between the boys and girls.

Another achievement, in the area of provision of basic education to a total of 65,000 special needs pupils in a bid to promote inclusiveness in the primary education system. Further more, the thematic curriculum countrywide which emphasized the acquisition of desired skills for all Ugandan children has been rolled out countrywide. To ensure effectiveness and efficiency in implementation of this policy, about 14,000 head teachers and 28,000 primary teachers have already been trained for this purpose.

However, not withstanding the continued achievements under UPE, inefficiency has continued to be a problem due to pupil absenteeism and unacceptable drop-out rates. The primary school drop out rate currently at 7.8 percent and the low completion rate of only 52 percent requires decisive action to keep children in school. Education demands a joint responsibility between the State and parents to contribute to the education of the children. Parents have not yet taken their responsibility of providing their children with meals to ensure that children do not go through the school day hungry.

This negatively impacts on the children’s learning achievement. It is important that both the State and parents all work together to put an end to these shortcomings. Here I am not talking of compulsory lunch money – I know some people have been agitating for that because they want to win tenders –(Laughter)- but we should look for other ways of how to feed the children without imposing fares on the parents. We can look at entanda - what in our other language we call peke and other forms of packed lunch.

I also understand that the habit of teacher absenteeism continues to plague the system with about 20 percent of the teachers not being present at school or actually in class teaching. With the government’s recent increase in teachers’ salaries to a minimum of Shs 200,000 per month, teachers now have no excuse to do other things when they are supposed to be in school. Teacher absenteeism must be stamped out decisively and I have directed the Minister of Education to ensure that Education Standards Agency and the district inspection service are immediately revitalised to penalise truant teachers. 

Following the introduction of the USE in 2007, I am glad to state that the proportion of pupils proceeding from primary to secondary level has increased from 46 percent in 2006 to 69.3 percent in 2008. Enrolment in the USE programmes has grown from 317,000 students in secondary schools in 2008 to now 574,000 in 2009 for classes Senior 1 to Senior 3. 

In order to ensure quality and relevance, the education sector will review the secondary education curriculum starting with a reduction of subjects from subject number of 42 to 18 subjects out of which each school will offer a curriculum menu of 14 subjects. Double shift teaching has also been introduced in 92 over enrolled schools in order to ensure effective utilisation of resources under USE.

Under the public-private partnership, the number of private secondary schools that are partnering with Government to avail secondary education to children from poor and rural families has increased from 363 in 2007 to 550 in 2009. 

It is not enough to train a large number of educated people without creating jobs for them. Job creation for a work force already educated and skilled includes modernisation of agriculture as already described above, building more industries, attracting service companies, promoting small scale industries, promoting cottage industries and artisanship as well as other forms of self employment. Most of these need cheap electricity, good transport network and cheap credit. There are some cottage industries that may not require electricity for example hand looms; these will also be promoted. The Minister of Finance will say more on the issue of job creation during her budget speech.  

With respect to the health sector, Government has continued the construction of health centre IIIs at every sub-county equipping them and providing them with the necessary personnel and drugs. A total of 118 health centre IVs have had their theatres completed and equipped. Twelve more theatres for health centre IVs will be equipped this year and another 11 in the Financial Year 2009/2010. I would like to encourage the Members of Parliament and the public to visit these facilities and report any anomalies including drug stock outs and absentee health workers. 

You should spy on these people as a Member of Parliament and go without being announced and drop in. Why do you like ceremonies to first announce yourself, “The hon. Member of Parliament will come to visit us on this day”, and then they slaughter a goat, some chicken –(Laughter)- for Ladit. If you want to help our people, go unannounced and drop in and record everything you find there and when you come tell the minister of health; we shall just lock up these people and they will stop. Nobody is surprising these people and you should do that as Members of Parliament. 

I thought we had agreed in the Movement Caucus – that little package we agreed –(Interjections)- no, Mr Speaker, protect me from a small minority who are imputing improper motives on me. (Laughter) The “ka-package” I am talking about – you all got it. You remember we agreed and it was operationalised through the Parliamentary Commission, hon. Lumumba is there - about how many times the Member of Parliament should visit his/her constituency. This is the “ka-package” I am talking about. But some of the people have got minds which are malicious. That “ka-package” operationalised through the Parliamentary Commission, not NRM, you should use it to surprise these people. Do not announce yourselves. You just drop in and you will be surprised.

With respect to regional referral hospitals, funds are now being disbursed directly to those hospitals which in turn draw their priorities with guidance from the Ministry of Health. Masaka, Mbarara, Arua and Fort Portal Referral Hospitals have already embarked on the rehabilitation work, while the remaining ones are in the tendering stages.

In view of the need to achieve great efficiency at Mulago Hospital, I have directed the ministers of Health and Finance to develop the National Health Referral Service at Mulago into a public/private partnership –(Interjections)– you will discuss it more with the minister when she comes here.

Mr Speaker, although our country was declared to be polio free a couple of years ago, a number of polio cases have recently been detected. The Ministry of Health and other stakeholders responded immediately and an immunization campaign for all children of five years and below has been enforced. I thank all those parents and guardians who have heeded to this important call and brought children for immunization. I must however caution the few individuals who tell parents that there is something sinister whenever there is a general call for immunization. We cannot afford to have our children exposed to preventable diseases on account of persons who de-campaign health programmes for selfish ends. Local leaders at all levels should be on the look out, expose, resist and counter such negative elements.

Last year I reported that the security situation in the country was excellent. I further stated that the whole country was peaceful and would remain peaceful. (Applause) I am happy to report that situation still remains excellent as far as security is concerned. (Applause)

With respect to ending years of strife brought on by Kony, a joint force from the Democratic Republic of Congo, Southern Sudan and Uganda launched an attack on Kony in Garamba mainly because of the brutality he was meting out on the people in some areas of DRC and Southern Sudan. Although Kony was not captured or killed, his infrastructure was destroyed. A number of his commanders were decimated while others surrendered and many abductees were freed. (Applause)

This is no mean achievement. Those who are unjustifiably cynical only need to appreciate that as a result of that attack, Kony will not be able to mobilise and attack Uganda again. I can tell you that Kony will never attack Uganda again –(Applause)– and by the way nobody will attack Uganda –(Interjections)– if he values his own security.

The few attacks that Kony is trying to carry out in the DRC will be dealt with by the Congolese Army assisted by MONUC and the UPDF Intelligence squads that are there continuing with their work under the leadership of the Congolese army.

With continued peace in Northern Uganda and Karamoja, Government has over the last twelve months scaled up the resettlement of internally displaced persons. Consequently by the middle of March this year almost 1.5 million internally displaced persons had returned home and had been fully resettled. The 500,000 persons remaining in the IDP camps will have been resettled by December this year.

Over the year Government has completed the demining of Teso and Lango sub-regions of remnants of Kony’s landmines and an unexploded ordinance to facilitate safe return of people from IDP camps. The mining experts are currently deployed in the Acholi sub-region and it is expected that they will complete the clearance of that sub-region by September this year.

Government has earmarked an additional Shs 100 billion for the full scale implementation of the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP), which is meant to give affirmative action to the districts that have suffered insurgency and cattle rustling in the past. This figure does not include the huge figure we are going to use on Karuma – probably US $1.5 billion and roads like those of Gulu, Nimule, Arua, Oraba, et cetera.

In response to the perennial hunger in Karamoja, Government has produced a comprehensive Karamoja Action Plan for food security 2009 to 2014. It focuses on a zoning programme based on the competitive advantages of the different parts of the sub-region.

Uganda has continued to live in peace with all her neighbours and fully supports the aspiration of the East African Community. That is why issues like Migingo Island, which have been overblown by the press, can and must be solved peacefully. (Applause)

In order to strengthen further the East African integration, negotiations of the protocol for the establishment of the East African Community common market are ongoing with a view to having a common market in place early next year.

In October 2008 Uganda hosted the first ever Tripartite Summit of the Heads of State of the East African Community, of COMESA and of SADAC. This was the first step towards minimizing and eventually eliminating the contradictions brought by the overlapping membership to the three regional economic groupings. The summit agreed, among other things, to work towards the harmonization of trade policies and practices within the region. It further agreed to a joint economic infrastructure development as well as cooperation on policies related to industrialisation, competitiveness, financial management and payment systems as well as development of capital markets. 

Last year Uganda presented her report on Africa Peer Review Mechanism at the African Review Forum in Egypt. The report was received very well and resulted into the adoption of a plan of action for implementation in accordance with international codes and standards. Recently a new council for the peer review mechanism was inaugurated. It is working closely with the National Planning Authority and other relevant institutions. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, you are thanked for the work you are doing both as a legislature as well as the oversight body. (Applause) The work accomplished since the last State of the Nation Address includes: the passing of 18 Bills, 32 motions for resolutions, 27 reports considered and adopted, 7 petitions considered, 38 ministerial statements presented and debated.

The following Bills, which Parliament passed during the last two months, are of great importance because of the matters they are to deal with. These are: the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2009, the Uganda National Health Research Organisations Bill, 2006, the Anti-Corruption Bill, 2009, and the Uganda and Immigration Control Bill, 2008. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the position of the Movement Government as stated in the NRM Election Manifesto 2006 is zero tolerance to corruption. (Applause) That remains our position. There are those who tried to question – tema mutwe instead of temangalo -(Laughter)- you can hear the malice of some of these people. Instead of cutting the hand they are planning to cut the head. Now you see! (Laughter) 

If there is anybody who can fight corruption in Uganda, it is the NRM. (Applause) Why do I say so? I say so because the NRM has a proven track record -(Interjections)- at one time Uganda was famous for extra judicial killings -(Interjections)- and who stopped the extra judicial killings? If we can stop the killings of people, we shall stop the killings of money. (Laughter) That remains our position. 

In my speech on Labour Day, 1st May 2009, in Soroti, I stated that the remaining war that must be fought relentlessly and won is that one against corruption because we have finished those wars with terrorists. The real war remaining is against corruption.

Yes, some of the NRM people are corrupt -(Interjections)- but many of the Opposition Members are also very corrupt. (Laughter) This is because some of the districts are managed by the Opposition! I have been going around many of these districts and the other day I wrote an article in the papers where I pointed out that I have seen some districts handled by NRM which are doing very well. At least they showed me some of the buildings they had built with the money we sent them. Now I am trying to see one district controlled by the Opposition where there is comparable performance - (Interjections)- I am dying to see one. If I see one I will congratulate them. 

For instance, I would like to see the one which is like Wakiso. You know that man there in Wakiso, our chairman, has built huge buildings using this money which we send them. You know these conditional and unconditional - you know those monies. There is even the new district of Isingiro -(Interjections)- the time I was there I was really surprised. So, Opposition, please I would like to see what the Soroti man has done. When I go there, I would like to see it. So, Members of the Opposition, although you do not control the whole country, there are some small areas you control. Show that you are good there. You see, they have now kept quiet!

During the period under review, our commitment to fighting corruption wherever it may exist is demonstrated by the following:
1.	The enactment of the National Audit Act, No.7, 2008 which gave the Office of the Auditor-General autonomy and more strength.
2. 	The establishment of a special court to try corruption cases. The court has two High Court Judges and is fully operational.
3. 	The presentation to Parliament, of the Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008. If enacted into law, it will replace the Prevention of Corruption Act of 1970 which is no longer in tandem with the prevailing conditions under which sophisticated crimes are being committed.
4. 	The presentation to Parliament, of the Whistle Blower Protection Bill, 2008. If enacted into law it will provide enough protection and encouragement for the members of the public and public servants to actively participate in the reporting, investigation and prosecution of corruption cases. 

The training of 421 officers from the Office of the Inspector-General of Government, the Director of Public Prosecutions and CID, sharpened their skills and capacity to deal with corruption cases. 

While Government will do all it can, the war against corruption must be fought by everybody. As it may be appreciated, the successes we were able to register in the fight against AIDS were as a result of collective effort by all of us, with the National Resistance Movement giving the lead. This should and can happen in the fight against corruption.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, all the foregoing show that our country continues to make positive steps in the development of the different sectors. (Applause) Nevertheless, this is no cause for complacency. We are still a long way from becoming the modern society we are aspiring to become. 

Conscious of the challenges posed by the current international economic crisis, let us double our efforts and work harder. We should look to others to supplement our efforts instead of thinking that they will be the ones to solve our problems. All leaders, political or otherwise, should guide the people to refrain from mixing politics with development programmes. (Applause)

I reiterate my appeal to all hon. Members of Parliament and leaders both political and civic to support all efforts that are being put in to realize prosperity for all. We all must recognize that poverty knows no tribal affiliation or political orientation. It is a challenge and duty to all of us to get our brothers and sisters out of the unacceptable levels of poverty and have them engaged in gainful employment that will enable them to lead a decent life. Those with constructive criticism must come up with proposals with a view of sorting out the issues arising.

Finally, let us at all times remind ourselves of the duties a citizen of Uganda which among others state that it shall be a duty of every citizen - and this is in the Constitution - to be patriotic and loyal to Uganda and promote its well-being; to engage in gainful work for the good of that citizen, the family and the common good; and to contribute to the national development.

I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

HON. MEMBERS: No change! No change!

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda and the distinguished invited guests assembled here, I wish to sincerely thank you for the State of the Nation address you have just delivered to us in compliance with the Constitution of Uganda. (Applause) 

I thank you for the account you have made to the nation; giving the activities and programmes your government and other private actors have been able to carry out in the current financial year and the plans for the next year which is to commence soon. It is good for Parliament in that you have been able to deliver the address on time and just a few days from the National Budget Speech scheduled for Thursday, 11th June, 2009. 

The contents of your address especially those concerning the future development plans will cause the hon. Members of Parliament to attentively listen to the speech to find out whether the Budget will be friendly to the promised development plans. Parliament is ready to positively support all plans and programmes intended to up lift the living standards of the people of Uganda. (Applause) Hon. Members of Parliament will soon have an opportunity to extensively debate the address.

Your Excellence, I wish to thank all our guests for honouring this occasion marking the beginning of the Fourth Session of the Forth year of the Eighth Parliament and receiving of the State of the Nation as a constitutional address. In a special way, I highly commend my brother the Rt hon. Abdi Abudrahman, the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly and Members of the East African Legislative Assembly for his gracing the occasion by his personal presence in a true spirit of East African co-operation. (Applause) 

Your Excellency the President and invited guests, traditionally this kind of occasion is marked in two venues. (Laughter) Starting with the chambers, that is where we are, and then in the Parliamentary Gardens. (Applause) His Excellency the President has kindly agreed to be there. 

Before the honourable members proceed to the gardens, you should proceed to the steps of the main entrance for a group photograph with His Excellency the President. Invited guests, please do not go away; go to the second venue. (Laughter) 

The House is adjourned until 11th June at 2.00 p.m. to receive the Budget Speech, which will be at Serena International Conference Centre. This has been requested for and using my powers, I agreed to the call. (Laughter) Please, let us have the National Anthem.

The National Anthem

(Two verses)

(The House rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 June 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

