Thursday, 01 June 2006

Parliament met at 10.55 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you but I regret that we could not start on time because there was a delegation from Kenya, which I have just been meeting. It raised a number of questions, which I have been answering; delaying the start of the proceedings. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF 
THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we dealt with the general report, which gave us the background or reasons or policy behind the suggested amendments to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I think we now consider the details of those proposed amendments. 

I believe that you have read the report and internalised the proposed amendments, as well as the main document of rules, which we are trying to amend. I suggest that the best way to deal with this is to consider it page by page. If there is anything that one wants to propose we add to those amendments, you will be free to say so. That is how we shall proceed. I believe you read these documents because I know you have the culture of reading. I have no reason to doubt you.  

10.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Omwony Ojwok): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since yesterday’s deliberations, we have interacted in order to establish what is the easiest and most effective way of proceeding today. I would like to draw your attention once more to the fact that we have three documents: the original Rules of Procedure and the draft Rules of Procedure that were produced by the committee during the Seventh Parliament, which was handed over to us as the basis for moving on to discuss the Rules of Procedure. These draft rules are actually an attempt to improve on the original draft and when you study it closely you will realise that there were even efforts to restructure it in order to take into account the new circumstances. 

The third document is our own report, which contains proposals for amendments to the Rules of Procedure but which Rules of Procedure are in the blue spiral bound book.  

Therefore, at this stage I would like to request that we focus our attention on the draft rules that were produced by the Seventh Parliament, and we compare them with our draft amendments or our report. That way we shall see what needs to be improved upon on the basis of the work of the committee that was set up when we had a meeting here. 

You will notice for example that if we start on page 12, which is the immediate page, this constitutes the interpretation section of the Rules of Procedure and in this interpretation section there are two issues to consider: one is the words or terminologies that are to be defined but which we have not considered to change. For example the term “arms”, which means firearms; my committee has not considered it necessary to change that but there are other words where we have proposed changes. Those we will look at and make the necessary changes.

On the other hand, there are words that were not there at all in the interpretation section. We have proposals in our report to make the necessary adjustments to them, therefore, we shall proceed page by page. Members will indicate which words require to be interpreted, if any. I think for the time being I could limit myself to that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on interpretation, the committee in its report has indicated the terms they want to define on page 6 of the report. Let us hear from the Leader of the Opposition. 

11.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the interpretation I propose that in (b) in the definition of Chief Whip the word “person” should be replaced with “Member” because a person could be anybody.

THE SPEAKER: This is the top page of the Rules of Procedure on the proposed amendments. He is saying that instead of “person” we use “member”. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, I think the good way in which we could approach this matter is if the chairperson of the committee systematically goes through the words that need to be –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. You are the one who proposed this. You gave us what you wanted to say in writing. Now it is the other people to propose changes.

11.06
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (NRM, Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, yesterday I tried to give a more elegant definition of the parties not in Government, by avoiding an impression that they are hostile. I suggested that we call them minority parties meaning they are not in Government. In that reasoning I would propose, therefore, that: “Chief Whip” means a member appointed by the party in Government hereafter called “Government Chief Whip”, or a member appointed by a major minority party to Government having the greatest numerical strength, hereafter called “Minority Chief Whip.”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we cannot amend a statute or an Act of Parliament in these rules.  What you are doing is to amend a Bill, which we passed. If the term, which we used in a law, is “opposition”, we cannot amend it while making these rules. What we can do subsequently is to move an amendment in that law and once we do, they will be consequential amendments, but not now.

11.08
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri, FDC): Mr Speaker, I would like to make an amendment to the interpretation (b) sub-section (i), which reads, “A member appointed by the party in opposition to the Government and having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament herein after –(Interruption)   

THE SPEAKER: Which one are -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Sub-section (i), the definition here is not in consonance with the Administration of Parliament Act, which we enacted recently.  Therefore, it should read “chief opposition whip” and not “opposition chief whip”. If it is “chief opposition whip”, then it will be in consonance with the Administration of Parliament Act, Article 6(i).

THE SPEAKER: Okay. If that is what is in the law, there is no argument.

MR NASASIRA: I think we are causing ourselves problems for nothing, Mr Speaker. Why don’t we in (b) define these whips as they are defined in the law so that we separate them? We shall define chief government whip and later define chief opposition whip.

THE SPEAKER: You want to split the -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: We should split (b) so that each definition is clear.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, do you have a problem with that?

MR OJWOK:  Mr Speaker, there is no problem.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, we separate it but use the language of the Act.  

MR TUMWEBAZE: In (b) I would like to suggest that “chief whip” should only be a reserve for the party in government so that these other parties call theirs only “whip”.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we have agreed on is to edit and use the language in the Act.  

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In (d), the committee has proposed a definition of “Independent Members” to mean, “A Member who does not belong to any political party or organisation”. There is a problem with that definition because it does not derive from what the Constitution says about an Independent Member. Article 72(4), which provides for Independent Members reads, “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organisation or political party.” That does not mean that the person does not belong to a party or does not hold a card of a party but that the person is free to stand without the sponsorship of parties. Therefore, in defining an “Independent Member”, it would be more appropriate to define it in the context of what is provided for because there was no verification as to whether somebody abandoned parties before he stood. We could say, “Members elected independently or members who were not sponsored by parties” rather than assuming that they do not belong to political parties, which is an assumption not backed by the law.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I beg to be helped. How does that relate to Article 83(h), which states, “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament if having been elected to Parliament as an independent candidate that person joins a political party?” The professor’s definition seems to assume that a Member should belong to some party although he stood as an Independent. If I have been elected as an Independent Member and I belong to some party, doesn’t that disqualify me according to this provision of the Constitution?

DR OKULO EPAK: Hon. Malinga actually said what I wanted to say. If we went by hon. Latigo’s expert constitutional interpretation, that particular provision would fall by the wayside.  Therefore, I support the definition provided in the interpretation by the committee. Thank you.        

THE SPEAKER: I think it is clear here. One does not belong to a party and he could not say, “I am FDC, I am NRM”. As far as the Chair is concerned, we regard him as independent and we could lift the veil and say, “Previously, where did you belong?” I think that is what it means.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, bearing your clarification in mind, supposing we defined an Independent Member as “a member elected independent of any political party or political organisation”; just as a paraphrasing from the Constitution, to fit into the definition in the rules? This would cure the confusion this is creating. 

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, is he making it clearer? Do you have any objection to the proposal by hon. Kamuntu? Does it cause any harm?  

MR OJWOK: Mr Speaker, the proposal seems to add some clarity. However, the question of belonging is what the committee was tracing, the “who does not belong to any political party” - therefore, if the two are put together, there is no problem.

THE SPEAKER: I think what was bothering him is that one would say, “But you are telling a lie because it is true you stood as an independent. I know your card number. You belong to a party.” I think this is what is bothering him. He is saying, “As far as we are concerned, that is the person who stood.” How he was elected will determine this category of independence.  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I think when we are defining an expression we have to define it in its totality. You cannot actually define it in isolation. Therefore, we have to combine 72(4) with 83(h), and that is why we have the definition and I do not think we should depart from that.

THE SPEAKER: What is in his mind is supposing somebody says “I know your number. Don’t you belong to the party?”  Why don’t we say how you came?  

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: If somebody challenged me to the effect that he knew my number, it would depend on when I got that number. If I stood as an independent when I still had a number, I should have resigned my party membership. However, if I come to Parliament and acquire a number of a party, then I automatically get disqualified from the House. I do not see how it applies.

THE SPEAKER: But why are we tied up with this? Is it a serious matter? I put the question to the proposal by Prof. Kamuntu. Would you like to repeat what you said?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, what I had said was that an Independent Member as defined here would mean, “A Member elected independent of any political organisation or political party”.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall vote by a show of hands. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE SPEAKER: The position is as follows: two abstentions, 19 against and those for are 112. The ayes have it.  

(Question agreed to.)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move an amendment to the definition of Independent Member in order to take care of both Articles 72(4) and 83(h) of the Constitution. The definition will read, “An Independent Member means one who stands for an election as a candidate independent of any political organisation or political party and does not join a political party or political organisation.” Article 83(h) is extremely important when we are defining the issue of Independents especially in as far as their conduct in the House is concerned. I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: In the last part you have said it will not happen. Constitutionally, you will lose your seat, therefore, it is provided for because he cannot be independent when he has joined a party. He cannot; after his election.  

MRS MWESIGYE: Yes, Mr Speaker, we are defining this for purposes of clarity. Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, Article 83 is about the tenure of office of Members, not about their character. Article 83(1)(h) of the Constitution provides thus; “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament if, having been elected to Parliament as an independent candidate, that person joins a political party.” This has nothing to do with your character. I think it is the definition as approved initially that gives you the character of who an Independent Member is. Therefore, the proposed amendment is not necessary because the character of the Independent Member was defined in the proposal that we passed.

THE SPEAKER: That is the explanation. Do we need to put this to the vote?  

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Could we now say that the proposals by the committee on the first page are subject to the amendment?  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to introduce a definition to the phrase “members not aligned” because it is not defined.

THE SPEAKER: Where is that?

MR EKANYA: The phrase “not aligned” is on page –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you deal with it when we come to it?  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, are we going to - I was thinking that we define it here in the interpretation.

THE SPEAKER: Should we need it then there will be a consequential amendment of the interpretation. Therefore, I put the question to the proposals by the committee on page six as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omwony Ojwok let us proceed on language. Should I put the question on language?  I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to 3, about the election of the Speaker. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the election of the Deputy Speaker.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the general authority of the Speaker. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question on deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, those amendments have been passed. Is there any comment or any amendment on the proposals on page 8?  

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, rule 8(c) on page 8 of the report proposes thus: “An Independent Member shall notify the Speaker about the side of the House he or she prefers to sit.” I was just thinking of the English word “prefers” and I thought that word was vague. You could prefer and still sit on the other side at any one moment. But if we became specific by saying, “wishes to sit” so that he or she affirms the side that he or she has chosen rather than “prefers.” “Prefers” means you could also sit on the other side.  

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, there is no problem we that.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR GORDON KATENDE: On the same rule, I propose to add “at the beginning of the session” at the end so that it reads; “An Independent Member shall notify the Speaker about the side of the House he or she wishes to sit at the beginning of the Session”, to avoid interchanging in between sessions.

THE SPEAKER: He is an Independent Member and could change. Why do you tie him?  

MR KATENDE: Mr Speaker, there should be order. Otherwise, this week they will be clogging the Speaker to sit this side and the other week they are changing.

THE SPEAKER: Is there anything wrong with that? He is independent. Do we need to vote on that? Does it matter if he changes after three months? I think there is no harm. Let us leave it as it is.

MR EJUA: Mr Speaker, I would like some more clarification. The other time you said that soon the Government would work on the infrastructure and then Independents would have somewhere to sit. It seems this matter is not well settled. People continue to see Independents with reservations. Maybe you could assure us of any developments, because we might adopt this and then soon after we find we are in another infrastructure. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see capital development is not something that comes in a day or two. Our wish is that we have that structure but when we get it then we shall rearrange. For the time being, let us use the facilities we have. There will be no problem. When we get it then that will be okay.

MR OKECHO: This issue of notifying the Speaker in this particular statement is - I think I need more clarification. Do we have to write to the Speaker or I could simply tell him, “I want to be on this side?” 

Secondly, I have been informed that even informing the Clerk is like informing the Speaker. Is this true?

THE SPEAKER: Well, provided you inform me in writing. However, finding me in the corridors and saying, “I want to sit on that side” -(Laughter)- there has to be a record. When you write to the Clerk, he is the keeper of that record. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, for avoidance of doubt we could add that “An Independent Member shall notify the Speaker in writing about the side of the House she or he wishes to sit”, to avoid any denial.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KIYINGI: My concerns are on page 8 in rule 8. There is a proposal to redraft the rule to say that the seats to the right hand of the Speaker shall be reserved –(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: I have an input about the sitting arrangement but we appear to be moving to another amendment. 

THE SPEAKER: He is still on the Floor. I will give you an opportunity to make your proposal later.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker: “The seats to the right hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of Government Business and Members of the party in government.” This is supposed to be a redrafting of rule 8 (2), which clearly makes a distinction between the front bench and the backbench. I do not know whether the intention here is to have or to do away with the frontbench and backbench. This distinction is maintained when it comes to the side of the opposition. I do not know why it is not maintained for the Frontbench.  

The other issue is with regard to rule 8. I do not know whether I could move –(Interruption) 

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, this provision was a result of careful discussion taking into account past experience but also the concrete realities of the House as it is now. The past experience was that it was based on the assumption that there would be enough space on the Frontbench to accommodate all Cabinet Ministers. The reality on the ground now is that it may not be possible. 

Therefore, the committee, after serious consideration over this matter, decided to concentrate on the two sides. The side led by the Leader of Government Business and the side lead by the Leader of the Opposition. In terms of the actual sitting arrangements on both sides, the committee felt it pragmatic to allow some flexibility in how the sitting arrangement will be done, hopefully until such a time as we are in a better position to organise ourselves. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a clear explanation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The rules clearly say left and right. What about the people sitting directly opposite to you?

THE SPEAKER: No. I do not think really we need to – You must assess the circumstances under which we are operating. This is temporary. If we get the funds, this situation will be history. Let us understand it that way.

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have agreed that the Independent Members notify you about which side they opt to sit in writing. I think we also need to regularise this to ensure they notify you in a specified time, say in two months -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem?

MR KAWUMA: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether you should make a response to the fact that the side they have opted to sit is okay, not because I am looking at –(Interruption)

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, to cure the problem my brother is grumbling about, I would like to move an amendment. This is on page 21 of the blue book, in Rule 8(3) and 8(4). In section (3) I propose: “The seats to the right hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of Government Business and Members from the majority party and the representatives of the Army in the House.” 

In section (4), to cure the problem: “The other seats to the left hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for Members from the minority party or parties in the House.” 

Justification, in Bugisu you are either a man or a boy –(Laughter)- you are either Omusani or Omusinde. There is no shortcut. And I was taught this at a certain stage of my education. There are pieces of a joint set and if we were to draw the sets here and put to your right a Venn diagram representing members of the majority party and the ruling party, to your left we would have the Members of Parliament who are not in the majority party. 

So who makes up these members who are not in the majority party? Any Member who is not NRM should sit to the left of the Speaker. On the judgement day you will not say that you can either go to the right or left. You are either a sheep or a goat –(Laughter). So, I would like us to give respect to the ruling party –(Interjection)- those people should have the freedom because they are the leaders. 

As for the Members of the UPDF, they will belong to the party that is ruling at the time. So, I would like to implore Members on the left hand side of the Speaker not to worry about the members of UPDF because this is competitive politics. When we go on the other side we shall find them there –(Laughter) In that spirit, Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the Constitution is very clear about who becomes a Member of Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Where do you put the Independents? Are you trying to ignore their existence?

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I am very clear. The independents are not part of the ruling party. I was a Member of the NRM. The day I chose to stand against the NRM official candidate it meant I was opposed to the party. And what the hell are my colleagues doing on the other side? They should come over this way -(Laughter)- the law is very clear. 

I am not happy with the provisions of rule 8(5) that a person who is not a member of a political party organization should apply to the Speaker. This makes me look like I am a substandard Member of Parliament. The law is very clear who becomes a Member of Parliament. We are all equal, I am a citizen of Uganda, I am above 18 and I hold a qualification higher than A’ Level and I should not be treated as substandard. So, –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: No, we do not have to be emotional on this. We must recognize that in this House there are Independent Members of Parliament and we should not impose on them where they should sit. That freedom must be left to the Independents and you do not say because he is not NRM, therefore, he must be opposition. That is not for us to decide. They are Independents, they are the ones to decide and our part is to recognize them. 

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I am an Independent Member of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, and I recognize you as so.

MR MALINGA: What we are trying to cure is the interpretation by the public that the rest of the Members of Parliament are different from us in the sitting arrangement. By the mere fact that you do not sit with NRM does not mean that you cannot associate with NRM, you cannot support NRM or NRM cannot appoint you a minister. But what we are saying –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us vote on your amendment.

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker I was moving that we amend rule 8, clause 3 to read, “The other seats to the right hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of Government Business, Representatives of the Army and Members from the majority party in the House.” I beg to move.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: The position is as follows: the abstentions are 14; those against are 72; and the ayes are 20. The nays have it.

(Question negatived.)

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, we voted on rule 8(4) and we had actually finished rule 8(5). I now want to propose and ask for your guidance whether we can follow the draft rules so that we go through each in order and where there are amendments from the report we deal with them as we go through the rules.  

THE SPEAKER: We have been considering the proposed amendments, but there are no other proposed amendments - all are assumed to have been adopted, that is why we are using the report to see whether the suggested amendment has any proposals to amend. And it has gone on well.

MR NASASIRA: You see, if we consider only the proposed amendments, we will be assuming that all the amendments were done in the committee and finished and if we pronounce ourselves on these amendments, then the rest of the document remains unchanged. But it seems Members are now proposing to amend certain clauses in the draft rules, which are not part of the amendments on the report. But that will take us backwards and forwards; and that is why I was bringing this.

THE SPEAKER: I think it should have been that if you had other additional amendments to make, you notify us but if you do not notify us then we assume that you do not have any other amendment, so we discuss what we have. Let us finish this page. Is there any other amendment to the proposed rule, because we are dealing with rules 7, 8 and 10; these are the rules?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I just need a bit of clarity and I hope that people going to draft - because it seems to be a hard point. The people going to draft must, for example in the interpretation clause we have defined what a shadow cabinet minister is. In the Constitution we are using the word “opposition.” If you look at these rules, for example rule 8 uses the words “majority party and minority party.” That is why I thought his proposal was right. That means the people drafting should ensure that they use the interpretation here and what is provided in the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: I think we said that if the term has been used in an Act or statute, you do not change that law by the rules.  

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, the rate at which we are moving is my concern. We might not even reach judgment day, where we shall be judged as either goats or sheep. 

In the minority report from the opposition party, they state that they agree with most of the proposed amendments except for these that appear on their report. Why can we not consider these ones where there are serious divergences and adopt the rest where there are now disagreements in order to save time?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, you have seen the proposed amendment by the committee to the rules as they are. Can I put the question subject to the amendment so far affected that those who support the proposed amendment –(Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am still not comfortable with 7(c) that is, the sitting arrangement. One time before my cattle were rustled I used to enjoy seeing my cows - some were white and others black in colour, together - and this is more or less the same thing. So I have a proposal that since this independent issue is becoming a problem, to your left let FDC honourable members sit on one seat, the honourable members of DP also on another seat, and then UPC on another and Independents on another. I beg to move.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, on the sitting arrangement - proposed rule 8(2) had provided for both the Government side and the opposition. If you substitute that with what is proposed then our rules become silent about the opposition and I think if we have to put this, then we have to put a provision for the opposition so that it is in the rules. Yes! The old rule says: “The front seats to the right hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of Government Business and members holding government ministerial offices. While the front seats to the left of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of the Opposition and opposition spokespersons for the various ministries.”  

This has now been replaced with the proposed (2), which says that: “The seats to the right hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of Government Business and members of the party in government.” I think they should then add, “and the seats to the left,” or retain the first. Otherwise you say “and the seats to the left shall be reserved for the Leader of Opposition and Members of the Opposition.”

MR OMWONY OJWOK: That point is correct, our instruction was that we should separate the two sides basing on the principle as initiated, namely that the seats to the right hand side would be reserved for the Leader of Government Business and the members of the party in government, while the seats to the left side would be reserved for the Leader of the Opposition together with the members on the other side; and then there is a specific provision for Independents. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I now put the question to the proposed amendment appearing in the report on page 8.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMWONY OJOK: Mr Speaker, just a small adjustment on page 8, of rule 10 on the Parliamentary Commission. There is rule 10(a) and (b). I am making reference to (c), which is 8(3): “Of the four Backbench Members prescribed under sub-rule (1), one shall come from the opposition”. I am proposing that the rest of that sentence be removed. In other words the one, which says, “and none of the four Backbench Members shall be a Minister.” If you are a Backbench Member you cannot also be a Minister. So I am just saying for cleaning up the text we remove that part.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker that completes rule 10.

MS OKORIMOE: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to seek clarification on 3(a). I would like to move an amendment to 3(a) to the effect that without prejudice to sub-rule (3) at least one of the four members referred to in that rule shall be a woman. The way it reads now looks like it does not give an opening to women especially if more than one woman wanted to come up for the Parliamentary Commission. So I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: What did we say in the Act?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: I think the committee would concede TO that because it is not tying the hands of Members; it is only saying “at least one of them should be a woman” then the rest can be sorted out through the normal voting, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now we go to rule 11 on the proposed amendment to rule 11, which appears on page 9 any –(Interruption)

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, in regard to rule 11, the committee looked at this carefully and has come up with the following amendment to sub-rule (1) of rule 11: 
“(i) Members of the East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be elected in accordance with the rules set out in appendix (b) and such representation shall reflect the proportional party membership based on the numerical strength of the parties in the House and take into consideration gender and other shades of opinion represented by independent candidates.” 

We have also split by providing under (ii) that: “The House shall elect from among the independent candidates to the East African Legislative Assembly.” It is important for us to justify this. Under the provisions of the East African Treaty of Co-operation, there is a specific provision, which states – the treaty for East African Co-operation provides under Article 50 for election of members of assembly. I would like, with your permission to quote a particular relevant text, which is 51: “The National Assembly of each partner state shall elect from among its members, nine members of the Assembly who shall represent as much as it is visible the various political parties represented in the National Assembly shades of opinion,” - that is very important - “gender and other interest groups in the partner states in accordance with the procedure as the National Assembly of each state may determine ….” 

The idea really is that in line with what the committee had already established, we should give room for Independent Members who definitely represent different shades of opinion - how many are they? Some people say they are as many as the Independent Members, but that does not matter. The important thing is that we want to give room to the different shades of opinion represented in this Parliament; that is the essence of our recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: But do you not see a problem, because if it were the Pan African Parliament it would be different because for the Pan African Parliament you select five people from among us here but in the East African Legislative Assembly, you select from outside. So how will you cater for the Independents outside Parliament? For the Pan African Parliament, yes, because we know we have 35 but for the East African Legislative Assembly, when they come from outside the House, how are you going to determine the Independents?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, that is a genuine point and we also took that into consideration by providing that the House will carry out these elections. That is the reason why we brought that out.

THE SPEAKER: Elections will be carried out by the entire House but people have to come and declare their intentions, their wish to be elected; they have to stand as candidates and we act as the electorate. But then how will you –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I think my honourable colleague should concede on this point because the concept of independence is related to how certain individuals can come into this Parliament. There is no basis by which you can translate that concept of independence to apply to those who want to be candidates and, therefore, I agree with you entirely. We shall not have a problem when it comes to the Pan African Parliament because the reality of independence will be in this House. But in this we are going to go into difficulties defining who is independent among all these and we have no legal basis for doing so.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, what the committee was trying to do was to give a chance, but if it is the general view that there is no need for shades of opinion to be represented here, the committee concedes and we can proceed.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, just for purposes of clarity, I have looked at appendix (b), which relates to the rules of procedure of election of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. It is page 132 of the blue book. If you look at page 133, qualification and category of members and tenure of office of the members of the assembly, it reads: “Elected Members of the Assembly that is East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be nominated by parties represented in the House and approved by the House.” I believe by this formulation, the party can nominate its own members. It can also nominate independent members, and any other person with any shade of opinion as reflected by the chairman. 
 
MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I think Independent Members of this House will carry out this election during the campaign will; we have some independent candidates who failed just like those whom we are going to consider, they might have failed in NRM, UPC or DP. Therefore, we are representing them here and we are going to vote.  It is just the same thing like election of the Members of the Pan-African Parliament, where independents should also appear because we are here to represent them and they are out there. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, Members of the Pan-African Parliament are elected from Members of National Assemblies. They are not elected from outside, it is you and I who go to the Pan-African Parliament. So that is not a problem because the independents are here and therefore they can be elected. But for the East African Legislative Assembly, people who go there must not be members of National Assemblies of partner States. I think that makes it clearer.  

12.13
MRS MARGARET MUGISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to voice my concern as well on the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. I would also like to support those who are saying that they should come from parties because now, it is going to be very hard for an independent member to lobby to become a Member of the East African Legislative Assembly. 

First of all, how would we source an independent person, how would we know? Parties are now going to bring their members and say, for instance, what we had agreed is that, maybe the Movement would bring seven –(Interjection)– yes, depending on our numerical strength and you bring two from the FDC, that is a fact, because the ratio of representation here in Parliament - we should agree on that. 

But now, an independent person, since Independent Members of Parliament are independent of each other, how does another independent person come from outside to look for votes from this House? It is going to be very complicated. I think we should agree that parties with majority –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: My understanding is that the mover, which is the chairperson of the committee, withdrew. I put the question on the proposed Rule 11.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, with regard to Rule 12, it is in fact much more straight forward now following the concession that has been provided from the opposite side of the House. We propose as members of this committee that: “Members of the Pan African Parliament representing Uganda shall be elected in accordance with these rules and such representation shall reflect the proportional party membership in the House and take into consideration the numerical strength of the parties and gender.”  The justification of course is that all these members are going to come from this House and we know exactly the political party affiliation of the members concerned.  I think that is it.  

THE SPEAKER: Did you complete what you were reading? I think the interest of the Independent Members of Parliament was not part of it?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: It is part of it.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, I put the question –(Interruption)

MS SAFIA NALULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mine is a general comment, which actually I have recognised throughout the amendments of the rules. I note that when you read Rule 12 and even others before and after it, we recognise that the presence of women, the presence of independent candidates, is highly appreciated in this House and I feel that we are disregarding Article 32 of the Constitution.  

As much as persons with disability and the youth are very few in this House but I do not think we should lose sight of that; I feel the Constitution is supreme and these rules are subsidiary to the Constitution. So, in the spirit of not losing these important issues, I feel that they should be reflected in these rules.  

THE SPEAKER: Can that be answered?

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to comment that perhaps we are suffering from the hangover of the broadbasedness, in which we are moving. It is the responsibility of the parties to make sure that they encompass all those sensibilities and differences when they are putting up their representation. We cannot be able to put it in the Rules of Procedure here; these are independent people, if they want to hang, let them hang by ignoring those groups.  

THE SPEAKER: What he is saying honourable member is that you have quoted the provisions of the Constitution but now this arrangement is under party arrangement and party arrangement should take into account the provisions of the Constitution in the internal administration and the internal selection of members that may go on these bodies, because as you have said, the Constitution is supreme, whether we provide for it here or not still the Constitution will be hanging whoever acts contrary; because the rules can be ignored.

MS NALULE: Mr Speaker, I appreciate that and many times we are told that, for example, I appreciate that women and independent candidates are mentioned in the Constitution, but that is where our issues also get lost. I appreciate that answer but let me hope that the parties take cognisance of that.

MR OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, on Rule 12 the chairman of the committee actually ended at the word “gender” and I was proposing that after “gender,” there should be an addition that “and take into consideration the interest of the Independent Members of the Parliament.”

THE SPEAKER: I think what you are reading is in the original report but subsequently they improved on it and it is here on this sheet. So, I put the question –(Interjection)– anything again on this Rule 12?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, for the sake of clarity, my attention has been drawn by Members of the committee that this clarification is absolutely important and it touches on the point coming from the honourable member.  

If I could please be allowed to re-reading that particular part, which takes of the interest of the Independent Members of Parliament so that it is on record in the Hansard. It says, “Members of the Pan-African Parliament representing Uganda shall be elected in accordance with these rules and such representation shall reflect the proportional party membership in the House and take into consideration the numerical strength of the parties, gender and the interest of Independent Members of Parliament.”  

I think I want to put that on record in this form; this is the consensus that the committee greed upon and by the way, this is a treaty obligation I want to make that very clear. Under the relevant treaty, which is contained in the protocol to the treaty establishing the African Economic Community relating to the Pan-African Parliament, Article 5 talks about election tenure and vacancies. 

Article 5.1 is very specific; it says and I quote: “ The Pan-African parliamentarians shall be elected or re-designated by the respective National Parliaments, or any other deliberative organ of the member states from among their members.”  And then it goes on to say in article 4.2 that: “Each member state shall be represented in the Pan-African Parliament by five members, at least one of whom must be a woman.”  So we cannot escape from that; there must be at least one woman. But next, it proceeds to say: "the representation of each member state must reflect the diversity of political opinions in each National Parliament or other deliberative organs.”  

I expect that there should be no further controversy on this matter given what the Leader of the Opposition had already assured us about it. I thank you. 

Then of course, in the same manner, we are saying that in sub rule 2, “The House shall elect one among the Independent Members to the Pan-African Parliament -” just to clarify and specify. I beg to move.

12.27
MR BALYEJJUSA: Mr Speaker, I would like to move an amendment in rule 12, to read as follows:“ Members of the Pan-African Parliament representing Uganda shall be elected in accordance with these rules, and such representation shall reflect the proportional party membership in the House and take into consideration the numerical strength of the parties and affirmative action.” 

The justification is that several times, when someone talks about gender, what the public picks is that that person must be a woman. But in this case, we are looking at a Parliament, which has directly elected Members of Parliament, which has women, youth, UPDF, persons with disabilities and workers’ representatives.  Therefore, if we only stick to the issue of gender, we may be misinterpreted to mean only ladies. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: But I think the explanation by hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, to the point raised would really answer your question. Well, if you use affirmative action, then you have to define it. I put the question, those in favour –(Interruption) 

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, as we represented in this House, we have Members of Parliament who were elected directly as special interest groups and that is what we hope to include so that they are reflected in the character of our National Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question. There is an amendment on affirmative action that we use the term “affirmative action.”  

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: Now I put the question on the proposal on rule 12.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, the proposal from the committee regarding 12(a) deals with whips. We propose that we insert a new rule 12(a) to read as follows: “There shall be in Parliament a Government Chief Whip, appointed by the government from among Members of Parliament representing the ruling party. 

1(a) The role and functions of the Government Chief Whip is to ensure due attendance, participation in proceedings and voting in Parliament of the Members of the ruling party.  
(b)	There shall be in Parliament a Chief Opposition Whip, appointed by the party in opposition to the government, having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament.  

2(a) The role and functions of the Chief Opposition Whip is to ensure due attendance, participation in proceedings and voting in Parliament of Members of the party in opposition to the government, and having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament.  

(b) 	The Chief Opposition Whip shall also perform such other functions as provided under sub rule 4 of this rule.

3(a) The party in opposition may appoint its party whip. 
 
(b) 	The role and functions of a party whip is to ensure due attendance, participation in proceedings and voting in Parliament of Members of the party.  

(c) 	The party whip shall also perform such other functions as provided for under sub rule 4 of this rule.  

4)	Other functions of the Government Chief Whip, Opposition Chief Whip and Party Whip shall include:

(a)	Organizing party business 
(b)	Keeping Members informed of business 
(c)	Supplying lists of Members to serve on Standing and Sectoral Committees 
(d)	Cooperating with Whips in arranging Parliamentary functioning 
(e)	Acting as intermediaries between leaders and other party members 
(f)	Arranging representations of party members on official parliamentary delegations  
(g)	Acting as tellers during divisions.

Mr Speaker, the justification is really to conform to the provisions of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act of 2006. Thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification. The proposed amendments to the rules talk about a Chief Opposition Whip and highlight the functions of the Chief Opposition Whip. 

It also specifies that there shall be a Party Whips and it defines the functions, so far those persons with opposition of responsibility. I did not see any distinct difference between the functions of the Chief Opposition Whip from those of the other Party Whip and in giving their justifications, the committee refers to the requirements of the Administration of the Parliament’s Act, 2006, which in my opinion, if I remember very well, guarantee the Chief Opposition Whip as overall Whip over the other Whips. In other words, the other party whips fall under the Chief Opposition Whip. I want to seek that clarification from the Chairman of the Committee.  

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of my colleagues to the provisions of the Administration of Parliament Act, 2006, in particular to the provision of Section 6(i). 

That section provides for the Chief Opposition Whip in line with what we have said. But there is also 6(j), which I particularly wish to draw the attention of Members to, 6(j) says and I quote: “The Party Whips   
i.	A party in opposition may appoint its Party Whip.
ii.	The role and functions of a party whip is to ensure due attendance participation in proceedings and voting in Parliament of Members of the Party.
iii.	The Party Whip shall also perform other functions as may be prescribed by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

What we have done is actually to recognize under 6(i) the role of the Chief Opposition Whip and the attendant functions. But we have also provided for the possibility of each party, but it is not must; we no longer use word “shall,” we say “may”. So it is up to the Leader of the Opposition to harmonize with the parties that are in the opposition, and those parties may agree to fall fully under the Chief Opposition Whip. But you cannot force a party not to appoint a Whip for its own members. I notice very good body language from the other side in line with what the committee is talking about. I thank you.

DR OKULO: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification on rule 12(a) (2), which says: “There shall be in Parliament a Chief Opposition Whip, appointed by the party in opposition to the government and having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament.” I think there is something wrong with this. If you say “in Parliament,” you are almost talking about the other side again. I think it is a typographical error.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  

DR OKULO: I know you would like to enjoy that, hon. Kutesa, but unfortunately I do not want you to do it. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Is it okay?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, all the committee did was to include verbatim, what is provided for in the Administration of Parliament Act. I fully agree that the spirit of the law as opposed to the letter of the law probably goes in the direction of what my good colleague from Oyam is talking about. But all we have done is to reproduce the text from the Administration of Parliament Act.

THE SPEAKER: Was the term “opposition” defined in the Act?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, it does appear that there is no definition for the term “opposition”.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. If there is no term, would adding on what hon. Okulo Epak has proposed on this rule for purpose of clarity dilute the Act?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: I do not think so, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Then I think let it be effected for the purpose of clarity.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: I think it is the spirit of the law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to seek clarification from the Chairman of the Committee. Rule 12 is talking about elections of Members of Pan-African Parliament. Then we are putting 12(a) of Whips. Would it not be better that we give it a substantive number to stand on its own?

THE SPEAKER: You mean you want to divide 12(a)?  Do you want to split (a)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what I am trying to say, is that there is no relationship. What I would suggest is that it should be (a) from 12. When they are making the rules, it should be numbered, may be it becomes 13.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but in essence do we pass the –

MS ERIYO: Thank you Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the Chairman on the proposed 12A, Part (3), where it says, “A party in Opposition may appoint its party whip.” Part (2) on Page 9 also says, “There shall be in Parliament a Chief Opposition Whip appointed by the party in Opposition…” I do not know if that is not a repetition.

Secondly, I want to raise something in relation to what hon. Okulo Epak raised here, to amend the last part of that proposal to read, “…among the opposition parties.”  I do not know whether it is in the interest of the Opposition party with the greatest numerical strength to have the Chief Opposition Whip appointed from any other party in the Opposition. I thought we should add, “from among its Members of Parliament” so that it would read, “There shall be in Parliament a Chief Opposition Whip appointed by the party in opposition to the Government and having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament from among its Members of Parliament.”  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The leader of the Opposition or Chief Opposition Whip may change because the numerical strength of the parties in opposition may change. When it does, you may find that a party may have an opposition leader but because of change in its strength, the position goes to another party. It has happened in some other parliaments.  

MS ERIYO: But, Mr Speaker, if the status quo changes, would it not mean that the Chief Opposition Whip may also change? I want clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MS ERIYO: So why should we not say “from among its Members of Parliament”?

THE SPEAKER: But who are the members? Currently, we have FDC with 37 members, UPC with nine members and then the Democratic Party with eight members.  The problem is that you cannot compel UPC, DP, JEEMA or CP to be subjected to the Chief Whip from FDC but they may work together. Those other parties are also free to have their Whips.  

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, I also see a lacuna here. If we do not add “from among its or their Members of Parliament”, supposing they appoint someone who is not a Member of Parliament, what happens?

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To put this matter to rest, we are not speculating; the chairman and his committee literally lifted what is the law. Rule 6(1) states as follows: “There shall be in Parliament a Chief Opposition Whip appointed by the party in opposition to the Government and having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament.”  

The English is difficult but the meaning is the same. The party in Parliament that appoints must be that party that has the greatest numerical strength.  So there is no confusion that the appointment can come from the Government side or from any other Opposition party in Parliament.  
 
THE SPEAKER: Is this not clear enough for us to put the question? I put the question on 12A.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you see on the next page we have proposed amendments to Rules 13, 14, 21, and 22.  Is there any query or amendment, or I put the question?  So I put the question on Rules 13, 16, 21 and 22. They are clear enough, I think.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just on page 10, sub-section (4)d, it says, “Co-operating with Whips in arranging the parliamentary functioning.” It is just the English; if the committee can just adjust the English.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We shall improve on that but we had already passed it.  

MR KATENDE: Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the Chairman of the Committee on the rule we have just passed. We passed a rule saying that the Chief Whips act as tellers during divisions, but we have no definition of a teller in these rules.

THE SPEAKER: We have passed that one.

MR KATENDE: But there is no definition of a teller.

THE SPEAKER: No, we cannot go back. We have passed that. I put the question on the proposed rules 13, 16, 21 and 22. Apparently, there are no amendments. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: On page 11, there are proposed amendments to rules 23, 24, 25 and 26. I am reminded here that there is something, which arose from the debate yesterday, on days to transact business, which is Rule 22(2). The proposed days are Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. There was a problem with Friday. Do you want to delete Friday and leave it to when there is urgency of business?

MEMBERS: Yes.  

THE SPEAKER: So the other 22 is taken with the deletion of Friday. It will be Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.  

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Mr Speaker, on Rule 22, as a matter of general principle we want to make amendments to reflect the reality of our Parliament, which is a multiparty Parliament.  There have been provisions made for Private Members’ business, but there has not been provision made for Opposition business.  

THE SPEAKER: Private Members’ business will include individual members, be it on this side or on the Opposition side. They are covered. Now, on rules 23, 24, 25 and 26 apparently there are no amendments. Can I put the question?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, for avoidance of doubt, on the Friday exception, would it not be quite appropriate to mention that subject to these rules, the House will meet on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. We can also put Friday, subject to the discretion of the Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: I think with the Speaker’s discretion it could even be a Saturday.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe this is the convenient time to suspend the proceedings. We shall come to page 12 after lunch. Proceedings suspended until 2.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 1.05 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.35 p.m., the Speaker Presiding_)
 
THE SPEAKER: In the Gallery we have children from Gabo’s Vocation School in Rujumbura, Rukungiri District. They are here to witness what we are doing. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda- (Applause)


ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to Mr Alex Aadroa Onzima.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alex Onzima accompanied by Mrs Mary Onzima, I congratulate you on your election. You are welcome to the Eighth Parliament of Uganda. I know on the 23rd of February there must have been other people who contested for the same constituency but you won the elections. You became Member of Parliament for Maracha for those that voted for you and those who did not vote for you. You are now the leader of that constituency. We expect you to serve all the constituents fairly and equally. I wish you well.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF 
THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

(Debate Continued)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are now moving to page 12 where there are amendments to Rules 27, 28, 39A, 62 and 66. Any counter proposal? Since I see none, I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We now move to page 13 where proposals for amendment on rules 76, 78, 80, 81, 84, 89 are dealt with. Is there any counter proposal and observation? Since I see none I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We move to page 14 of the proposed amendments. These are amendments on rules 90, 92, 93, 94, 95 and 100. Any counter proposals? Since there are none I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We move to proposals of amendment on page 15 of the report. The proposals are dealing with rules 100A, 113, 129, 130 and 132. Any counter proposal? Since I see none I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to seek your clarification. We have passed up to Rule 132; does it mean we have agreed with the minority report? They had put something in Rule 132.

THE SPEAKER: Which something?

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We got mixed up because we were operating by page and Rule 132 spills over to page 16. There are matters under 8 which we wanted –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is it?

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Mr Speaker, we wanted amendments to be made to the provisions under Rule 132, (6) and (7) and then insert number (8).

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Number (6) says, “Each standing committee shall elect its chairperson and deputy chairperson.”

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: we wanted to amend and say that “except for the committees outlined in sub-rule (7).” This is to create exceptions so that the Opposition provides the leadership of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: So you are saying, this candidature shall be limited to members of the Opposition party?

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Yes.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, the provision of Rule 132(6) is merely putting a position of principle that we have agreed upon. The principle is that each standing committee shall elect its chairperson and deputy chairperson. The question of what to do with the committees that he has referred to in Rule 7 is specific and it can be handled on its own. We stick by the presentation of number (6), but it does not stop us from discussing what we are discussing except that the committee stands by its commitment.

THE SPEAKER: The understanding with those four oversight committees is that the candidature of the chairperson or deputy chairperson will be restricted to members of the Opposition. That is the understanding. For the election, this is general. The election is done although the people who can stand is limited to a different category. I think it is clear.

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, Clause 7 provides that the standing committees on Public Accounts, Local Governments Accounts, Government Assurance, Commissions and Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises shall be chaired or deputised by members not aligned to the party in government. My understanding is that it would cover all the Opposition parties and Independent candidates that are not aligned to government. 

I hear the leader of the Opposition saying that they should only be chaired and deputised by the Opposition political party. Mr Speaker, I would like to oppose that. I think it is not fair to the Independent Members of Parliament who are not aligned to government. That is why the committee carefully looked at that and also the presentation that was actually made by the leader of the Opposition and also reflected by hon. Ekanya’s minority report. 

An Independent Member of Parliament has equal rights to participate and chair a committee just like any other Member of Parliament. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to oppose that and urge members to support what the committee recommended. I thank you.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, the honourable member who has just made a submission is talking about the right of the Independents to chair those oversight committees. How about their right to chair other committees that are not oversight? (Applause)

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, the right of Independents to chair any other committees is open but these are specific committees. These are oversight committees. We agreed that members who are not aligned to the party in government chair or deputise these committees. This is for purposes of ensuring scrutiny and proper implementation of their oversight function. Their right to chair any other committee is also guaranteed.

THE SPEAKER: I think the policy behind these committees was that their leadership be given to the Opposition side -(Applause)- the Opposition side are the parties which we now know here, unless now you want to say the Independents are in the Opposition -(Laughter)-You create that impression. When they say they are independent, they are free here and they are free there. 

This is the problem that you may cause if you drag in other people that are not officially known as the Opposition for these particular committees. You will now be screening them saying, ‘this is an Independent and he is not in the Opposition or this is an independent and he is in the Opposition.’  You will get that problem and it may not be easy for you to say this is what I mean. The policy was that the Opposition chair this oversight function.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, Independent Members of Parliament are not part of the ruling party. That is a submission I want to make clear. They are obviously independent of the ruling party.

MR KAMBA SALEH:  There is some inconsistency on the matter we are trying to debate, Sir. Actually, yesterday when we were looking at the report of the committee, we said that the oversight committees would be chaired and deputised by members not aligned to the party in government. Today we are saying the oversight committees will be chaired or deputised by members not aligned to the party in government. I believe these are different things as far as the law is concerned. That was what we said yesterday on point 3.7, the last paragraph on page 4. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have heard. He is seeking clarification, hon. Omwony Ojwok.  

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, unless I have not understood what he is trying to say properly, in which case I am ready to be guided, it still brings us to the same point. We are saying that these oversight committees shall be chaired or deputised by a member who is not part of the party in government. So it is a question of putting “and”. Thank you.

MR NJUBA: Mr Speaker, I must admit my interest; I am a member of that committee. What hon. Hope Mwesigye has just said has made me think again about that phrase. She has just said that Independent members are not part of the Government side. We can also say that Independent members are not part of the Opposition. This question must be clarified once and for all. These Independent members, with due respect, can go to government side. Some have been sitting on the Government side permanently and others have been sitting on this side. 

We must find a formula where we can ascertain who is actually not aligned with the Government side. Government is denying it when it becomes convenient. We are denying it when it becomes convenient to us.  I am inclined to accept a proposal that says, since the side to your left has the responsibility of guiding this House as the Opposition, we should take up full responsibility until the Independents decide to come and join FDC or DP and declare their position.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us follow the genesis of this matter from the time we started this issue. At one stage there was a demand that the Opposition members on these committees take the majority seats, say 11. However, I think it was considered as no longer demanded. In any case its practical aspect was considered and it was no longer demanded. It was then zeroed to the leadership. It is the leadership only that is being demanded, that is, the chair and the deputy, on only four committees. Most likely for the others it is the majority party that is going to take on the chair. Can’t we really give up this and leave it as that?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, the position the committee had adopted was a result of representation by Independent members. We had to take into account their interests as well.  However, since I see them silent or not present, I think we can assume that we can actually concede on this matter.

DR OKULO:  Mr Speaker, I think we are having this confusion because neither the Opposition nor the Government side can define what the Opposition is. I have taken pains to know who will decide who an opposition member is. One of the definitions now in the rules is, “members not aligned to the Government side”. That sounds to me a reasonable definition to go by.  

The other view, Mr Speaker, is that an Independent member is probably a lot more flexible in deciding whether to be in the Opposition or not. Some people are trying to imply that you can only be in the Opposition if you belong to a party. Some people are trying to imply that they are Independent until they decide to join FDC, and that is when they can be recognised as the Opposition. I think that is a very unfortunate and superfluous position.  

As to the fluidity of members, this is an individual situation. We already have a case of a member of a party already appointed a minister. That creates all these uncertainties about anybody in this country, and we are yet to see more developments of that nature. We do not have to be very presumptuous in these few days. I am in my own right –(Interruption)

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, much as the honourable member has not mentioned the name of the person, I think I know what he is talking about. I think the law is also very clear that if a member of a particular party crosses to join another party, automatically he loses a sit in the other party. So, if any member of another party had joined Government, automatically he does not belong to the other party. 

It is different for the case of the Independents. The Independents can still go and join Government and remain independent. I think these are two different scenarios.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, we must accept that somebody who has defected from UPC and stood as an Independent is independent of UPC. Somebody who defected from NRM, according to the code of NRM, and stood as an Independent is independent of NRM. In effect, he is opposing NRM just like somebody from UPC is opposing UPC. In effect, it is a one-man party, and he is saying “I am going to take it alone”. It is, therefore, very right for these Independents to be one party, standing on their own. It must be clearly defined that they are in opposition. I think it is very important for us to take this position and recognise them because they will stand to be counted as in the Opposition.

DR OKULO: Mr Speaker, I do not know about that information because according to hon. Kidega, when one is supposed to have joined government I think even in the long run those of us who are sitting on any side will find ourselves voting together. I do not know whether you will define that occasion as having joined the Government. 

The point I am making is absolutely clear. The doubt about the character of Independents is arising from one or two situations which have already been shown. First of all, this story of people who have signed memoranda, and then there is a story of an Independent member who has been appointed a minister. I was also just quoting an example of a member of a political party who has already been appointed a minister. I am saying we have all those cases. We have no reason to doubt the integrity of individuals here.  

The position I take as an Independent is that I am not aligned to the Government side nor am I aligned to any parties on the Opposition side. I would even go as far as saying I am super Opposition as a matter of fact. The fact of my being in opposition or an Independent is without question. I think people are struggling for very small things, wanting to be chairmen, wanting to be this, but what is important is how we participate in this House. I think we are going to demonstrate that in due course. Thank you Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you chose these committees and gave leadership to people not in government but in opposition. This was not out of the blue. It is a practice in many jurisdictions where we have a multiparty system. These committees are controlled by the Opposition as a way of oversight over the Government. 

This multiparty system is not new. We have not been with it for a number of years but we are starting. You clearly recognised that fact. This is normal, although now in our situation they do not have the numbers to take the majority seat. That was compromised because these are not the only standing committees we have in this Parliament. There are other standing committees. For purposes of a beginning, why don’t you leave it as that? 

I think for the numbers, they relaxed. At one time they were insisting that the majority of these committees should be from the Opposition. That was relaxed. Now it is only the leadership sharing. When they chair they do not have a vote anyway.

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I just want to provoke the thinking of members to a scenario were this country elects a President but the President does not have the majority in Parliament. That can arise. We are only looking at a situation in which possibly, you have the President elected with overwhelming majority and it comes to the House here - because it is a presidential system muddled with the parliamentary system in a way - that Parliament does not have the majority in the House. 

That is why we are talking of a situation in which we have the Leader of Government Business appointed by the President. It does not say the Leader of Government Business shall be appointed from the party, which is the majority in the House. We are talking of the Government Chief Whip not the party majority Chief Whip. We are talking of this leader not aligned to the Government. 

I think throughout the Rules we have avoided a situation in which we are talking of the majority party in Parliament. We are talking about the Government side. We are talking of a situation in which we are going to have chairmen and deputy chairmen of those four committees of parties or groups not aligned to government. In the Rules they have avoided all these situations though I want the members to think about this. You should not downplay the role of Independent members of Parliament because somebody could still support a government without being on the party, which the President belongs to. I can get the information.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, we are not dealing with the basic law. We are dealing with Rules. At such a time when it is deemed necessary to change the Rules, I am sure Parliament will do the needful. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ATUBO: My argument was that it is broader to look at the chairperson or deputy chairpersons from those who are not aligned to government so that you include Independent Members of Parliament. I do not know why you are having this sort of negative attitude towards this large group of Members of Parliament. 

You are also saying somebody is using the words “they have defected from their party, they have done this”. No, first of all, some Members of Parliament who want to be independent have not gone through any parties. Some of them were even locked out by their parties. Their parties possibly rejected some of them. There are many circumstances under which somebody may have became an Independent Member of Parliament.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. In the deliberation of these rules, we have introduced some words that could have caused the misunderstanding that is apparently developing. Ordinarily, we have the government side and it consists of Members of the NRM, but we have introduced the words, “Members aligned to the government side” and “Members not aligned.” 

We have independent Members who have officially declared that they would want to associate with the government side. This is because they became Independent Members out of certain circumstances but they want to associate with NRM. 

When we refer to all Members who are not aligned with government, these are Members of the opposition. Why don’t we also on the other side say that Members of the opposition or those Members aligned to the opposition? This would let the Independents, who feel they want to associate with the opposition in performing the oversight function, do so after they have declared they are Members of the opposition. Would this not be a cure to this problem? That is the clarification I want to seek.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, an Independent votes on merit; he has no permanent home. He does things as we used do them under the Movement political system. Members used to decide on issues on merit without a whip. We did not have a whip. Now, a Member of a party has to tow the line of his party, unless they agree to free voting. There may be issues where they say Members can vote, as they want. But largely are controlled by the whip.  As a policy in their caucus, they decide as their party has decided. 

An Independent, however, has no such position today. He votes with you on one day and the following day he votes on the other side. He is a free man in the sense that he is not whipped. You should appreciate that. I do not see why this thing is taking us that far. What do we do, honourable chairman, with these four committees? 

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, I have listened carefully to all the contributions. It is my responsibility, as the chairperson of this committee, to defend the position of the committee. Otherwise, I will be seen to be betraying the interests of some of the Members of the committee. 

The guidance I can provide here is, let us put the question and we go through. I, now, am being put in a situation of only giving one side of the views that were expressed. By the way, there was very deep and sustained debate on this issue. I do not want to put on my head the historical responsibility of having betrayed the interests of some of the Members of this Parliament.  

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are in this Parliament as Ugandans sent to exercise the responsibility of legislating for this country. Once we entered a multi-party political system, the House immediately became divided into two sides: one side is the government side. 

If, as hon. Omara Atubo put it, hypothetically, the President who was elected was an Independent, there would be no way that this President would function. The President would not function unless he or she cobbles an alliance with one or two parties who then will assume the seat of government side. They would then exercise their responsibilities as the parties in government.  What will then be left are Members who are not in that government and they will occupy the position of opposition parties in Parliament.  

We are asking for this particularly at a time when this country will host the Commonwealth Conference next year. We are surprised that this has become even a matter of debate. What we are asking for is that, this country should allow the practices that have been built over the years in parliaments where there is a government side responsible for policies, programmes and the governance of the country, then an opposition is responsible for keeping government under constant check.  

When you look at the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, you will find that the specific responsibility given to the Leader of the Opposition is to scrutinize government policies and table alternative policies. This is demanded of the Leader of the Opposition before committees. In the same breath, and in the traditions of parliaments in the commonwealth, the opposition is assigned the responsibility of keeping watch over government. 

Once it was agreed that the four committees would go to the opposition then there is no difficulty whatsoever in putting that in simple language. If it is not given to the opposition, let it be said so that it is not given to the opposition. However, if that responsibility is given to the opposition, do not labour to twist your mind to redefine the responsibility that has been given.  

We basically have two choices: Government knows that they are in majority, but this Parliament does not belong to government. It belongs to the people of Uganda represented by those in government and those in the opposition. Each of us has a national responsibility. We in the opposition recognise our responsibility. That is why we conceded that even if it was the practice in the first independent Parliament that the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament had a majority of opposition Members, we reviewed the practicality of having our Members in so many other committees and accepted that the membership of this committee can still be constituted using the basic formula. 

Let the responsibility of the functioning of those committees remain with the opposition –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: I am very sorry, Mr Speaker, for interrupting the Leader of the Opposition, but it is very important for this House to accept that an honourable member like Dr Okulo Epak is clearly in the opposition, just as hon. Ben Wacha. To say that they are not part of the opposition is really amazing. Is the honourable Leader of the Opposition in order to suggest that these Independents do not qualify as Members of the opposition? 

THE SPEAKER: I have no knowledge about this fact. Therefore, I cannot make any ruling.  However, this is taking a lot of our time. I suggest that we put it off for further consultations among the people concerned. Before we proceed, I understand there is a Member who has some ideas but he cannot come in because he has not been sworn-in. Let us swear in the new Member and then we shall continue with the debate. 

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to Ms Sauda Mugerwa Namaggwa.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sauda Namaggwa, on behalf of the entire Parliament, I congratulate you on your victory! I welcome you to the Eighth Parliament of Uganda. Consider yourself as a representative of the entire population of Masaka District, where I also belong. Do not discriminate. Serve equitably all the people in the district and make your contribution to the welfare of the entire country. You are welcome!

Honourable members, as I said earlier, we are putting off the other issue for further consultation. We shall now move to other amendments. I see no counter proposal for any amendments and, therefore, I put the question on the amendments on page 16 in respect of Rules 134, 135 and 136.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We now move to amendments proposed on Rules 137, 139, 140 141, 143 and 145.  

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I needed more clarification from the chairperson of the committee in regard to amendment on Rule 137, regarding the justification for the closed meetings, like the Appointments Committee. It is important to note that in a democratic society like ours, having closed sessions creates more problems than solutions. It creates suspicion where people will start doubting what people in a closed meeting are doing. 

Mr Speaker, it is important to note that transparency is one of the great pillars of a democratic society. And as you know, suspicion is always at war with transparency. People will start questioning the integrity of the Appointments Committee. I would like to suggest that the meetings of the Appointments Committee for the sake of transparency and democratisation of this society remain open. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But you will notice that in the rules there are instances when we may choose to have closed sessions here. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, in that case, we could only say, “The sessions could be closed only in circumstances, which are allowed under Rule 19”, probably for reasons of national security.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, as many of you know, the principle of openness is a very positive one. The more open we are, the more the public is involved and the more everybody is involved, the better. However, there are definite circumstances in which we need to look deeper into the wider implications of what is going on.

First of all, this committee has included this particular provision from the previous Rules of Procedure and it could not have come there by accident. These rules are usually a result of historical experience, distilled not only from Uganda but also from other countries to which we have an affinity in various forms.  

Secondly, from my own understanding of the background to this provision in the jurisdictions where it was applied, an Appointments Committee is a committee, which is very critical. It is dealing with persons within our society who on the one hand must definitely be brought into the public domain as much as possible. But on the other hand, Mr Speaker, they must also be protected. It is very difficult to build leadership; it takes years of hard work and so on. But this leadership can be destroyed within no time, and that loss is not only the loss of an individual it is also the loss of a country as a whole.  

This is a matter that must be discussed beyond party issue, because today somebody is on this frontbench, and is being given the opportunity to come in as a leader, but tomorrow another person who was being questioned and challenged will also get that opportunity. So, we must look at the past, the present and the future. 

I think it is within that context that in exercise of caution, the Members of the committee have felt that let the matter be discussed by the Members of the Appointment Committee, and that those Members should feel very free in expressing their views without the fear that somehow some of the issues that they are raising might become a subject of debate, which goes beyond what they had intended to bring at that particular point. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  We are guided by the Constitution; if you read Article 41 of the Constitution, it talks of right of access to information. I have here a copy of the Access to Information Act and I have perused through it and I see that the proposal, with which I totally disagreed in the committee, is unconstitutional.  

Mr Speaker, you have said that this Parliament, through your prerogative can decide to have closed sittings and therefore any committee can decide to have a closed sitting. So, if we provide in the rules to make that close permanent, I see we shall have a problem. The chairman is saying that during the debate the issues that are discussed in the Committee of Appointments, if come out may cause conflict, injure the integrity of the persons interviewing and the person interviewed. The Access to Information Act guarantees access to all information in the hands of government –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, are you suggesting that Cabinet meetings should be open and when the Appointments Committee is interviewing judges, should it also be open? Then I think the Table too should be open.

MR EKANYA: Honourable members, if you read this Act, it provides for how information can be released to the public, including Cabinet minutes and security information and, therefore, we should comply with Access to Information Act.

THE SPEAKER: What does it say? What is the relevant provision?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I think we should just put this matter to rest. Hon. Ekanya was privileged to be in the committee. But we had been consulting on this matter and we formally concurred with the position of the chairman of the committee.  It is not right to put a deliberation where information that may be still under investigation can tarnish the image of a candidate being considered. At the end of the day, if you require information on why somebody was approved, you will have access to that information. 

But the suggestion that you should be part of the proceeding in the name of having a right to information is inappropriate. Therefore, we should not labour ourselves on this matter; we concur with what was proposed.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, honourable members, therefore, in the circumstances, these are proposals for amendments on rules 137 and 139, 140, 141, 143 and 145. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We go to page 18: the proposed amendments are in respect of rules 146, 147 and 148.  Are there any counter proposals?  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, since we have stood over Rule 132, I would suggest that Rule 146, which is one of those, be stood over as well.

THE SPEAKER: No, but this is only about membership; the other issue was about leadership. Can we not finish the membership? Since I see no counter proposals, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: On page 19, there are proposals for amendments of Rule 157. It goes to the top of page 20. It is about sectoral committees.  

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to get clarification from the chairman as far as the composition of the sectoral committees is concerned, because previously we used to have a situation where the composition was flexible, from 15 to 25. But here, it is being fixed at 20 and I think the intention previously was that Members who are not able to qualify for standing committees should be absorbed in the sectoral committees, which were formally sessional committees. But now, if you have a situation where the numbers are fixed, I want to get clarification from the chairman on how that will be done. 

Secondly, if the numbers are fixed, the assumption is that the figures will be divisible by the number of committees that are there. For instance, if you have 13 committees, it will mean you have exactly 260 Members. Supposing they are more than that or less than that and you want to accommodate them, how do you go about that?

THE SPEAKER: I think you should clarify on how many sectoral committees you are proposing - chairman, how many are they?

MR OJWOK OMWONY: Mr Speaker, the committee agreed on 20 Members.

THE SPEAKER: No, I am asking the number of sectoral committees.

MR OJWOK OMWONY: Mr Speaker, we only separated two sectoral committees and added another one of ICT.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but how many?

MR OJWOK OMWONY: They are now 13.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Now, 13 means 260 and that is the number we have because ministers, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are not Members of these committees. So, the 13 with 20 would require 260 Members.

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr Speaker, I am not yet satisfied because I am not sure. We are just assuming they are 260. But supposing they are slightly less or more, what happens?

THE SPEAKER: We are not assuming because we know the composition of this Parliament. The constituencies are 215; you add on the districts, you will get the number.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, in the general debate, I raised the question of the difference in content between a standing and a sectoral committee. I would want the chairman at this stage to clarify because even standing committees deal with sector matters. But the moment you call them sectoral committees, it implies they are dealing with something different, while in the previous terminology, “standing” was for the period of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Constitutional Court had an opportunity to make an interpretation of a standing Committee and, therefore, we may be guided by that interpretation. First of all, the features of a standing committee, you take into account its duration and the time when it’s being set up. A standing committee with previous rules is set up at the beginning of the life of a Parliament and it is for five years and even if the Parliament is dissolved, it continues to exist. 

For a sessional committee, when Parliament is prolonged, its mandate expires.  In this particular case, if you look at the rules they made, the standing committees for two and a half years, the sectoral committee, which they used here are for session but catering for a sector of government.  

MR NASASIRA: We just wanted to find out more why the committee preferred the word “sectoral” instead of “sessional” yet “sessional” was more meaningful. And you find that this committee they call “sectoral” could be covering even more sectors than one. So, even calling it “sectoral” might not be relevant to the work but when you call it “sessional” it means that it is for that session and it will expire when another session comes. 

So, I would wish, with the permission of the chairperson, to move an amendment to call them “sessional” rather than “sectoral” committees. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: What you can do to compromise is to say “sessional sectoral committees” because the intention of calling them sectors is based on the area of its concern or the responsibility it holds. So, what do we do?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, we discussed this thing at length yesterday and we thought we had put the matter to rest. However, if the House really feels that we can go back to what we are already familiar with, there is not going to be an objection from the part of the committee because it is not a substantive matter, it is a question of names. Therefore, we are willing to concede to “sessional.” Thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I seek clarification on the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: Can we dispose of this issue? We change the name “sectoral” to “sessional.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, the Committee on Foreign Affairs covering the East African Community, missions abroad, bilateral, multilateral and inter-governmental relations, the ministry is not there. Where will the Ministry of Foreign Affairs fall? I think the ministry should be included to be covered by this committee.  

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is actually the custodian of all those issues, which are raised under this committee. Therefore, by definition, it will be the committee overseeing the work of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as well as the Ministry - if it is going to be a full ministry - of East African Affairs.  

THE SPEAKER: What do we do? If it is causing concern, why don’t you, wherever you have this sectoral committee, mention the ministry and the other things.  

DR OKULO: Mr Speaker, these ministries are capable of even changing names. Even sectors or departments, which were formerly in one ministry could in the course of time change. That is why it is safer and I thought it was logical to say “sectoral” because you are dealing with different sectors. Anybody looking at the rules will find which sector is in which committee and that is where that ministry should belong. 

The alternative would be that each time a ministry is changed, you go back to the rules and amend the rules. This is the impression I had, that if you define the sectors, ministries whose responsibilities pertain to those sectors would fall to that committee. For instance, last time it was Social Services and it did not say Ministry of Education, it did not say Ministry of Health. The ministries, which deal with Social Services, found themselves reporting to that committee. It is a pity that we have dropped the word “sectoral”. 

To me, the name of a situation must reflect what it is. What is so significant about the fact that this committee is functioning sessionally? I think the most important thing is that they handle sectoral subjects. Hon. Kamuntu was trying to say that even standing committees deal with sectors. I do not know what sector the Auditor-General’s report belongs to. 

So, these are some of the problems that are gone by and I think this time we are going to have some reorganisation of former ministries. That is the point I had in mind that, it is safer to identify the sectors for each committee and then any ministry which finds itself handling that sector automatically reports to that committee. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, is that not clear enough?

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have talked about the committees and yesterday I mentioned the names, which have broken from Social Services. I do not have the list of the committees before me here and I raised the issue on whether the ministries, which broke from Social Services, include people with disability. Can you read for me at least the three new sectors, which are put here so that I know whether my issue is included or not?

THE SPEAKER: Well, there is gender, labour, social development including equal opportunities and interest groups.

MRS BABA DIRI: So, the word “interest group” is there?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MRS BABA DIRI: That is fine. Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now go to page 20, which deals with amendments on rules 158, 161 – (Interruption)

MS TUBWITA: Mr Speaker, I had an amendment on page 19. I thought we were still going on but we passed it before I got up to move an amendment.  Yesterday, I raised an issue on page 19(e): the one talking about redrafting physical infrastructure covering lands, housing and I was suggesting that we substitute “urban development” with “physical planning” so that it can cover a wider area other than being restricted to one area and then maybe to include works and transport.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, the concern of our colleague is genuine. However, we might consider the following: as she says, we put there lands, housing, physical planning but we cannot leave out urban development. Urban development is an important component of this particular rule.

 So, we can make physical planning a separate entity so as to capture a win-win situation and then I also accept on behalf of the committee the addition of works and transport. It is in the spirit of the discussions, which we had; it does not subtract. On the contrary, it enhances what we have agreed upon. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, we go to Rule 158 on composition of sectoral committees and Rule 161 on select committees. Any amendments? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, we go to page 21, proposed amendment on Rule 165, appendix B –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, yesterday as we left Parliament, I had the opportunity to pass and share my intention to add one important rule in our Rules of Procedure and I passed this document to the chairman. I believe he must have read through it. The sort of clarification I would like to seek from you is as to whether it is agreeable that I probably introduce the rule before we go to consider the various appendixes.

Mr Speaker, throughout the five years we were in the Seventh Parliament, there were many occasions when committees submitted reports to this Parliament and Parliament unanimously adopted them and expected action to be taken by the line sectoral ministries. There are many reports of that nature which even during the time of two to three years never received any response from the sectoral ministries. It is only felt that it is important, as it is the practice in other multi-party parliamentary practices that we in our Rules of Procedure provide for a rule that will compel sectoral ministries to act on resolutions passed by Parliament within a specified period of time.

The justification is that, if we leave it open, Parliament can resolve on a matter expecting the sectoral ministries to come up with action points and no action may come at all and it becomes very difficult to make any follow up and even to ask because there will be no specified period. I only felt that it will be important for us to come up with specific action points so that within that time, responses can be expected from the sectoral ministries. In that way, it actually enhances the work of the head of government business to make sure that the ministries or sectors are kept on their toes. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: In other words, you want to make a rule that provides for periodical reporting on action taken on resolutions or reports?

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need clarification on resolutions of Parliament on government. The way hon. Wadri, the Opposition Chief Whip, is moving an amendment to the rules presumes that resolutions and recommendations of Parliament are binding on the Executive. I need your guidance on that before we can consider it.

THE SPEAKER: No, he is saying you pass a resolution here, then the minister concerned comes and gives a report or an explanation that government considered this one, but for one reason or another could not do this and this. Not every resolution is compelling. There are resolutions, which are compelling, for instance, a loan. If a loan is refused, you cannot take it. But the other ones, which are advisory, it is a question of saying yes, the impact of this was this. Government considered it but did not take it because of this. It is not really that you must effect every resolution made because some may be advisory. You may take advice or you may not take it, but you report why you did not take it.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, the difficulty I face is that reference has been made to the draft resolution having been given to me. But I do not remember that draft here and in fact, I would then have expected my colleague to actually read the draft, which he has not done. So, I am a little bit in a difficult situation. Maybe if he did, I have no memory where we met, where he gave me those papers from –(Laughter) But let him help us by giving us the actual text of the thing. We are working together. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, the chairman is a very busy person and he has very many documents under his armpit. I am not surprised that he has forgotten the fact that I handed over the document to him personally and I am sure tonight when you go back, you will be able to find a one-page document, which I presented to you. But to shorten it up, allow me to read what I had put down for him. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, since Members may need to look at the draft, and since we have put off one issue, can you go, draft it and then when we come back to complete the other issues we deal with that one too.

MR WADRI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I will produce and circulate the document. 

THE SPEAKER: So, in view of this, honourable members, what do we do? We proceed with the appendixes?

MR WADRI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Appendix B, there are proposals: number 58 and on interpretation, election of Members of the Assembly and so forth. Any improvements?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, on Rule 3, that is the election, we are using the proportional method to elect these Members. But the Members we are electing to the East African Legislative Assembly are coming from the public. I want to move an amendment here that we use the presidential elections results to be able to determine the proportion of the Members we are sending to the East African Assembly. [Laughter]

The justification is that, the Members we are sending to the East African Assembly are coming from the public and Parliament is just the electoral college. So, after knowing who are supposed to go, Parliament will decide who those are. That is the reason I am putting across that the results outside there, which show the character of the population were well demonstrated during the elections of the President. 

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, I can appreciate we are interested more in the results outside the House than inside the House. However, I wish to draw attention to the specific provisions of the treaty that we must take into account in constituting this committee. Article 50 is very precise. It says: “The National Assembly of each partner state shall elect, not from among its Members, nine Members of the Assembly who shall represent as much as it is feasible the various political parties represented in the National Assembly.” I think that speaks for itself. I can give numerous other reasons, but the most important thing we must adhere to is the spirit of the treaty. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think it is cleared. He has told us that the enabling law precisely says that, we cannot go beyond that. His mind is now cleared. (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, for avoidance of doubt, I beg to move that the elections of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Which rule are you talking about?

MR BYABAGAMBI: That is Appendix B, Rule 3, which is about the election of the Members of the Assembly. For avoidance of doubt, I want to move that the election of Members of the East Africa Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be in the following proportions: seven from the party in government and two from the opposition party. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: No, he has a formula, which we used.  We do not have to do it here. We shall find out the proportion. That is administration. I think then you will bring the calculators.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, before we get the calculators, we know that those whom we are going to elect here are nine.  So far we already have two people who are Members of the East African Assembly, that is, the minister and one of the secretaries. That means we have 11 Members. So, when we are going to compute our proportions we shall base them on 11.

THE SPEAKER: No, those are different. Honourable members, I put the question on these proposals.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We go to 22, Appendix D. Any counter proposal? Since I see none, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: That disposes of the proposed amendments, save the one of state plus hon. Wadri’s proposal. Our rules can now be adjusted in accordance with what we have passed today. It is necessary we dispose of the other one as soon as possible because there is work for Tuesday. If you would prepare and distribute them on Tuesday, maybe we start with that and then we proceed. 

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work you have done today. Now we have the rules under which Parliament will be operating.  With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 pm.

(The House rose at 4.08 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 June 2006 at 2.00 pm).




