Friday, 4 June 2004

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in the International Conference Centre, Kampala.

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

OPENING OF THE FOURTH SESSION OF THE 7TH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Proclamation by Edward Ssekandi, Speaker of Parliament of Uganda.  

“WHEREAS Clause (2) of Article 95 of the Constitution provides that a session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may, by proclamation, appoint; 

AND WHEREAS the third session of the Seventh Parliament ended on the 13th day of May 2004 upon prorogation of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS it is expedient that Parliament be summoned to convene the fourth session;

NOW THEREFORE, I Edward K. Ssekandi, Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by Clause (2) of Article 95 of the Constitution, hereby proclaim that the fourth session of Parliament commence in the International Conference Centre, Kampala on the 4th day of June 2004 at 2 O’clock in the afternoon. 

And further, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker that the Constitution in accordance with the Powers and Privileges Act and Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the same Uganda International Conference Centre, including its forecourt, the yard and the gardens to be precincts of Parliament for the fore-mentioned purposes. 

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala this 4th day of June 2004.

Signed
Ssekandi.” (Applause)

Your Excellency the President of Uganda, my Lord the Chief Justice, members of the Diplomatic Corp, honourable Members of Parliament, religious leaders, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen; it is my greatest honour and pleasure to welcome His Excellency the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and you all here to the important constitutional event of receiving the mandatory State of the Nation Address from His Excellency the President at the commencement of the fourth parliamentary session of the Seventh Parliament of Uganda.  

There is no doubt, Your Excellency the President, honourable Members, Your Excellencies and all distinguished guests, that this session begins with very many important issues that will probably affect the future of Uganda. The country expects a lot from this particular session.  

Honourable members, the recess has been unusually very brief but I have no doubt you have been able to go out to your constituencies and you have come back well equipped and resolved to handle the business of the House diligently and effectively as is necessary. We should all tune ourselves to be ready to listen to each other and be sober in making our contributions to issues that may appear hot.  It is only by handling the business ahead of us in this manner that we shall be able to deliver what is expected of us.  

I hope the prayers, which a number of you attended yesterday and today at Juma prayer, will also help you to solidify what I have alluded to above.(Laughter) I wish all of you a very successful fourth session. Thank you for your attention.

ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 101, (1) OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, whereas Clause (1) of Article 101 of the Constitution provides that the President, at the beginning of each Session of Parliament deliver to Parliament an address of the State of the Nation; 

AND WHEREAS the Fourth Session of Parliament has commenced today, the 4th day of June 2004; 

Now, therefore, it is my presumed duty to invite Your Excellency the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation this 4th June 2004 at Uganda International Conference Centre. Your Excellency the President.

2.55
THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Rt. Hon. Speaker of Parliament, the Hon. Chief Justice, honourable Members of Parliament and Members of the Diplomatic Corp, ladies and gentlemen. Before we start, since we last met here, we have lost three of our colleagues - the Rt. hon. James Wapakabulo, hon. Ayume and hon. Bernadette Bigirwa. So I propose - if I do not break your rules, because I know you follow your rules very well - that you allow me to ask these people to stand up for one minute to remember these people.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

MR MUSEVENI: Mr Speaker and the hon. Members of Parliament, the two cardinal reasons why FRONASA and later on the NRM fought the Amin and Obote regimes were the following: One, to give the people of Uganda total sovereignty over their affairs, and two; to ensure security of person and the property of Ugandans. In other words, it was in order to banish, once and for all, the twin evils of dictatorship and marginalisation of the people, the electorate, on the one hand, and extra-judicial killings perpetrated by state agencies on the other hand. For the young people who may not know why we took up arms, these were the two reasons.  Any other political issue could have been handled peacefully, but these two could not. Dictatorship and marginalinalisation of the people and extra judicial killings perpetrated by the state agencies: These are the two reasons that led us to fight those regimes with guns. These are still our internal primary goals. If the past regimes had avoided these, Uganda would not have suffered the way she suffered.

I remember 1966 very well. If only Mr Obote and Sir Edward Mutesa had referred their differences to an election that was due in 1967 and gone by the results of that election, there would have been no problems in Uganda. There would have been problems but of a different kind. The issue of Buyaga and Bugangaizi, the so-called lost counties, which are present day Kibaale District - For instance that issue was referred to a referendum. If only the results of that referendum were unequivocally accepted by all the concerned parties plus my earlier point of always seeking the arbitration of the people at the crucial stages of our country’s development if there is anything contentious, the political path of Uganda would have been smooth.

There were three other important reasons for FRONASA and the National Resistance Movement for which it would not have been necessary to go to the bush, but which were nevertheless very important for the future of Uganda and Africa. These three reasons were very important for us and they are still very important, but we cannot take up guns for them. For those we fight politically until we gain the majority and we execute our will politically with the support of the people. These three are the following:

First, fighting colonialism and black people’s enslavement wherever we could, because by the time we were fighting it was still in fashion to want to colonise black people.  There were still those who thought that black people were nincompoops; did not know what they wanted and they needed to be controlled by those other human beings. But by that time Uganda was independent so there was no need for us to use force to fight colonialism because this was already after independence. But other Africans were still under colonial control.

Secondly, transforming the Ugandan and African societies from pre-industrial to modern societies.  This is still our goal, as you know, and the pursuit of Pan Africanism – working for any of the balkanisation of Africa so as to guarantee the future of the black race and other African peoples. The future of the African people is not guaranteed as long as we are fragmented the way we are politically – small political units.  

I was recently in China. Africans are now flocking into China – I found Ugandans there – because China is now developing. It is a very big power, lots of skyscrapers – we used to go to New York to see skyscrapers. You should go to China; there are more skyscrapers there now and the Africans are already there – nsanga bisibe. They go to where things are already prepared, already arranged. I found them in Beijing speaking Chinese. I asked, “What are you doing?” 

But what is the magnet of China? The magnet of China is the sheer size of China. That is why all these people are going there – it is a big market, it is attractive, you cannot ignore China. But the Republic of Uganda with the President, the Rt. Hon. Speaker, the Chief Justice and hon. Members of Parliament and all the big people, unfortunately we are not very much listened to because we are small; and all African countries are like that. So, that is why from the very beginning the National Resistance Movement said we must resolve the issue of this political balkanisation.

These five are still the strategic goals of the National Resistance Movement. You have seen how we have pursued some of them such as the creation of the peoples power through elected institutions, such as the Resistance Councils which are now called Local Councils, Parliament and the President, all elected by the people. You have seen how we have tamed the state agencies so that they respect the rights of the citizens and residents of Uganda, especially in ending extra-judicial killings.
 
Recently, I was in Wobulenzi and there was somebody reciting what they call in Luganda ‘ebitontome’ – poems. His poem - I cannot remember the whole of it - but when he got to the soldiers he said, “Abasirikale baling’ababikkira”. That soldiers are like nuns; they are so humble. When you meet a soldier, you think that he is a nun, meaning a soldier of UPDF. “Abasirikale baling’ababikira,” that was part of his poem – The people are very observant - because we have told the soldiers to be very respectful of the people. We have tamed the state agencies vis-à-vis the population. In fact, the ones who are not yet tamed are the civilian public officials; these are the ones that need to be tamed actually; they are now the problem. 

You have also seen how we have been standing by the African resistance movements whenever they were fighting for the survival of the black people. You remember how we stood by the ANC of South Africa when Mr Mandela was in prison, and the RPF of Rwanda. Recently I went to attend the 10th anniversary of genocide in Kigali and many guests were standing up and saying, “oh, when people were dying we did not know, it is terrible that…” But for me, I stood up and said, “I have no apologies to make because we made our contribution. We stood by the people who were suffering, so I do not have to apologise like you are apologising.”

I also pointed out that at that time a UN group called UNAMIR was formed and its work was to watch Uganda and ensure that Uganda does not support the people who were being killed. They were not to watch the people committing genocide; no; it was to watch Uganda. But in spite of watching us, we were able to stand by the people who were dying. So, that is our record.

The Congolese Resistance Groups, which I have been fighting recently, and the SPLA of the Sudan - standing by the ANC of South Africa was easier because there was consensus about it; in Africa at least. The other situation was more obscure from the points of view of the general African political class and the perception of the world. It would therefore not have been so easy for us to stand by those struggling peoples if it was not for the mistakes of the regimes against which they were fighting, at the same time meddling in our internal affairs and threatening our security.

Regarding the issues of Pan Africanism and the social metamorphosis of the Ugandan and other African Societies from pre-industrial to modern societies, you know our relentless efforts in spite of the complicated circumstances in Africa. In East Africa, we are gratified that a customs union has been now realised. The Customs Union in Article 75 of the Treaty for East African Community clearly stipulates that the ultimate goal is a political union, a political federation of East Africa. My wish is that this political federation be realised sooner than later. I am going to do everything possible to expedite this process so as to give our people a stronger voice, while bargaining for our legitimate interests as well as rationalising the use of our natural resources. 

The things, which are happening in the world are very dangerous for the human race but especially for the Africans who are disorganised politically. You must have heard of something called global warming - that the globe is getting warmer. Why is the globe getting warmer? -Because of some people who are leading a profligate life. A profligate life means extravagant life. In global warming, some substances create more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and therefore that carbon dioxide acts as a blanket and traps the heat onto the surface of the earth.  So, the world gets warmer. 

Some countries started a movement to stop the global warming by having what they call the Kyoto protocol, the agreement which is supposed to stop the increase of these green house gases so that the world does not become dangerously warm. But certain countries have refused to sign that protocol. When I heard more, I asked, “why are these people refusing to sign this? This is so dangerous for all of us!” I was told that some of them say, “What does it matter?  If the globe becomes warmer it means that Siberia, which is now frozen, would become warm and therefore agricultural.”  So, it does not matter if the world becomes warmer - and Alaska and the other place in Northern Canada will become warmer and therefore ready for agriculture. They are not able to grow anything there now because of the freezing. That is why they do not mind whether the world becomes a sigiri or not. A sigiri is a charcoal stove, for those who do not know our culture here.

Then I asked, “How about us? When the globe becomes warmer, how about Africa, which is already warm?” They said, “That one will become a desert; that is no problem. But the other part will be green” You will become a desert and that is no problem! Which African will stand up and say, “Stop this, you are committing aggression against me?” This is threatened genocide, if you talk of genocide. But can any African stand up and make a stand now? No, we are asking for some little money here; if they give you money, you fall down. They are not looking at our survival. We must be able to negotiate more credibly so that people in the world listen to us, because we matter.

Coming to the issue of transforming our society, you know of my statement at Kyankwanzi last year in March. You also know of the Movement vision, which I presented to a sub-committee of the NRM/O on the 31st of March 2003. One of the main points that vision highlights is the point of export-led growth. This is why we have put a lot of emphasis on analysing the internal, regional and international markets, and how Uganda can access those markets. My persistent message to all of our partners is market access. 

I want the United States to come out on the current status of the African Growth Opportunity Act (AGOA). It is not acceptable to us that the political players of the United States should wait for their presidential elections in November. By that time the momentum on AGOA will have been lost. I am therefore appealing to the players in the United States on both sides of the political spectrum - the Republicans and the Democrats - to come together on this issue of AGOA so that we get the renewal, which we need so that we do not lose momentum. And I would like, honourable Members, when you go to meet the Ambassadors, when you are talking about whatever issues you talk about when you go to meet Ambassadors, also put in the issue of market access, please. Put in the issue of market access; let it be the word everywhere. If they ask, “What can we do for Uganda?” Answer “Market access”, because that is where the future lies. 

I am glad Prime Minister Tony Blair has named a 17-persons African Advisory Group, including some people whom I know such as Dr Amwaku of the ECA, Dr William Kalema of the Uganda Investment Authority and Dr Anna Tibaijuka, my clanswoman from Tanzania - you know my clan goes into Tanzania. So, this lady who was named by Tony Blair is actually my clanswoman, Dr Anna Tibaijuka, a very brilliant woman, very knowledgeable about trade issues. I am sure those people, especially Dr William Kalema and Dr Anna Tibaijuka, will emphasise to Prime Minister Blair the paramount importance of trade access, because I have discussed it with them in the past; they know it, especially Anna Tibaijuka is very active because she was in that office in Geneva - whatever they do there.

Another point in the Movement vision is value addition, ending the slave practice of exporting raw materials so that we get a higher value for ourselves. It is not only getting a high value, but also creating more jobs here.  This is why I will, by all means possible, ensure that the Ugandan companies involved in converting our cotton into fabric and garments, those involved in roasting all our Arabica coffee, those companies involved in processing our honey, those involved in the processing of our bananas, fruits, leather, beef, milk, etcetera, will get all the support they need. We shall have to give them all the support they need. (Applause) We cannot do all this in a single leap. We cannot support all of them at a go; we shall have to prioritise. I am now concentrating on coffee, cotton, bananas and honey. I want all of you to support me in this revolution - I call it a revolution. I am glad our private companies are already exporting processed fish, exporting processed tea and as you know, British American Tobacco has for a long time been processing tobacco leaf into cigarettes.  

As I said in my address to the African Development Bank, one stimulus that can help our society to transition is paying our scientists world-class salaries so that they use their knowledge to help us achieve this strategic goal of adding value to our raw materials.  

These scientists can perform miracles if they are assisted.  I am assisting them already to patent their innovations through the Harare process.  A number of them have patented their innovations through that office in Harare.  Our Government has set up an innovation fund to be administered through the Science Council under the Ministry of Finance.  This fund will help our scientists to develop their products and commercialise them.  There may be other scientists who may invent new products but who may not be interested in commercialising those products.  We shall use part of this fund to make what we call, “Presidential awards” to such scientists for recognition. I already have candidates who will get these awards. These awards will not be just mere certificates; it will have to have some cash in it.   I have been talking to the scientists; there are those who want to commercialise what they have invented, and we are ready to help them.  It is now almost a year since I started telling the people to work on this, but finally there is this fund in the Science Council under the Ministry of Finance.  So, if they do not get private partners to invest with them, we shall help them to become investors themselves by giving them access to this fund.

However, there are scientists who are interested in discovering and giving their patent to others to develop.  Those ones we shall reward by a cash gift, which will come from this fund.  Anybody who invents something new, we award him and if does not want to commercialise it, we give him a cash award.  I have got some figure- I do not want to mention it here- but it will be attractive to our scientists.  You will find that they are putting on better shoes and this will encourage them to do more research.  

In fact some of the researchers are taking advantage of our traditional knowledge, because there is a lot of traditional knowledge which is not described in modern terms.  That knowledge is very useful for the human race.  The human race may get salvation from Africa by these young scientists who are now describing what we have always known, but doing it in a modern scientific way by packaging it and producing a few innovations like preservatives.  

In spite of the fact that we have not wholly resolved the issue of quota free and tariff free access to the international markets- In fact I remember one of those people put on Mr Blair’s Committee, this clans-woman from Tanzania, coaching us in a certain meeting.  She said, “Even if you do not understand all the trade issues, when you go to the meeting, you simply say, ‘quota free, tariff free’ even if you do not understand the rest, that is enough”-(Laughter)- She was coaching us.  So in spite of the fact that we have not got this quota free and tariff free access in a secure manner because AGOA now needs to be consolidated by some new measures which Mr Bush needs to take.  Like, for instance, there is a question of third party fabrics, because the textiles we have here are not yet world class.  

NYTIL is making textiles but they are not world class quality.  So, Tri-Star cannot tailor the cloth which is being made in NYTIL to export to the United States. NYTIL has been crying for $12 million for a long time to improve the machines so that they can make that world-class fabric.  They can make it, but they need those machines.  That is our system here; it is not thoroughly tuned for that type of work, but we are going to sort it out.   We take long but we always act.  That problem of funding these factories will be solved in one-way or the other.   

So because of that, Tri-Star now is importing what we call “Third Party Fabrics” from Asia and they come and tailor them here, and yet AGOA for good reason, is about to say “Use all your fabrics” in other words, use the fabrics of NYTIL, but those of NYTIL are not ready.  It is much better to use the ones of NYTIL, but they are not ready now. Why are they not ready? Because there is no money for industries. There is money for other things, but not for creating wealth.  Next time when I come here, I will talk to you about interest rates. That is a topic I did not include in this speech.  The Minister of Finance maybe on Budget day should talk to you about interest rates.  

In spite of the fact that we have not wholly resolved the issue of quota free and tariff free access to the international market and we are still largely exporting raw materials and Kony terrorism has undermined our tourism for many years, especially in the north, it is remarkable to see how our exports have diversified and grown in terms of earnings.  

In 1992, our total export earnings from the exports of goods and services were a mere US$235 million. Today these exports of goods and services are US$929 million.  What is interesting is that coffee earnings are a mere US$107 million of this, so this is 12 per cent of the total export earnings.  The non-coffee, the ones minus coffee, currently gives us US$520 million.  The export of services gives us another US$303 million.  

The US$520 million is from the following items: Electricity, we are earning US$13.2 million; Cotton, we are earning US$28.9 million; tea, we are earning US$38.3 million; tobacco, we are earning US$38.9 million - this sector is growing very fast, very soon it will be more than US$50 million- hides and skins, US$5.4 million; maize we export, not the one that is sold here, we are earning US$18 million; flowers, US$28.9 million, and others US$252 million.

So, you can see that while at the beginning we were depending solely on coffee for earning foreign exchange, now coffee earnings are a small portion of the total export earnings.  These export figures does not include approximately US$700 million that is remittances from Ugandans who are engaged in kyeyo.  This is quite remarkable!  If only we were not exporting raw materials, our earnings would be in scores of billions of dollars.  This growth in exports has been because of correct policies in certain aspects.  This is because of liberalization, privatization and repairing of the infrastructure such as roads, electricity, telephones and so forth.

We have made other achievements such as a general leap in research.  There is a lot of research information in the Research Institutes, but it is not being used; it is barely scratched. A lot of these research products are not utilized because of lack of markets.  So, the research information is just sitting there in the Research Institutes and universities.

Apart from the growth of exports, there has been all round growth in whole economy.  The average rate of growth for the last 14 years is 6.5 per cent per annum.  The average industrial rate of growth has been 10 per cent per annum.  The highest rate of industrial growth in 1995 was 21 per cent, and the lowest in 1999 was only 5.3 per cent.  The average rate of growth of services has been 7.4 per cent per annum for the last 14 years.  The rate of construction has been on the average 9.5 per cent per annum for the last 14 years.  The highest rate of growth in construction in 1994 was 26 per cent.  

When we congratulate ourselves on these achievements, we need to remind ourselves that these are really peanuts.  When I stand here, President of the Republic of Uganda and flanked by all these powerful people, men and women, and I announce with a lot of happiness that we are now earning almost one billion dollars from exports and that our kyeyo people are bringing in another US$700 million, People outside there are laughing and saying, “Bambi, look at these ones.”  Now, why are these people laughing at us?  Let us look at the others and compare, how much they are earning from exports.  You know, our Baganda people say, “Atanayitayita yatenda nnyina okufumba.” This means, “A child who has never visited other homes is the one who praises his mother that she is a good cook.”  The Banyankole say, “Akana katagyenda, kagyira ngu nyina atekagye.”  It is the same like in Luganda.

Egypt is not very far from us; it is earning about $16 billion; that is better but not very far ahead.  South Korea is a small country half the size of Uganda.  South Korea is earning $190 billion from exports, Malaysia $108 billion, Thailand $81 billion and United Kingdom $410 billion.  Here in Africa, our neighbours not very far from us, Tanzania $1.5 billion, Kenya $3.1 billion and South Africa brings in $36 billion. We are far behind. These other people, especially the ones outside Africa, are on another planet.  

Recently I was in China. China is now earning $400 billion from exports.  India lagged behind because they did not liberalize the economy but now they are earning more than $50 billion from exports because they had an economy which was not liberalized. They are more import-substitution oriented than export oriented.  But now they have passed the $50 billion mark in their exports.  These other people are on another planet. 

The total exports of East Africa are not more than $7 billion.  We have also made dramatic gains in the education sector. Primary school enrolment, as I have told you many times, has jumped from 2.5 million to 7.7 million – triple. Secondary school enrolment has jumped from 230,000 to 683,000, almost 700,000 in 2003. University enrolment from 5,000 students to 64,000 students, almost 65,000 students in 2003. This figure does not include Ugandan students studying abroad.

In the area of safe water in the rural areas, the percentage of rural population accessing safe water has risen from 16 per cent to 58 per cent this year.  The figures for the urban areas are from 20 per cent to 65 per cent in 2003.  

The number of households with permanent buildings – this is quite interesting because I have dug out this figure from the census figures – the number of households with permanent buildings has risen from 404,000 in 1991, which was at that time 11 per cent of all the households in the whole country to 2.6 million in 2002, which is 51 per cent of the total households in Uganda.  It is now of course higher than this.  Somebody murdered my figure – the total houses in Uganda in 1991 were 3.4 million permanent and non-permanent, in the whole country.  The ones with permanent material at that time in 1991 were 404,000 and that was 11 percent of the total population, which was 3.4 million.  In 2002, the number of households was 5.8 million in the whole of Uganda.  People with permanent building were 2.6, almost 2.7 million at that time and that was 51 per cent of that total. This you can see for yourselves if you fly by any means- (Laughter) There are many means, you can take Eagle Air. I have been using your facility to fly around, your helicopter, so I see better.  I should take some of the people who do not see very well like Ken Lukyamuzi, Aggrey Awori and Cecilia Ogwal.  If I take them in the helicopter, they will be able to see these developments much better- (Laughter) 

When it comes to physical infrastructure, the generation of electricity has grown from 60 mega watts to now 390 mega watts.  If Bujagali had not delayed us we would now be talking of 600 mega watts.  Kilometres of tarmacked roads have increased from – I do not think this the right figure. I will have to sort the figure out- but anyway the kilometrerage has increased.

Telephones have risen from 20,000 fixed lines in 1986 to 67,000 fixed lines and 870,000 mobile lines.  That is almost 1,000,000 mobile lines.  This is phenomenal!  This reminds me in 1980, you remember when I was in the Government of Binaisa – is it Binaisa – yes, it must have been Binaisa, one of those temporary Presidents who were here. (Laughter)  I went to represent Uganda on the First Anniversary with Akena Pajok.  I think by that time I was - because I am the one who led the delegation with Akena Pajok to the First Anniversary of Saddam Hussein.  He had been in power for one year and he held a big party. He called people from all over the world to go and celebrate that one year of being in office!  So, we went and met a number of ministers.  Now, there was this Minister of Communications, Ramathan.  So, I went with Akena Pajok to see him. He asked us, “How many telephone lines do you have in Uganda?”  Akena Pajok knew the figure.  He said, “28,000 lines,” and Ramathan said, “No, for us we have got 800,000 lines.”  Oh!  I felt so small in that office of Ramathan.  But now I am happy to have beaten Ramathan -(Laughter)   Well, maybe by the time he was removed, he had three or four million – I do not know. The demand for these telephones is very high.  You may think that you have exhausted the demand. 

The other day the people on the road at Kanoni stopped me.  They said, “You must go and tell MTN to come and put a mast here because we are very angry, we want to answer - and these are Movement people- they are being provoked by those who go on the radios and make stupid statements.  They said, “We want to ring and shut up those people.”  So, when I came, I asked the MTN people to put up a mast for these people. They are now putting up a mast.  Then I went to Kapeka. The demand is the same. They said,” We want a mast here.”  So, the demand for these telephones is very high.  That means that the society is not as poor as you may think.  

In order to cause transformation of society, we must among other steps create employment.  By creating employment, especially employment in Industry and services, this is how you transform society.  If people start shifting from Agriculture into Industry and Services, that is a sign of transformation, if you are looking for transformation.

Now, the industrial and service jobs in Uganda, in 1991 there were 135,563 employees.  The same jobs in 2002 were 444,118 employees.  This figure has gone up by almost three times, but this is not good enough, and in fact the Ministry of Finance, which works with some of our partners, the multilateral agencies, like IMF and World Bank, you should be using these parameters.  If an economy is creating more and more industrial and service jobs, then that economy is transforming.   

The rise of the industrial and service jobs is one of the indicators that the economy is transitioning from an agricultural one producing just raw materials in a new colonial setting to an industrial one guided by the rationality of the law of comparative advantages.  The figures of the jobs I have quoted above do not include the informal sector.  These are figures registered by the Registrar of Companies.  In other words, these are the formal sector jobs.

The greatest struggle in human history is the struggle of concepts; it is concepts that will show us a correct way forward or a defective one when we are dealing with issues.  If you make a conceptual mistake, you will in the end get wrong results; there are no two ways about it.  One of the contentious issues in Africa today is, what is primary, high rates of economic growth or control of population growth? I normally hear people saying, “The economy is not growing because the population is growing very fast”. The economy is being undermined by the population growth.  I have never believed in that line and I have also not bothered to think more about it.  But recently I started thinking about it.  Is this really true, and my mental computer was retrieving some old figures, and I asked myself, “What was the population of China in 1965, because I remembered it? What was the population of China because I was following issues even at that time? What was the population of China 1965? But what was the population of India?  I thought I remembered the figure. But I rang Dr Musinguzi of the population centre to say, “Crosscheck for me what was the population of India and China in 1965.”

So, here are the figures: I am reminding myself of the figures that were everywhere in the media in the 1960s. I am reminding myself that the population of China in 1965 was 729 million people. It was a poor population then. That population is now 1.3 billion and in spite of the population growing, the society is now richer than it was in 1965. The population of India in 1965 was 495 million, it is now 1 billion; the Indians are much richer now.

Therefore, in my opinion the primary question for Uganda and Africa is ensuring a high rate of economic growth. Although the rate of population growth in Uganda is now 3.4 per cent per annum, if the rate of economic growth was 11 per cent, that population would in fact be an asset, not a problem. In the end, modernisation would by its very source be an element in population control. Educated modernised people with good jobs do not go for many children. It is the non-modernised people who need many children as an insurance against child mortality. The Banyankole say: “Nyinomwe niwe nyina busha” (The mother of one is a mother of nobody) and that was a summary of the experience because of high infant mortality. If you produce one child, it is as if you have produced nobody because he can easily die and you remain with nothing. So, as insurance, produce many; many will die but some will survive. That has been in the psychic of these people and the medicine for that is modernisation.

If we can pull those people from the villages and they come to the towns to work in factories, to work in hotels. You ask somebody, how many children do you have? That somebody has got 37 children.  There is one of my friends who said he had 54. He said, “Abaana banshobire. I cannot manage the children; they are 54.”  Now, if he is working in the town in a flat where will he put 54 children? But as long as they are in the villages there and as long as there is some land, even 60 can run around in the compound and they eat menvu.

UPE has been a great success; my idea is to extend this to Universal Secondary Education. (Applause)  It is not impossible to provide universal secondary education; I have been thinking about this. If we were to provide universal secondary education, I was estimating, I asked these people to give me figures but these ones are a bit jumbled up; I have not understood them yet. But I was making a mental calculation and I was saying, suppose we had two million students in the secondary schools, because now the students as you see, they are something like 700,000. These are students in secondary schools who are both in government schools and in private schools. The ones in private schools are half of that figure and the ones in government schools are the other half. But suppose this figure was two million because that is where we are heading with UPE; we shall soon hit a figure of two million.

In a rural school, if you charge school fees of Shs 200,000 per year provided the school is a day school, students will study. Assuming you are paying for one million because the other one million may be privately sponsored; there are rich people who do not want their children to go and squeeze in public schools, so they go for private schools. So, they leave room for us in the government schools.  That would mean we would have an extra bill of Shs 200 billion to pay school fees for one million children in secondary schools. But this does not include infrastructure, building new schools; does not include the salary of teachers. It is mainly paying school fees for those children. So, this figure is not that excessive now.

If our tax collection could go up, I think the Minister of Finance when he comes here, he will tell you that our tax collection next year will be Shs 1900 billion. Remember we came from Shs 44 billion, we are now at Shs 1900 billion. But if this tax collection could go up to Shs 4000 billion or Shs 5000, supporting universal secondary education will not be impossible. So, we are going to study both the tax collection on one side and study what it needs, because I would not like these children to “Kukona” as they say in one of the languages when the food is neither raw nor cooked - left in the middle there.  It is something we should aim at as a target, but it must go hand in hand with tax collection. Our tax collection must go from 20 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) now to something like 25 per cent or even 30 per cent, like in some countries.  

What my people had written here is that - let me read it for you, they have inserted it in my speech:  “If we are to provide universal secondary education, the capitation grant, which includes school fees, would increase from the current Shs 8 billion to Shs 30 billion per year, and the wage bill for teachers will rise from the current Shs 76 billion to Shs 134 billion per year for 1,000 students in each school.” I told the Permanent Secretary that suppose these ones – in fact I had told him two million - I divide them into secondary schools of 1,000 students in each school. So, that is what he is talking about. If each school were to have 1,000 students, we would run only 369 secondary schools from the current 751 schools. Actually the schools would reduce. If we made them 1,000 the number would reduce; that is what he is saying.  

But this is something we are going to study. I have been thinking about this quite a lot and I do not think our children should be allowed to “kukona” because of - whenever I go home I really get besieged by children. You feel like running away and going to the French Riviera like some of the presidents used to do, because when I go to Kisozi I find 100 children waiting for me there. Even though these presidential guards try to keep them away, you find a child hiding in a bush. When he sees my car he comes in the middle of the road. I ask,  “What is the problem?” And then he replies,  “Oh I cannot afford secondary school fees.”  I am told that my poor Members of Parliament are also trying to be small presidents there in their areas –(Laughter)- and they are getting quite a lot of problems, and they do not have the experience of some of the old people on how to avoid these people. So, it is a big problem. 

Like the other time, there is a village called Kyaasi next to my farm, I had like 50 children there crying. We must find a solution. (Applause)

I told my poor Members of Parliament, “Tell them ‘I am not the President; I do not have money’.” That is what you should tell them.  We must find a solution for these children and those big families, which have got so many children. The mothers are the ones who bring up many of these children. It is quite a pressure and for me to walk away from children is very difficult, so I really get into problems and then my staff get very angry with me, “But, Mr President, Mzee you know that we do not have money.”  But this child is crying, what do I do! It is quite a problem. So, I think we better, as we say in our language, “cook our heads” “Kufumba mutwe” and see what we do about this problem of post-primary support for these children.

On the side of security, you remember last year in June, Kony in desperation on account of our pressure tried to spread his terrorism to Teso. You remember I wrote an article in the newspapers telling all of you that that adventure of Kony would lead to his great weakening. Since the terrorism of Kony has dragged on for a long time, some people did not believe what I said. However, there is no doubt that the Kony terrorists are now greatly weakened. (Applause)

We have not completed the building of the core assets of our Army. Now that the problem of under funding is somewhat addressed - I must thank you for agreeing with me to address the question of under funding the Army. I am told that you are now very resolved to support me in funding the Army –(Applause)- and you remember when we made that internal adjustment of 23 per cent from other ministries and bought some assets for the Army, it made the work of the Army much easier.  Nevertheless, although the problem of acquiring these core assets is not yet finished, now that we have the money we are acquiring these assets slowly. Nevertheless, using the improved assets which we have now acquired, great blows have been delivered by the UPDF to the terrorists. 

Since January 2004 up to the 1 May 2004, the following achievements have been registered:

• Terrorists killed: 781 including 42 they were calling commanders.  

• Those who came out by themselves: 372 including 52 commanders. Many of these young people are coming out in big numbers including their commanders.

• Those taken prisoner – 179. 

• Abductees liberated – 1,565.

• SMGs rifles captured – 531.

• Some slightly bigger guns which they got from Sudan known as SPG9. SPG9 is for hitting Mambas and for hitting tanks and so on. We captured two of those.

• SPG10, another gun for attacking mambas and tanks; we captured one.

• RPG tubes – we captured three.

• Machine guns known as G2 – we captured four.

• Anti-tank mines, the ones that can blow up a lorry and so on – 33 were captured.

• Anti-personnel mines, the ones which chop off people’s feet – 19 were captured.

• Some anti-craft machine guns, which they were using to try and shoot at our helicopters known as 12.7 – two were captured.

The remnants of the Kony terrorists are now fugitives trying to hide. In fact, many of the operations which are still going on in the North are no longer really serious fighting as such, it is now more like hunting people who are hiding; and the whole of Teso is peaceful; the whole of Lango is peaceful. The activities are now in the three districts of Acholi, mainly Gulu after the Nile and Kitgum to some extent but otherwise Lango is quite peaceful. The remnants of Kony are now fugitives trying to hide.
  
The improved assets enable us to reach any point in the Northern Uganda or any part of the area of Southern Sudan whereby agreement with the Government of Sudan allowed us to operate in a matter of minutes. This is what I was telling you. People were saying, “Why has this problem lasted long?” It is because the Army was under equipped. That is all; there is no other reason. But now with better equipment, we can reach any point in that area, including Southern Sudan where the Government of Sudan has agreed with us that we can operate up to 4 degrees north from the Equator. 

To give one example, on the 17 May 2004, we got information that Odhiambo, the killer who was involved in the Barlonyo incident, was slightly north of Kinti Bridge on the road to Alur junction. This is in Southern Sudan towards Juba; if you look on the map it is quite far. The gunships were over their heads in a matter of 40 minutes, and they sprung out of Gulu. So, these people were almost near Juba and we got information; within 40 minutes the gunships were over them. This was on the 17th of May. If they were staging from Ngomoromo, which is at the border, the time would have been much shorter. As a consequence, 34 terrorists in that particular group were killed and many were injured. If soldiers had to walk on foot, they would not have easily caught up with that terrorist band. So, we would have endless operations; you know, somebody on foot following another one on foot in the bush is just like a game.  

Our core assets are improving even more. It would be almost impossible for anybody to hide from the security forces for any length of time by day or by night. Because of the Army equipping, we have not been using the night. Although we try to train soldiers in night fighting, without night gadgets it is not easy. It takes a lot of dedication to do good work at night when you are not well equipped.  But we are solving that problem so that the Army is able to operate by day and by night without stop, and with that capacity there is no way thugs like this one can disturb the peace of a country. This is the capacity we have been struggling for since 1992 when we reduced the size of the Army in the hope of improving the equipment of the smaller Army. The under budgeting undermined that plan. I am glad that all the political leaders of Uganda are now unanimous about ensuring that the Army is fully funded, not under funded, and I must thank you very much. (Applause)

I would like to end by thanking the Speaker, for the leadership of this House over the years. I also thank the members of this august House for working smoothly with the Executive. (Applause and Laughter) This Parliament is better than the last one -(Applause)- and I think that is why many Members of Parliament in the last Parliament could not get re-elected because 50 per cent of them collapsed. They could not come back because - I think creating friction with the Executive had created some bad luck for them. So, be careful this time. (Laughter) It is always important to remember that if we are to build good and strong governance, all the branches of government must support and not work against each other. The Executive is grateful for the good relationship, which exists between the Legislature and the Executive in the absence of whips, because we do not have whips yet.  

During the 3rd Session, Government presented a total of 29 bills to Parliament. Of those, 11 were passed and 18 are with various committees of Parliament as unfinished business and will be hopefully dealt with in this 4th Session. 21 resolutions were passed and 24 reports were adopted. 

During this 4th Session 2004/05, Government will introduce 86 new bills on top of the 18 bills carried forward from 2003/04. You must earn your bread, you remember? The Banyankole say: “Abuwategyire embogo, ekiija akatemba omuti.” You know these Banyankole used to put on sandals made of buffalo skin in the past, so a man had old sandals and he prayed to God. He said: “I wish God you give me a buffalo and I kill it, and I get a fresh hide from which I can make new sandals.” Now, God listened to his wish and the buffalo came. When the buffalo came, he ran and climbed a tree instead of killing it. So, when I went to the Republic of Ireland, there was a certain Irish man who was telling lies about Uganda. He had been in Congo and he was spreading lies about us on the BBC television. So, I was coming from America and I said, “I will stop in Ireland to confront that man.” When I came, I looked for him, the man never showed up. So, I went on Irish television and I told them of this proverb. The Irish have not forgotten the man who wished for a buffalo and when it came he just run away and could not confront it.

So, Members of Parliament, you wished for leadership, you have the leadership now; and the ministers you wished for leadership, you have the leadership now. So, do not climb the tree. You must deal with all these bills. 86 new ones and 18 old ones; that is more than 100.  So, see how you work, even work on Fridays; miss some of your free time and serve your country. 

I appeal to this august House to work quickly on the following bills so that our political transition, security, peace and marital bliss can be enhanced: 

• The Referendum and Other Provisions Bill, 2003

• The Uganda People’s Defence Forces Bill, 2003

• The Domestic Relations Bill, 2003 -(Applause)- and

• The Amnesty (Amendment) Bill, 2003.

I am also going to direct the Attorney General’s Office to propose an amendment on the penal code about two issues: People who commit economic sabotage.  There are people who commit economic sabotage, economic crimes like you remember the other example of people who were putting explosives in the lake to kill fish that time. You remember when the European Union banned our fish because of the activities of these people. Something serious must be done to these people, not just to arrest them then they are released on bail -it is a very dangerous game. And then corruption, I hope we have dealt with it; there are strong punitive actions against it. 

But the other issue, which I would like to have amendment on, is people who try to print currency.  There are people who try to make fake notes and we keep arresting them, we confiscate the machines, and then the police releases them, and then – we must give these people very stiff sentence so that they stay in. So, I will direct the Attorney General to propose amendments, which I hope you will help him to pass through quickly so that the penal code has got more teeth.  

A lot of work awaits you in the fourth session. In the past, this House lacked a quorum in many sittings to do its work. Oh, hon. Awori is saying that ministers never come; that is an interesting point. The Prime Minister is vigorously protesting that the ministers come. I pray that the lack of a quorum be confined to the past so that you can complete your legislative programme. I urge you to ensure that not so many bills are carried over to the next session. Thank you very much, for listening to me. (Applause)

4.30
THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, on behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and I believe of our distinguished guests, I want to sincerely thank you for carrying out your constitutional duty of telling us about the State of the Nation and your proposed programme for the following financial year. As I said before, my assessment is that the honourable members have come back equipped and ready to face any task that may come to us.  Definitely they are not frightened about the proposed 86 bills, they will definitely do the job and we are resolved that we are going to do it together, we are going to listen to each other so that we produce what the country expects of us. 

Your Excellency, the honourable members will be given time to make their formal appreciation of this address and should they have any question about it, Your Excellency you will know and then I think you will be able to give us some answers.  

Before we adjourn, I want to take this opportunity to thank the organisers of COMESA - there is a conference going on here - who kindly agreed for us to share these facilities with them. Originally we had planned to hold this important address in our premises, but we realised that we had many distinguished guests and they would not sit comfortably as they are sitting here. So, thank you very much COMESA organisers for allowing us to share this facility for this occasion.

Your Excellency, as you were giving us the address, I received an important fax concerning our national soccer team, from the Minister in charge of Sports and allow me, Your Excellency and honourable members to read it. It is addressed to me: 

“Football match - Cranes versus Congo - at Namboole Stadium Sunday, 6 June 2004:”
The honourable Minister of State of Education in charge of Sports, hon. Oryem Henry Okello, invites His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni –(Applause)- and all honourable members of Parliament to a very crucial match between the Cranes of Uganda and DRC – Congo at Namboole Stadium on Sunday, 6 June 2004.” 

That is the day after tomorrow. Kick off is at 4.30 p.m. and an appeal is made to you to mobilise your constituents to come in big numbers to give support to our national team. 

And with this, I want to remind honourable members that the session has started, but it is important that as soon as possible, we set up the various committees that we normally have. Therefore, I will be adjourning this House to Tuesday to enable you to come and register so that soon we constitute the committees; and when the budget is read on Thursday, the committees will be in place, because with the kind of work which we heard that we are most likely to have, it is necessary that we start on our work as soon as possible and economise on time, so that that important business which I told you of before, when it comes, we can embark on it and finish it within time. With this, we come to the end of today’s business, Your Excellency. The House is adjourned to Tuesday but this is subject to the national anthem being played.

(National Anthem)

(The House rose at 4.35 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 8 June 2004.)


 

