Tuesday, 6th June, 2000

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in the International Conference Centre Kampala

National Anthem

Prayers

The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair

(The House was called to order)

OPENING OF THE FIFTH SESSION OF THE SIXTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

READING OF THE PROCLAMATION TO MARK THE COMMENCEMENT
OF THE 5TH SESSION OF THE 6TH PA5RLIAMENT OF UGANDA AND TO
DECLARE THE NILE HOTEL INTERNATIONAL AND THE ADJACENT
AREAS AS PRECINCTS OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Proclamation. Whereas Parliament was prorogued on the 4th of May, 2000 and whereas it is expedient that Parliament be summoned; and 
Whereas His Excellency the President under Article 101 (2) of the Constitution has to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation; 
Now therefore, I Francis Joash Ayume, Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by the Constitution, the National Assembly powers and privileges’ Act and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda hereby proclaim;
One; that a Session of Parliament shall be held at Parliament House, Kampala commencing on the 6th day of June 2000 at 2.00.  
Two; that the premises of the Nile Hotel International, commonly known as the International Conference Centre including its four courtyard and garden to be the precincts of Parliament for purposes of the First day of the Session which is the 6th day of June, 2000. Given under my hand at Parliament House Kampala this 6th of June 2000.

STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS BY H.E THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, it is now my singular honour and privilege to invited you, the President to address Parliament on the state of the nation.

HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDNET OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr. Y. K. Museveni) The Rt. Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Her Excellency the Vice President, the hon. Members of Parliament, the honoured guests and fellow Ugandans.  The Sixth Parliament was mainly entrusted by the people of Uganda with the task of passing laws to implement the 1995 Constitution.  In the last four Sessions you have more or less working with executive accomplished that task some delays notwithstanding. I hope that during the Fifth Session, you will endeavour to pass the National Planning Authority Bill and Legislation for the recall of Members of Parliament in order to fully execute your mandate.  Of course, all hon. Members know that the Referendum and other Provisions’ Act which legitimise the referendum during this country shortly to determine the political system under which Ugandans will be governed is part and parcel of that constitutional obligation. There are other seminal bills including the universities and other tertiary institutions, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, deployment of troops outside Uganda and the Condominium Properties Bill, which requires your urgent attention.

This Government and the Parliament operate without a Whip and has left the Members of this House to be guided by their consciences.  In mature democracies we know that the Whip is used to rally supporters of the government in parliament behind legislation which it considers crucial to the implementation of its programmes. This has not been the case in this House.  We have not been using the Whip.  In order not to cause paralysis therefore, giving the new Constitution, which gave a greater role than the previous ones to Parliament, I have strongly recommended, in the past to you, that we use the Movement Caucus as a clearing house of all issues.  If this is done I am sure there will be less delay and more cohesion.

The Hon. Speaker and Hon. Members, nearly five years ago, in my election manifesto, tackling the tasks ahead - that was the title of the manifesto - I promised to tackle all the following tasks: to modernise the country, to improve security, to decentralise power, to carry out land reform, to restock cattle in the areas which had lost their herds, to empower women and youth, to liberalize the economy further than we had done after that time to protect the environment, to build and repair the infrastructure, to promote education and health, to work towards region integration and to fight corruption.  As this is my last address to the nation before the next Presidential and Parliamentary Elections, it is fitting that Ugandans are told how far we have gone in tackling the above tasks.  

Modernisation is a process.  It does not happen over night.  What matters to us is that we are moving in that direction.  We have come up with our vision  20 –25 and if we follow that reason, Uganda should become a middle income country by the year 20-25.  The key ingredient in our  modernisation formula is the liberalisation of the economy.  Government has fully liberalized before the exchange regime.  We have abolished  price controls, we have  removed trade monopolies, the government is divesting public enterprises , we have removed interest rates controls, we have reduced the barriers for the registration of new private banks and the government has greatly restricted its role to only policy formulation and regulation rather than hyper active intervention in the business activities of the economy.  With continued fiscal and monetary discipline, we have been able to reduce inflation from three digits in 1986/7, which that year was 216.5 per annum to single digit.  In 1993/4, inflation came down 6.5 per cent and then to negative 0.2 per cent per annum  in 1998/99.  For the Year 1999/2000 the rate of inflation is going to be 4.7 per cent p.a.  The country has sustained a broadly based economic growth for the last 14 years.  Real  domestic product (GDP) growth  averaged 6.3 per cent between 1986/1998.  Between 1996,1997,1999, 2000 , it averaged 6.3 per cent.  Despite population growth rates averaging 2.9 per cent per annum in this period , the sustained rates of real GDP growth have raised per capita income output at an average rate of 3.4 per cent per annum and the size of the economy has doubled in size since 1986.  During the same period, most of the sectors grew at more than 5 per cent.  The fasted growing sectors are construction at an average rate of growth of 12 .9 per cent per annum.  Construction houses and office blocks.  Manufacturing has been growing at a rate of 12 per cent  per annum.  Hotels  and Restaurants  have been growing at a rate of 12 per cent per annum.  Telecommunications has been growing at a rate of 8.3 per cent per annum and Agricultural Production has been growing at a rate of 5.7 per cent per annum.  This sustained rapid economic growth is a major achievement especially compared to the declines of the 1970s and the early 1980s.  In regard to the infrastructure, government has achieved significant progress especially in the revamping and construction of roads.  Between 1986-1997, 65 per cent of the total feeder roads network has been restored to motorable condition relative to less that 20 per cent in 1986.  With regard to Trunk roads,  barely 10 per cent of those roads were in a fair to good condition in 1986.  Between 1997 and 1998, 70 per cent of the total network of the trunk roads were worked on and are in good condition now.  

With regard to electricity in 1986, the Owen Falls  Dam – Jinja now renamed Nalubale Power Station was generating only 60 mega watts and I am told that Nalubale has generated some heat .  I saw one hon. Member of Parliament, putting it inaccurately  to the public that Nalubale is not in Mukono District .  I think the MP needs a guided tour to know where the power station is.  It is clearly in Mukono District.  And the new one is clearly in Jinja District.  Since I know my geography very well, the problem being that I have walked on foot through most of these places, while other people have been driving; so sometimes when you are driving you do not know the areas very well.  I saw somebody misinforming the public.  Somebody was saying that both of them are in Jinja District that is not true.  Today, Nalubale Power Station (NPS) has been fully revamped and is generating 180 mg watts.  Construction of the Owen Falls Dam extension is advanced and earlier this month, I had the honour to commission the first unit of 40 mg watts produced at the extension, which we named Kiira.  The Kiira if it was in Ankole, would call it Kiruruma because according to Lusoga language Kuyira is when you make that noise of roaring noise.  And we call it okururuma in Runyankole so it will be Kiruruma.  So the Banyankole could call it Kiruruma but it is Kiira but they do not have the honour of being near the dam so they cannot assert their rights so closely.  So this new power station , with the support of Cabinet, I named it Kiira Power Station.  At the moment, this one will produce, is now really producing  40 mg watts.  At the moment our peak demand of electricity is 250 mg watts.  You know when the demand is high or is  at the peak, what  we need is to handle 150 mg watts, which of course shows how backward our economy is.  Because 250 mg watts is not much really.  But the other time when I was opening a new power station, my people dug up figures and in 1954, the consumption of electricity in Uganda was 15 mg watts.  And you can see how really backward we were.  Even more backward than we are today.  Domestic demand is growing at a rate of  2 Mega Watts per month.  That means that by the end of the year it is 24 Mega Watts more than it was at the beginning of the year, although it seems now they have revised the figures, because at one time they were saying it was 4 Mega Watts, now they are saying, it is 2 Mega Watts.  Figures are a bit to fluctuate quite a lot in Uganda.  You must be very careful with the statistics here.  But anyway, if it is the additional annual demand, then the additional demand is 24 Mega Watts good.  When the five units of the extension  come on stream later this year, we shall have enough power to meet domestic demand and to export more power to our energy thirsty neighbours.

Now, you remember a few months ago, I had an altercation with some people who were saying that Uganda was in danger of too much electricity, and you remember we had a big debate until we had to disappoint our Egyptian friends who had come with the intention of building a big Power Station at Kalagala, that could yield 500 Mega Watts.  We had to disappoint them and said, “Go away, people have said that we are in danger of too much electricity”.  So, the Egyptians went when they were very angry.  I am the one who had invited those people, because I met President Mubarak and I said, “Bring all the investors you have, I will accommodate them in Uganda”, and he introduced me to those people.  They came, they spoilt money and then we had to tell to go away.

Now, before we had finished discussing the matter, we have now a big crisis in one of our neighbouring countries - they do not have electricity; they have got big power shortage – in Kenya.  I had said that there is no way you can have too much electricity in Uganda.  They will get demand for it, but I had to yield to those pressures.  The Banyankole say, “Owamiira ekiniga amira engundu” meaning, “if you are angry and you swallow the anger, then you wait until your father dies”.  If your father disappoints you, and you are very angry with him, you should not show your anger to your father; you should swallow it, and by swallowing it, when your father dies, he will give you the principle bull because you swallowed the anger, you will also now swallow the principle bull.  So, I had to swallow the anger and just get on the business.  But these are the sort of wrong decisions.

Electricity is like coffee export, if you do not consume it you can export it.  How can some body say, you have got too much coffee now to export when the demand of coffee in the world is still less than the supply.  But anyway, this crisis in Kenya has just indicated what I have always been saying.

When I was opening that factory – the Power Station – I pointed out that Uganda has got a comparative advantage in power because we happen to have these rivers which have got more reliable water.  I hope every body has learnt from all these mistakes.  Now, people are running up and down, bringing these oil generators.  The electricity produced by these oil generators is about six times more – 24 cents instead of 4 cents, let us say, that is 6 times!  But any way, the Banyankole were philosophers long ago, so when you swallow the anger, in the end you swallow the principle bull in the kraal.  So, I had to swallow my anger to disappoint the Egyptians.

When the hon. Members of this House passed the Electricity Bill in October, last year, and I must really salute you for that -(Applause)-, you made it possible to eliminate the monopoly of the Uganda Electricity Board in the generation, transmission and selling of electricity.  Actually, you and I are going to go into history in some of these issues.   When the future generations come, they say, “Who are these wise men and women who made these big changes?”  They will say, “The hon. Members of Parliament, headed by an old man, Museveni, who was the President at that time”.  So, we are really writing our names in history books.

You made it possible for the Country to attract private capital and experts to the energy sector.  Government has already concluded a Power Purchase Agreement with AES, Nile Power; they are developers of Bujagali Hydro Power Site, where they are expected to generate 200 Mega Watts.  Another Company, NOPAK Power, from Norway has presented a Project Plan for Government for the development of the Karuma site.  

In the next few years, electricity could become one of our major exports and foreign exchange earners, at least for some decades, before our own demand outstrips our total hydro and geo-thermo potential.   Geo-thermo is what we call, “ebitagata – the Hot Springs”.  Those hot springs had got power in them.  In the different places in Uganda, Kitagata in Bushenyi, Sempawa in Bundibugyo – in different sites.  At one time it was estimated that we have got 450 Mega Watts of electricity in those hot springs.   

As far as hydro is concerned, we have got other sites – Ayago North, Ayago South, Murchison Falls itself, Kalagala, which we had to abandon, some sites on the Kagera – Bushunjezi, and so on.  

Government also recognised the need for rural electrification to promote balance to bring growth in the Country and to modernise the rural areas.  Rural Electrification is also essential for attracting small and medium scale enterprises and for effecting the implementation of the modernisation of agriculture.  Hence, with the support of the World Bank, Government is planning a Comprehensive Private Sector Lead, commercially based Rural Electrification Programme.  The Government is playing the role of market regulator.

 In the investment arena, investment rates have been increasing for the last 14 years.  In real terms, fixed investments increased by 90 per cent during the 1990s averaging 18.6 per cent of GDP in the second half of the decade.  Although the initial investment was mainly attributable to government investment funded by Donor Project Aid, private investment rates increased strongly during the 1990s and accounted for 70 per cent of total investment by the end of the decade.  While private investment averaged only 5.4 per cent of GDP in late 1980s, it rose to an average of 8.6 per cent of GDP in the first half of 1990s and to 12.2 per cent in second half.  This is a very big change; these are some of the factors you should be looking out for.  It means now that 18 per cent of the total production is being invested in the country.  At the beginning it was only 5 per cent so, which means that people were taking out this money, instead of investing it here, they were taking it out, because they had no confidence in this economy.  But now, we have gone from 5.4 per cent in the 80s to 18.6 per cent, both Private investment and Public investment.  If however, you will remove Public investment then Private investment is 12.2 per cent of GDP - this is quite something.

The policy reforms, which stabilised the economy and liberalised markets, have contributed to increased private investment.  In addition, fiscal restraint combined with substantial donor budget support has enabled government to accumulate savings within the Domestic Banking System since 1992/93.  This has freed financial resources/expansion of bank lending to the private sector.  The increase in private investment which occurred in the mid 1990s suggests that government has begun to establish a degree of policy credibility with private players in the economy.  We are determined to jealously guard this credibility. 

One of the most positive changes achieved has been in the structure of the economy over the last 14 years.  The share of Agriculture in GDP has declined from 57.9 per cent to 42.7 per cent in 1998.  In the 1980s Agriculture was accounting for 57 per cent of GDP now, it is accounting for only 42 per cent of GDP.  Of course Agriculture itself has been expanding but what this means is that other activities have come into play, that is why Agriculture has got a smaller portion, although Agriculture has expanded tremendously.  The share of the manufacturing sector has increased from 5.4 per cent to 9.4 per cent in 1998. 

In the neck, when we were considering the manifesto, we pointed this one out. It was pointed out (I think in the final manifesto) that this was one of the early targets of the first two or three, five-year development plans.  (You remember in the 1960s we had that system of five-year development plans)  Now, those early development plans' target had been to diversify the economy by expanding the share of industries as a percentage of GDP but they could not achieve it.  But now we are beginning to achieve it. 

The policy of export diversification has resulted in the share of coffee exports' earnings to total export receipts, falling from 92.2 per cent in 1986 to 55.9 per cent in 1998/99. This is another very interesting figure.  In 1986, dollars from coffee accounted for 92.2 per cent of all the earnings, but now the share of coffee earnings (although the amount of coffee has doubled. We are now exporting more coffee than we exported in 1986) compared to total foreign exchange earnings, is now 55.9 per cent.  I have been urging the concerned Ministries to concentrate on consummating of a few strategic sectors in terms of vertical and horizontal linkages.  Although we have done well, but we have been a little bit laissez faire (laissez faire just going) depending on Macro economic stability only.  I have been talking to the concerned people that we need a little bit of activity to prod the economy in certain strategic sectors.  This sectors are: Textiles, Coffee, Fruits, Fish, Leather and Beef products, Diary products, Wood products, Hydro power and Hydro carbons, Petroleum, Minerals and Electronics.  The government must assist this sectors, because we have got natural advantages in them but we leave too much to chance and we leave too much to the invisible hand of the market (you see there is the invisible hand of the market, but sometimes we need the visible hand of government in some of this things - we need the visible hand of government rather than just depending on the invisible hand of the market) and this areas; Textiles, Coffee, Fruits, Fish, Leather and Beef products, Dairy products, Wood products, Hydro power and Hydro carbons, Petroleum, Minerals and electronics.  If necessary the State should play an active and cataleptic role in causing motion in this sectors.

Education and Health are the key to the development of our human resources and therefore to modernisation.  Government has therefore been attentive to the requirements of these Sub sectors. As a share of GDP both recurrent education and health expenditures increases almost three fold in the 10 years between 1988 and 1989  1.2 per cent of GDP to 3.3 per cent of GDP for our education and from zero per cent of GDP to 0.8 of GDP for health.  The Munyankole says, “Otakumanya ngu  Bamustigire at bandinzire”.   Somebody who does not know that he as been left far behind thinks that the people ahead are waiting for him.  Now people who do not know that the movement is moving ahead, they think that the movement is still where it was.  These education programmes have caused a revolution in the countryside. To see Mabati schools with bricks in all these places shining, in all the corners of Uganda is something of a bomb-shell for those who do not wish well for the movement that is where my supporters here in Kampala say, “Oba alonga Aloge, tuwagira movement.”  That is what my supporters say. They say, Oba Aloga Aloge, they say in one of our local languages. “ Oba Aloga Aloge .“  “If those wish to bewitch us can bewitch us, but for us we shall support the movement”.  That is what they say.   But apparently some of the people do not hear these songs.  I think UTV should be playing more of them so that we could get less blood pressure from people who do not wish movement well.  But the schools in the countryside, the health centres to find that you can be operated upon in Kaperabyong so that they can actually operate you in Kaperabyong and they open up and show you up.  Oba Ologa Ologe, but I can see a lot of problem for -In some of these places they had never seen even an injection. To hear that you can be operated there in Kalaki, those places, is a revolution.  To find a dispensary at the sub-county, a maternity, each sub-county has got a dispensary with a maternity wing. The people in Brig. Moses Ali’s place they now visit the hospital not so much for treatment but for taking a bath in the heated water from the solar energy from the hospital.  They just come to take sauna in the hospital.  For the Madise to know that you can boil water with the sun is a revolution for the Madise and for all these people of Uganda.  Government has accorded priority within the budget to spending on basic social services particularly healthy and primary education.  This rising the recurrent education expenditure from 12.7 per cent of government expenditure in 1988 to 25.8 per cent in 1998/99.  While healthy recurrent expenditure increased from 3.1 per cent to 6.2 per cent of government expenditure over the same period.  One of key areas in our modernisation strategy is to make primary education universal and vocational.  In 1997 we begun to implement the universal primary education, UPE programme.  Whereas in 1986 enrolment in primary schools was 2.2 million, it rose to 2.9 million in 1996 and after launching of the UPE programme to a hopping 5.7 million children in 1997.  By March, 1999 primary school enrolment had risen to 6.59 million pupils, 52.6 per cent of whom are males and 47.4 per cent are females.  With regard to the  education of the girl child, the national strategy and plan of action for girls education has been developed to guide government and all stakeholders in removing the barriers that stand in the way of the education of the girls in this country.  Another project promotion of girls’ education scheme is intended to enhance enrolment, retention and pass rate through grants which range between shillings 500,000 and 1,000,000.  The scheme targets districts with the highest drop out and lowest retention and pass rates.  At the public universities we have continued with the affirmative action of adding 1.5 points to the female students scored at A level to facilitate their admission.  Although there has been rapid economic growth, poverty especially in the rural areas where most Ugandans live and work, has persisted.  We have organised long and hard over this programme and have come out with the poverty eradication action plan which lays out a too long strategy of poverty eradication namely, one;  measures to increase incomes of the poor which focuses on roads, land, agriculture, rural markets, employment and labour productivity, rural credit and financial services and micro and small scale enterprises.  The second element measures to improve the quality of life of  the poor through the provision of basic services in primary care, primary education, water, the protection of the environment and disaster management.  As a result of the measures we have taken to fight poverty.  The incidence of poverty at the national level fell by 11.5 per cent between 1992/93 and 1997/98 from 55.5 per cent to 44 per cent.  While the percentage of the population in absolute had core poverty fell by 10.7 per cent from 35.8 per cent to 25.1 per cent in the same period.  This means that nearly 2 million people were lifted from poverty and a similar from absolute or hard core poverty.   Some of our people do not have a good grasp of what goes on in the economy. 

A township like Kumi has almost quadrupled in size.  Kumi was one street.  But now I think it is like four streets.  When I go in the Movement bus, I have the honour of driving around these towns and you really see development.  In Kumi the other day walked in a private hotel of somebody who started business by selling sweet potatoes to Kampala.  From the sweet potatoes, he h as now built a hotel.  So if you want to wash your hands, I recommend a hotel in Kumi when you are driving to Soroti.  In Kitgum, I had a Presidential suite built for me there, in a new hotel, which they are putting up in Kitgum.  But if you see the houses which they are building in these towns, all of them, Kumi, Soroti, Lira; Lira is a big metropolis now.  So a lot of changes are taking place in the economy but I do not think they are well captured by the statistics.  The vast majority of the poor as I have already said live in rural areas and earn their living from largely rain fed small hold agricultural.  It is these people that we mainly wish to reach through our plan for the modernisation of agriculture which aims to assist them to adopt improved farm technologies including adoption of improved seeds, the us of machinery, irrigation, the use of manure and chemicals as well as production for he market i.e. for money.  Government and the African Development Bank co-financed the poverty alleviation project phase 1 with 13.5 million dollars which was successfully implemented in 29 districts of the north, north-east, north-west, central and south of the country.  The project which extends financial and non-financial resources through NGOs and CDO at grassroots level to the active poor including women, youth, orphans, retrenched civil servants and demobilised soldiers was successful and has had a salutary impact on the poorest communities in the targeted districts.  For example, the US dollars 9.7 million disbursed to finance 24,000 projects with a total clientele of 27,000 people of which 62 percent were women.  304,000 savings accounts were opened amounting to Shs. 1.2 billion as a consequence of this project.  The projects created 67,000 jobs, of which 24,000 were non-agricultural and 42,000 were agricultural.  The people involved in this programme should be commended for the high repayment rate of 9.3 percent.  They are paying back because the programme is continuing.  Following the above performance, government and African Development Bank have approved another 28.6 million dollars to implement the second phase of the project which will cover all the districts of Uganda.  Ugandans have over the years encountered natural as well as man made disasters including prolonged drought, rebel activities, cattle rustling and religious fanaticism.  For the north and the north east of Uganda as well as in the Luwero triangle, we have carried out restocking programmes and this financial year, government put in the budget Uganda Shs. 18 billion for restocking, of which shs.1.1 billion has already been disbursed.  Under the first Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (NURP 1) over US dollars 100 million donor and local funds was spent on various aspects of reconstruction in districts of northern and north-eastern Uganda.  Government is now in the process – now this money did quite a lot of work.  When you go to the town in Soroti, all the roads in town are tarmarcked.  Not all but most of them.  Kitgum town, the roads are tarmacked, Gulu town the roads are tarmacked.  I think some streets in Lira were tarmacked.   Government is now in the process of preparing NURP to provide an appropriate response to the poverty situation in the NURP area.  This programme NURP 2 will dwell heavily on community participation in the formulation and implementation of programmes.  Attached to NURP 2 is a telecommunications component to link the north with the rest of the country and phase one of this component with US 8.9 million dollars will begin as soon as Parliament approves the project.  It will link Kampala to Gulu.  Phase 2 worth 10 million dollars will extend telephone service to the districts of Adjumani, Apac, Arua, Kitgum, Lira, Moyo and Nebbi.  So recently when I was in Apac, the people there were asking me whether Apac was an island or not.  But I can now tell the MPs from Apac that there is a programme for them.  I was not aware of this programme at that time.  I could not answer that.  But apparently there is a programme for them to get telephones.  Phases 1 and 2 will be implemented in 18 months commencing as soon as Parliament approves a loan of US dollars 7 million from the NODIC development fund.  Phase 3, which will cost US dollars 8 million will link Katakwi, Kotido, Moroto and eight rural townships to their respective district, centres.  So the people of Moroto also have an answer here because they were asking me about telephones.  Government is still soliciting funds for the other phase.  The special needs of Karamoja are being taken care of.  Government has signed a memorandum of understanding with the government of Italy in a project, which will involve the drilling of 70 boreholes at the cost of US dollars 750,000.  Government is currently upgrading the Sironko-Nadungeti-Moroto-Kotido Road.  The Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment has constructed a water dam at Kailingi in Kotido of 300,000 cubic meters capacity at a cost of US dollars 295,000.  It was completed in March this year.  Work has already commenced on two dams at Lochagar and Lodumu in Moroto District.  In addition, ten sites and six sites in Moroto and Kotido respectively have been selected for constructing valley tanks in the next financial year.  As far as Luwero triangle is concerned, it is one of the special programme areas, which was of course devastated by the wars in the past.  Since 1992, government has been assisting the people there in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the social and economic infrastructures damaged during the war.  Government has rehabilitated and reconstructed health centres, schools, administration facilities, feeder roads and victims of the war have been assisted with building materials to rebuild their homes.  Many families have received heifers and more families will receive cattle through the restructuring programme in which Luwero triangle will get Uganda shillings six billion for the Luwero triangle.  Additionally, some families in the district of Kibaale, Luwero, Kiboga and Mubende have been benefited from high breed seeds from the Presidential Household Poverty Alleviation Project.  On the side of governance, our resolution is principally motivated by our commitment to democracy, the democracy of our people to participate in the making of decisions that affect their lives.  That is why we devised the Local Councils from villages upwards to involve all the people in governance, men, women and the youth.  The LC system is now a very well established institution and the main point of social and political reference.  Nobody should take this away from the Movement.  Through the constitution and the Local Government Act, decentralisation and the devolution of power is becoming a reality.  To decentralise is to democratise.  Sometimes I get intrigued because some of our 'democrats', whom I would like to put in quotes because I have never seen their democracy, never talk about decentralisation.  Decentralisation is one very important component of democracy and of empowerment.  It is up to all the stakeholders in the democracy enterprise to play their part to push forward the march of democracy.  I am happy that women have come forward to strengthen the democratic governance we are building.  Given their new assertiveness, women can no longer be excluded from taking part at all levels in the economic, social and political activities of our country.  What can be more democratic than bringing the majority of a country's citizens in the main stream of events, because the women are 52 per cent of the population and when we empower the women, we are empowering 52 per cent of the people.  Not only that, because women, they are the ones who look after the children so by empowering the women, we are empowering the children.  So, these democrats who never talk about decentralisation, never talk about gender issues, they are sort of strange democrats.  Maybe they are like - what would you call this man-Yohannes Foster, these who were South Africa, they believe that democracy will be for only the Whites.  The Black people have no democracy so some of these democrats think democracy is only for men, not for the majority who are the women.  They are practicing apartheid, gender apartheid but the Movement has empowered the women deliberately and I have been pointing out that most of these programs which I have just read actually assist the women first and foremost because the women are the ones who go to collect water from the river.  So, when we make boreholes, we are assisting women.  They will no longer have to walk four miles to the river and back; it will now be nearby.  Women are the ones who collect firewood from the bush so if we make energy-efficient stoves, we are helping women.  Women are the ones who grind on the 'lubengo', on the grinding stone.  By propagating more kneading machines, you are saving women too much labour.  When we build a dispensary at the Sub County, it will be nearer to the woman to take the child and go back to do her work.  So, you are helping women, 52 per cent of the people, plus their children whom they are looking after so you are looking after almost 70 per cent or 80 per cent of the people through these programs.  On the side of corruption, through the Inspectorate of Government, Government has been undertaking the sensitisation of the population and of leaders about the evils of corruption.  Under the AGS of the IGG, 1,931 integrity workshops targeting LC5 executive committee members, LC5 Councillors, LC3 Chairpersons, Heads of departments, members of statutory bodies and opinion leaders, have participated in these workshops.  Following these workshops, districts have produced their own plans of action to fight corruption.  The results of these workshops are beginning to manifest themselves in the increase in the number of cases reported in the areas covered through workshops held in Mbarara, Mbale and Arua.  Last year, 4,045 complaints were handled by the IGG.  Of these, 2,382 which makes 59 per cent of the complaints, were investigated and completed - 733 which form 18 per cent of the complaints were referred to other agencies and 930 which form 23 per cent are still being investigated.  31 cases of prostitution have been handled and six of these have been finalised.  Leadership code conduct forms were distributed to 5,744 leaders in September 1998, the hon. Members of Parliament included.  Only 23 per cent of the whole declared their assets, incomes and liabilities for their 1998.  I would like to congratulate the Ministers, all of them fulfilled this obligation but of course we still have a problem.  I do not know whether we have amended the other law, which said that we should declare quietly.  It is coming because I want us to amend that portion and say that the declaration should be made public because to declare quietly really is not very useful.  When you declare quietly then people do not know what you have declared so the amendment should be coming so that what we declare is available to the public in case they are interested.  So, all the Ministers have fulfilled this obligation., only 46 percent f the hon. Members of Parliament have filled the forms –(Laughter)- so, it means 54 percent have not, 87 percent of the district chairpersons and councillors have declared one Judge has declared –(Laughter )-  78 percent of the Army Council have declared their assets and only 2 percent of the Town Clerks and treasurers have declared. The inter-agency committee on legal reform has drafted a Bill that provides for blenches under the leadership code.  The  Draft  Leadership Code Bill is currently before the cabinet, I think this is the one you are talking about, it intends to give authority to the Inspectorate of Government to enhance compliance with the law.  I hope that when the Bills comes this House will pass it quickly –(Laughter)- to facilitate the crusade against corruption.  The anti-corruption agencies of Government together with the departments like Finance, the Revenue Authority, Public Service, Civil Society of the Private Sector being co-ordinated by the Minister of Ethics and Integrity are put in their act together to fight corruption collectively.  Right, hon. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, the growth of our economy and improvement of the conditions of Uganda would have been breath taking these last years if there were no log elements in our midst.  The banditry in the north of our country has continued for too long, there is now a generation of Ugandans that has grown up in abnormal conditions in that part of the country.  This is a petty because the National Resistance Movement  took power in order to include everybody in governance.  We established win, win system but those who were used to a system which  excluded some people could not accept to share power with anybody else.  We have established the democratic system of governance and anybody who wishes to participate in governance at whatever level can do so through the ballot box as simple as that.  I therefore, invite our brothers and sisters to abandon banditry which has caused untold suffering to people whom they wish to be their constituency.  Hon. Members of Parliament passed the Amnesty Bill to bring back into the fold our  estranged  brothers and sisters, Uganda can accommodate all of them in peace and prosperity.  The desire on our part to accommodate those Ugandans should not be taken as a sign of weakness, UPDF is a fine and efficient fighting force which in spite of the sport which both ADF and Kony has received from one of the neighbours have been able to contain there thugs. The UPDF have recently managed to occupy most of the ADF in the Rwenzori Mountains and eastern Congo.  Many rank and fine members of ADF have surrendered or have been captured to us including some of the leaders and others have been captured.  The ADF tried urban terrorism but since May 1999; there has been no terrorist acts in our urban centres thanks to the vigilant of all our security organises –(Applause). Although, it is bad news that makes news, and is the stock in trade of the media most Ugandans sleep peacefully in their beds and go about their work without looking over their shoulders in fear of their Government or their army –(Applause). Another bandit group camp was nipped – and it is rank and file continued to surrender to the Government.  This achievement deserves celebrating by all those Ugandans hollers of  Amin, Obote and Okello’s.  Uganda is now at the crossroads and Ugandans need a memory now than they have ever done before to prevent history from repeating itself. It is a big mistake to under estimate the UPDF, we have been building capacity both in terms of quality of soldiers and the tools they use.  UPDF soldiers are now well trained and well equipped, Government is trying its best to improve the conditions in which our soldiers live and work and this is a continuous exercise according to Carol  war is the continuation of politics by other means.  Wherever we are or have fought, the fighting has been forced on us and it is for political reasons.  We are very keen to pursue politics in the usual way of dialog and peaceful resolution of conflicts.  With regard to the DRC; we believe that the way forward is the implementation of the Lusaka peace agreement.  On our part the agreement recognises Uganda as legitimate security concerns in the Congo, I can assure the hon. Members of this House that the UPDF will not stay a minute longer in the Congo the moment our security concerns are made in a framework which is regionally and internationally recognised.  Has you may have seen, although, this was not part of my speech, again yesterday and even today there was fighting in Kisangani between us and Rwandese.  Fortunately, this time we had some other people to see who started this fighting because you remember there has always been accusations UPDF is the one who started this fighting but this particular fighting started yesterday because we had been implementing the militarization plan of Kisangani.  You remember we worked out a plan of the Security Council of the UN to militarise Kisangani.  Now, this plan had two phases; because that city has got four main areas, one area is the east near the big airport of Bangkok, the other area is the north going to Butta, the other area is the west at Simusimu airport; this is slightly a smaller airport but also quite big.  And there is another part of Kisangani  to the south across the river,  river Congo passes through the middle of Kisangani.  Now, the southern part of Kisangani is called Kisangani Goshi; I do not know what Goshi means.   Now,  the demilitarisation plan was roughly as follows; the UPDF troops are Bangkok Airport to go through the town, Bangkok Airport is in the East, go through the town and go to the North of Kisangani at a place called Kaparata across the Tchoco bridge and wait there for the second phase; and all our forces have completed that phase.  They are all to the North.  Now, the other forces were to go to the East to Bafasende, there is another town 200 kilometres from Kisangani called Bafasende, these ones had already gone and they were more than 100 kilometres away.  

Now, the Rwandese who had been in the town centre and at Simusimu Airport in the West was supposed to first concentrate at Simusimu Airport and then cross the river and go to Southern Kisangani in preparation for phase II.  Phase II was supposed to be simultaneous withdraw of the UPDF from North Kisangani and RPF from South Kisangani so that UPDF goes to Banalia and RPF goes to Ugundu.  So, for us we completed phase I completely.  We only remained with one company at Bangkok Airport which was loaned to the UN.  The UN did not have troops, so they said Uganda and Rwanda loan us two companies until our own troops come.  So, one  of our companies was loaned to them and it is the one which had stayed at Bangkok Airport under a UN command.  But the Rwandese did not leave the town centre, they stayed there.  Dug in there, dug in there, dug in there, but the UN escorted our forces, they passed through the middle of them and they went to the North.  

Yesterday in the morning, one of our trucks was going from Bangkok Airport where we had left a company under the UN to the North of the city where our main forces are.  When it was somewhere near the Eastern side of the town, some armed people jumped from the side of the road into the main road, and it was escorted by the UN, the UN people were escorting it, jumped into the road with RPG and machine gun and they hit the vehicle with RPG, and with machine gun fire.  The UN people were there, the escorts were there.  They hit the vehicle, apparently they wanted to kill some officer whom they think was travelling in that vehicle but fortunately he was in the UN vehicle, he was not in that vehicle.  Although he was in that convoy.  So, I was in Mbale, Kazini rung me before 11 and said that there was an incident, and he told about the incident.  So, I told him and said now, do not react.  Fortunately the driver was not killed, because when he saw them on the road aiming at him, he stopped then and jumped out.  It had food and things like that on it, but the vehicle was destroyed.  So, when I spoke with Kazini, I said now, do not react, just since the UN saw it, let them advise us because they are the United Nations, they know how to advise on some of these things.   So, since they were there, because all along you know all the stories, what has been happening; false accusations, false lies, what have you, but now these people were there, the UN people were there.  So, I told Kazini, I said do not react because of this, just let the UN tell us what to do now.  What do we do?  So, I went to the leaders meeting, apparently after I had talked to Kazini, now the Rwandese who had been hiding, big Rwandese forces were hiding in the town there in the centre of the town where they are not supposed to be, they should have gone out.  They were there, they now opened fire on our forces to the North of the city now, those which had  withdrawn and others which were there, they opened fire on them; 12.7 motors, what have you and they tried to advance to the North to where our people were.  Now, our people reacted and they crossed the bridge, this is the first time to cross the bridge in this so called conflict.  They crossed that bridge and chased that group which had been firing at them; and established a strong position across Tchopo bridge and neutralise those machine guns which had been firing at us.  But before they started firing at our people, the UN had already started deploying our mixed groups.  They would get 4 Rwandese, 4 Ugandans and deploy them on what they call check points.  So, that junction where they were firing at us from, there was already a check point manned by 4 Rwandese and 4 Ugandans.  After they had hit the truck in the town which was far away, but before they started firing at our forces, they shot at our 4 soldiers and killed one of them.  The one who was under the UN, the whom we had given the UN; because the UN said you give us soldiers, we put them in mixed patrols.  So, they killed that one.  They wanted to kill all of them actually but they killed one, the other 4 run away, and then they started firing at our forces.  That is when our forces crossed and chased that particular group; and then they reported to the UN, they said now, what do we do?  We are now here, we have silenced these guns here, but what do we do now?  The UN said, we are going to arrange a cease fire, this was yesterday when I came from the morning meeting I asked the commander, what is happening now?  He said UN is trying to arrange a cease fire.  And - what happened, why did those people shot at our truck, and who shot our soldiers, why?  Now, instead of organising a cease fire, the Rwandese started attacking our force which had crossed.  By this morning, they had attacked it 12 times and all the attacks had been repulsed.  So, we are waiting for the UN to sort that one out and that is what I have to report about; but the important thing about this one is that for the first time we have got witnesses to what has been going on; because you know the stories, we can not keep up with these stories, lies, lies, lies.  Now, these people were there, the UN people and you remember the UN people are the ones who sent out false report the other time because they were not near, they were not near by then, they were being fed by our brothers.  So that is what has been happening there.  Then later on in the night they said, we cannot have cease fire unless UPDF withdraws to the North first.  How do we withdraw if you are fighting, and secondly why should UPDF withdraw before you stop shooting?  Why?  What is the logic?  In fact according to my agreement with Kagame, that is supposed to be our sector, that Northern sector, I hope you know that agreement I signed with Mr. Kagame, that is supposed to be the Northern sector, they should not be there at all.  Then later on they said that we should withdraw at night – what?  At night, why?  Oh, we with draw during the day, in the presence of everybody, UN troops and then they were saying, UPDF go first.  No, there is no question of UPDF going first, simultaneous withdrawal, the UN comes there, simultaneous withdrawal, we establish a timetable, these go this way, those go that way.   This is a bit foolish but if you are living in a not intelligent world, then you must be foolish, there is nothing you can do about it.  So, that is all I have to say about that for the time being, but maybe we shall have to say more in future, but I thought I should – because you must be hearing stories, but actually, that is what happened yesterday and it was very important that we had third parties seeing – you know these Banyankore were philosophers long ago.   There was one husband who was mistreating his wife, then one day, the mother of the wife had visited them; the mother in-law in other words and this fellow started beating the wife when the mother was there.  So, the woman composed a song; akanteera maawe andarire nti  kamureebe ebimba ningamba; the husband beat me when my mother was present and I said, you see what I had been saying.   So, this time we were beaten when the UN had visited us.  So, we said, okay, you see what we have been saying.   

As I was saying on our part, the agreement recognises Uganda’s legitimacy security concerns in the Congo, that one I have already said and I said, I can assure the hon. Members of this House that UPDF will not stay a minute longer in the Congo, the moment our security concerns are met.  I am saying that the situation is a bit stupid, because,  you remember the other time our Rwandese brothers shot one of our tanks.  Now, those boys whom they are using to shoot our tanks, I am the ones who trained them, personally, not even the Army.  You know when the Rwandese were having problems with Mr. Mugabe, I rang Kagame, I said, Kagame, the Vice President Kagame, I have got some medicine for some of those Mr. Mugabe’s problems he  is causing you, you come here, we share it.  So, I told him to select, I said, you select some educated boys of senior 4 and send them to me.  So, he sent them to me, not to the Army, to me personally, because I was very worried about them, that Mugabe may cause them a lot of problems.  So, I used my team to train them at Nabugabo and I, myself went there to see that they know what they are doing.    So, these are the ones they are using to shoot at my tanks and I think even the medicine I gave them is the ones they were using against – because I gave them some of our system.  So, this is a bit stupid, but it does not matter, we live in a stupid world, we always see how not to make it idiotic, that is all.

In December, 1999 Uganda and Sudan concluded the Nairobi Peace Agreement.  Since then, we have released Sudanese prisoners of war but unfortunately, Sudan has not shown much commitment to that agreement.  No sooner had the ink dried on the agreement papers than 200 bandits of Kony crossed into Uganda from the Sudan.   This particular group are still dispersed in Kitgum and Gulu areas in small groups.  As I said recently, we shall not fold our arms while this group of Kony is still disturbing us from near Juba.  We are working with different people including President Gadaffi to ensure that this Kony leaves Juba and he is taken somewhere else by Bashir and I am sure, we shall succeed one way or the other.  

Although we are doing what we can to address the problems of Karamoja, stock thefts by Karimojong warriors still goes on both within Karamoja and outside it.   The neighbouring districts of Kitgum, Lira, Mbale, Kumi, Katakwi, Soroti and Sebei are always disturbed by these warriors.  Often times, the activities spill also into Kenya.  As I pointed out above, we are doing all we can to make sure that the Karimojong have enough water both for human and animal consumption.  This, we hope will reduce nomadism and the spill over into neighbouring districts and beyond during the dry season.  Government also directly responds to the rustling by deploying the UDPF.  We are also arming militias in the affected districts to protect their stocks against the Karimojong warriors.   The LDUs in the districts neigbouring Karamoja have already effectively stopped all rustling into these districts.  You remember when we armed the  LDUs, some people who did not know, said we were making a mistake, but you remember when we were training these chaka mchaka courses which our donor friends seem not to have understood well, they thought we were spreading the ideology of NRM.   In fact, we were creating a national reserve, those LDUs are part of the reserve, they are trained, any time we need them we can mobilise them.  Now, therefore, when we had these Karimojong youth Karacuna, the youths disturbing the neighbouring tribes and since I had used soft methods, many times and the karacuna were not responding – karacuna is the word for youth in Karamojong, I decided to use this method, to mobilise our reserve, the LDUs and equip them and pay them and use them to bring security in that  area and they have done it, because it did not take long, it has really stopped, there is no more infiltration from Karamoja into the neighbouring districts with guns.  Any Karimojong who wants to go to the neighbouring district, goes without guns and there is no problem for him, but if he goes with guns, he is arrested and in fact, some of the cattle rustlers ring leaders have been killed; like the one who was disturbing Olilimo in Lango, he was killed promptly by these LDUs.   So, it has already worked.  That is why the area is very quiet now.  Now, what remains now is to create similar LDUs in Karamoja that will stop the intra-Karamoja raids as well as the raids from Kenya and Sudan working with UPDF, because from Sudan, we get the Toposa and the Didinga; these are tribes in Southern Sudan who come to raid the Karamojong, especially the Dodoth and the Jie.  Then, from Kenya, we get the Turkana and the Pokot.  The LDU in Karamoja working with the army will stop first, raiding within Karamoja itself but also raiding from Kenya and Sudan into Uganda.   What compounds the rustling is the trafficking in small arms and ammunition from neighbouring countries into Karamoja.  We are working with the Kenyan authorities who also have the same problem to stop this trafficking and in July, we shall carry out a disarmament exercise in Karamoja.

For the other people who will not be part of the LDUs in Kampala we shall disarm them.  And I have already told the Karamojong who are big Movement supporters – the Movement support in Karamoja is very, very strong.  So although I have some little quarrel with them over guns, but actually they are very big supporters of the Movement.  And when I went there they gave me a small chair to sit on, and they also said in case I am tired I could use it as a pillow.  So, we are in very good terms with the Karamojong.  And the warriors put on very good performance for me and I joined the dance only that it caused me some allergy, but it was very nice.

More recently, we have had threats to the peace and quiet in our country from unexpected source, Religious zealot.  I wish to assure hon. Members and all Ugandans, that Government will get to the bottom of the Movement for the restoration of the Ten Commandments.  We have got tragedy; this is “Kibwetere.”  I also wish to allay the fears of Religious Organisations.  Government will not persecute non-denominational churches.  We respect freedom of worship, but we must also protect lives of Ugandans.  What is needed is more vigilance by the administrators and security personnel.  I think the security personnel should interest themselves in the content of the messages which these people give.  Because sometimes we never take interest in them, we just see them dancing and so on and we never go in to find out what they are saying.  But now we are going to do it.

On 30th November 1999, the three East African Heads of State signed a Treaty for establishment of East African Community.  In the Treaty, which is really a framework treaty, the point of entry is the customs union, which we hope to achieve by the year 2003.  This will be followed by the formation of common market and lastly by a political federation.  We have been talking about this for a long time. We all need the community in order to become economically viable.  We need wide markets and wide investment opportunities.  I am happy that the spirit of regional co-operation among the people and leadership in our region is strong.  With this support, the community will prosper and all of us with it.  At the 5th COMESA Summit recently concluded in Mauritius, we agreed to establish a free trade area by 31st October this year.  We hope to clear all the outstanding obstacles in the way to post zero tariff rates within COMESA by the above date.  

In conclusion, we have tried to accomplish what we promised in my Manifesto and in our earlier movement commitment and I believe we have done well.  Modernisation takes a lot time, but I believe we have pursued the right policies and we shall get there.  What Uganda needs is the acquisition of a primary consensus so that the country can focus on common goals.  A lot of time has been wasted in petty quarrels and disharmony in perception.  The time has now come for all Ugandans to define their national objectives and to work towards them as one family.  I thank you very much (Applause).  Well, I do not have opposition in Parliament I come as a visitor, but I was shocked by the death of Hon. Ofory, because this man was my translator.  Recently when I was in Okoro County in Paidha, he was the one who was translating for me, he was very healthy.  So I do not know whether I am allowed to ask the hon. Members to stand up for one minute of silence or I am interfering with the – May his soul rest in eternal peace and we extend condolences to his family and to his Constituency.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Mr. President and my Lord the Chief Justice, my Colleague the Deputy Speaker, hon. Members, this brings us to the conclusion of today’s proceedings, I would like therefore on your behalf to thank His Excellency the President for coming to perform a Constitutional responsibility on this occasion which is very important on our Parliamentary calendar.  Thank you, Your Excellency.  I will therefore adjourn the House to 2.30 p.m. tomorrow.  I am at the same time advised that there is an Item which does not appear on the Order Paper and which can be dealt with outside the chamber.  And I believe you are well advised on that issue.   I thank you very much.  The House is adjourned until 2.30 p.m. tomorrow at Parliament Building.

(Parliament rose at 5.25 and adjourned until Wednesday 7th June, 2000 at 2.30 p.m.)



                                                       END   OF TAPE NO. 8

