Thursday, 07 June 2007

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall, Kampala

NATIONAL ANTHEM

PRAYERS
   
(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

PROCLAMATION

2.50
THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS Parliament was prorogued on Tuesday 29th May 2007, thus marking the end of the First Session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda;  

AND WHEREAS clause (2) of Article 95 of the Constitution empowers the Speaker, by proclamation, to appoint the date of commencement of a session of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS clause (1) of Article 101 of the Constitution requires the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation at the commencement of each session;

NOW THEREFORE: 
1) 	In exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by clause (2) of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed that the Second Session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda do commence on Thursday the 7th day of June 2007 in the Conference Hall of Parliament; and

2) 	Further notification is hereby given that the President, under clause (1) of Article 101 of the Constitution, is to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation on the aforementioned date, it being the commencement of the Second Session of the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala this 7th day of June 2007.

Edward Ssekandi
Speaker of Parliament.”  (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President of Uganda, Your Excellency the Vice President, the First Lady, your Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker, the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the Vice Chairman of the National Resistance Movement Organisation, honourable ministers, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, your excellences the Ambassadors and High Commissioners, honourable Members of Parliament, leaders of political parties and political organisations, distinguished invited guests, ladies and gentlemen;

Your Excellency, it is my greatest pleasure to welcome you to the Parliament to perform your constitutional duty of delivering to Parliament the State of the Nation address as commanded by Article 101(1) of the Constitution of Uganda. 

Your Excellency, we have just concluded one year of a multiparty parliamentary dispensation. While there have been some aspects of a hangover from the politics of individual merit, which was the cornerstone of the Movement political system, on the whole, multipartism in Parliament is beginning to take root. I can report that we have completed the first session of the Eighth Parliament harmoniously, despite the political inclinations of individual members. It is my strong belief that the second session and those to follow will witness further consolidation of the multiparty political system which our people adopted in a referendum of 2005.

In the session that has just ended, Parliament has been able to pass a good number of Bills that the Executive was able to generate in good time. A good number of requests to authorise Government to borrow have been considered and passed. Some people’s concerns have also been addressed through petitions and questions to ministers brought to Parliament through members representing the affected people. 

It is hoped that the ensuing session will witness more work from the Executive to Parliament geared towards realisation of the undertakings in the manifesto of the party in power and other policies as they emerge from time to time, and Parliament is ready to play its part.

Your Excellency, ladies and gentlemen, among us today are distinguished personalities whose presence I would like to recognise and who are in the country for a series of meetings that commence tomorrow. I request them to stand up for recognition: 

•	Hon. Renuka Chowdhury, MP and Minister of Gender, India;
•	Hon. Lindiwe Maseko, Chairperson of Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians and a Member of Parliament of South Africa;
•	Senator, the honourable Joanne Massiah, MP from Antigua and Barbuda;
•	Officials from the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Secretariat: Ms Sherrill Whittington, Ms Meenakshi Dhar and Ms Elsie-Bernadette Onubogu.

You are all welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

I also wish to recognise the presence of the leaders of political parties and organisations here present. You are very welcome and your presence gives us some inspiration that we are united in purpose.

Your Excellency, it is now my pleasure to invite you to address Parliament and the country at large. (Applause)

ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION

2.57
HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency, the Vice President of Uganda, the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Vice Chairman of the National Resistance Movement, the Rt hon. Leader of the Opposition, honourable Members of Parliament, Members of the Diplomatic Corps, ladies and gentlemen. 

Mr Speaker, when I delivered my State of the Nation Address in June last year, we had just gone through the presidential and parliamentary elections under a multi-party dispensation. This was a transition from the omnibus, all-inclusive, movement system, which Ugandans had operated under since 1986. That system as you remember was democracy based on individual merit rather than group merit. 

The reason we opted for that system was deliberate; we were not drank - we had not taken alcohol - we were sober. We decided that we should have democracy based on individual merit for the time being. This was in order to allow our country to heal and to tackle the sectarian politics that had characterised the brief period of multi-party politics between 1962 and 1966. 

So, those who were giving us lectures to do this or that should have stayed with their paper. That paper could have been used more usefully than lecturing people who knew what they were doing.

We stood on our two feet and said, “No, we shall have the movement system for a long enough period for the country to re-orient itself,” and that is what happened. When the country had healed, then we opted for multi-party politics, which we started last year. So, here we are. Those who thought that we did not know what we were doing now know that we knew what we were doing.

Having completed one year under a multi-party dispensation, we should assess our performance with a view to tackling resolutely the challenges to consolidate democracy. 

As it may be appreciated, building democracy is not a one-time event, or an assignment to which one could assign a lifespan or a couple of years. On the contrary, it is a dynamic process to which every generation has to contribute for the good and survival of the people with the present generation laying a firm foundation for the future generations to build on.

Mr Speaker, at this juncture, permit me to convey to you and to the entire House my deepest condolences and sympathies over the death of one of the longest serving legislators, the late hon. Okulo Epak, and also the late Brig. Mayombo, who passed away recently. May the almighty God rest their souls in eternal peace.

Coming to the political scene, first and foremost, I would like to re-affirm a statement I made last year during an occasion similar to this one. Uganda as a country does not belong to the Executive, the Judiciary, Parliament or any other small group. It belongs to all Ugandans irrespective of their political or religious inclinations. Uganda is not an abandoned property – it is not a contested property, it belongs to its owners, the people of Uganda.

Some time ago I was in Washington, and I attended a meeting where there were a lot of people worried about Uganda. I looked at these people, and I told them that how can you worry about something, which has got owners. Why don’t you let the owners of that country sort it out? So, by the time I left the meeting, they had calmed down. Their worries had been misplaced.

The only thing required of each category of actors is to be law abiding and to be guided by the Constitution. The political question of Uganda was resolved in 1995 in the CA. Everything is written down; how you do this or that, and who does what; it is there. And when it becomes necessary, like in 2005, to amend here and there -(Laughter)- it is also done, and we know by who and how. 

So, I cannot understand why people get worried about issues, which are well laid out. If I want to go to Soroti, I know how to get there – from Kampala, to Kireka, to Namanve, then to Mukono - [Hon. Members: “To Mabira”] - yes to Mabira. (Laughter)

During my State of the Nation Address last year, I pointed out one development which would be of interest to study as we transited to a multi-party dispensation. This development was a sizeable number of Members of Parliament who had been elected as independents. Although one can argue that such members can be a balancing factor when it comes to very critical issues, it is too early to assess with certainty what their overall impact would be in a political environment like ours. 

As far as the NRM is concerned, we have developed a memorandum of understanding with the National Resistance Movement-inclined independents. The independents under the Movement ticket were a result of the hurried manner in which the primaries were conducted. This brought discontent among some of the Movement supporters, who resorted to the national constitutional refuge of independents according to Article 80 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

There is also some debate regarding the role of the Electoral College vis-à-vis the general membership of the party. In the case of the NRM, we shall handle that matter at the next national conference. 

Another development, which appears to be negative, is a situation where a legislator goes public to defy a position taken by a party to which she or he belongs -(Interjections) The Opposition members are saying it is only the NRM who are doing that. (Laughter) Thank you very much for your contribution. (Laughter)

Our parties have their respective constitutions and other regulations for internal management and democracy. It is, therefore, my well considered view that once members of the party have democratically and exhaustively debated an issue and a position is taken according to the constitution of that particular party, the decision so taken should be the one to be defended by those concerned. 

The other challenge, which must be addressed quickly, is the financing of political parties. Cabinet discussed the matter and directed the Attorney-General to prepare an appropriate Bill, which will eventually be brought to Parliament as soon as possible. 

Mr Speaker, in my last address, I reported that Government had decided to maintain Kyankwanzi as the National Leadership Institute. Consultations for its restructuring are in advanced stages. While those consultations have been going on, a total of 1,042 district and sub-county officials were trained and prepared at the institute to be the focal officials for micro-finance and prosperity for all, which we call “bonna bagaggawale” in one of the languages. In another language it is called “lonyo me ducu”.  

Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I would like to reaffirm the National Resistance Movement government’s determination to continue to adhere to constitutionalism and the rule of law in management of all public affairs. Every Ugandan, starting with the leadership, has a contribution to make. Adherence to constitutionalism and the rule of law is a cornerstone for a democratic society, which Uganda is trying to build. Chapter Four of the Constitution is elaborate on the protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. What is disturbing is that some leaders, who claim to be better promoters and protectors of those rights and freedoms than some of us who have for very many years fought for the same, shy away from explaining to the people that those rights and freedoms are not absolute, hence the provision of Article 43(1) which provides that: 

“In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.” 

The same leaders do not seem to appreciate the provisions of Article 17 of the Constitution, which spells out duties of a citizen, which among others are:

1. 	to respect the rights and freedoms of others.
2. 	to protect and preserve public property.
3.	to co-operate with lawful agencies in the maintenance of law and order. 

It would make a big difference if leaders, especially those who are qualified lawyers, explain to the masses the exact position and what is required of them as citizens instead of making them believe that the various freedoms and rights are absolute and can be enjoyed to the detriment of other people’s rights. That is misleading. Our rights must include respecting the rights of others. The few who know cannot be forgiven for misleading the innocent majority who may not be knowledgeable and who need to be assisted to enjoy the freedoms enshrined in the Constitution maximally. 

I was happy to see the statements in the press by both the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Uganda Law Society. While both organisations reiterated the freedoms and rights as enshrined in the Constitution, they clearly pointed out that they are not absolute and are not enjoyed by trampling on the rights and freedoms of others. Nevertheless, since the statements were only put out in English, most of our people who are normally misled might not have received the message. I will therefore appeal to the two organisations to have their respective statements translated into the major local languages for the reading of the widest public. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, let me specifically say something about the press, because what it puts out for public consumption can be of dire consequences, like what happened in Rwanda in 1994. Although a free press is essential for true democracy and good governance to flourish, the same press has no right to misinform and incite the public. Some of the papers, which have specialised in that activity, have always claimed to have impeccable sources when putting out information, allegedly from Government sources. 

As an illustration, while it is true that I recently chaired a long Cabinet meeting during which Mabira Forest was discussed at length among others, the Rt hon. Prime Minister as well as hon. Urban Tibamanya were not at that meeting because they were out of the country on duty. What was surprising, however, is that one daily newspaper, which normally claims to have impeccable sources, came out with a big headline “Otafiire and Tibamanya save Mabira.” 

In the same story, it was reported that the Prime Minister had been incensed by the ministers who had opposed the giving away of Mabira. One wonders how the Rt hon. Prime Minister would be incensed in absentia. In the same vein, how could hon. Tibamanya have saved Mabira through a Cabinet meeting which he did not attend? This is ridiculous! However, in a young system, we need to help these newspapers grow up. 

I reaffirm Government’s unflinching commitment to have the three arms of Government carry out their roles effectively and in co-operation instead of appearing to be competing against each other. Therefore, we are always in close touch with the National Resistance Movement Parliamentary Caucus and we hold one meeting every month. We are also always in touch with the Speaker of Parliament as well as the heads of the Judiciary whenever the need arises.

Last year, Mr Speaker, I informed the nation that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General would look at the amendments to the Constitution that were deferred and have them presented to Parliament for debate. Due to a lot of other pressing demands however, it has not been possible to present those amendments to Parliament as yet. Nonetheless, Government is still committed to having them presented as soon as possible. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as a further commitment to constitutionalism, the rule of law and good governance, we have accepted the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) under NEPAD. (Applause) I launched our national institutional framework for the review on 19 February 2007 and we are to be peer-reviewed in February 2008. I appeal to everybody to support this arrangement whose details will be availed in due course. 

For the honourable members who may not have followed that mechanism, some years ago the African leaders met in Lusaka and decided that we should institutionalise what Africa has been doing for a long time. Africans are very polite people with very polite cultures. We cannot go to somebody’s home and tell him to do this or that. That is never done in our cultures. However, it does not seem to be a problem in other cultures. You can find somebody coming to your home and saying, “put this chair there”, and then you look at him and say, “now, what do I tell this person?” Out of politeness, you may just keep quiet but even then, he does not notice that you are not happy with him and so he continues to say, “no, you should also put the bed here.” (Laughter) 

The Africans have stayed here for five million years. We will never go away; we are here. So, when I go to these meetings, I tell them that all those people - the Europeans, the Chinese and the Indians - are Africans but they lost the colour of their skin when they went away. (Laughter) So we, the ones who stayed, have developed a very elaborate way of how to relate with one another. An African can tell you something indirectly using a proverb. That is why proverbs are very important. It is up to you to interpret the proverb. 

Therefore, in order to consolidate our own heritage and contribute to the world - those people in the world, in Europe, in the Middle East, are messed up; they have a lot of problems. They need our help. (Laughter) We can help them if they are not full of themselves. (Laughter) I always see people running up and down here; the first human being was from Africa and that is a fact. The first civilisation in the world was a black civilisation. Egypt was a black country. There are Arabs living there now -(Laughter)- but the time when Egypt was leading the world in civilisation, there were black people living there. So, the civilisation of Egypt was a black civilisation and the first civilisation in the world. 

When Jesus was having problems -(Laughter)- when he was a baby and Herod was looking for him to kill him, where did they take him? To Egypt, to the black people; the black people are the ones who saved Jesus. (Applause) Before that, Joseph was sold by his brothers to Egypt and when there was no food among the Jews, they came to Africa. Later on our people enslaved them - that was bad - but initially they helped them. 

When Mohammed was having problems with the Arabs, he fled to Ethiopia and that is where he was kept. Of course, later on Egypt was overrun by all those fellows from other places - the Romans, the Greeks, and more recently, the Arabs. That is how our civilisation and our contribution to the world went down. So, those fellows have been messing up the world for a long time but now we are going to help them –(Laughter)- if they wish. The other day I was in London doing exactly that. I had heard that they were going to hold a meeting in Germany and that they needed to be advised. So, I went to a certain meeting and I gave them my advice; that you tell those people that –(Laughter)- regarding our own affairs in Africa –(Laughter)- we set up the African Peer Review Mechanism to review each other. 

Many years ago, I was a mulokole. However, I had some tactical disagreements with the balokole, in 1965 -(Laughter). When I was in those meetings, we had what we called a fellowship. Your brother or sister in Christ could criticise you saying, “Brethren, you have done this wrong,” and you could also criticise him or her. The African Peer Review Mechanism is based on the principle of fellowship, unlike this other one of the other people where the other people come to review you and you do not review them. How can an adult review another adult and the other one does not review him? What sort of arrangement is this? You look at these people and keep quiet, thinking that they will get the message that they are talking a lot of nonsense. However, they continue. So, that is why we set up our African Peer Review Mechanism. It is mutual. It is like the Balokole fellowship. You go to a meeting, you help each other. You say, “Brethren, you are making a mistake here. Why are you doing it?” It is a mutual review and I would really urge all of you to participate in it. All the political parties and all the groups should come together because this is now the olukungaana or a fellowship meeting where you meet to help each other. It should be first internal and then also inter-African.

On the side of security, the security of the country is finally getting consolidated. The main element in that consolidation is the near completion of the building of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, the Army. The effective operations by the UPDF led to Kony and Otti fleeing to Congo in 2005. They could no longer stay in Northern Uganda or in Southern Sudan where we were allowed to operate. Since the Congo Government did not allow us to operate against Kony in Congo, I accepted Gen. Salva Kiir’s proposal to initiate peace talks in Juba. This would be a soft landing for the Konys, and we would also save the efforts we have been expending on defeating the terrorists, for more constructive purposes like building schools, health units, roads et cetera. Unfortunately, the Konys have not been making full use of these talks; that is their choice. 

What I want to assure Ugandans is that Uganda will have peace; peace talks in Juba or no peace talks. (Applause) Our armed forces have so developed that they can guarantee peace and constitutionalism in the country. Recently, two batches of terrorists from Congo entered Western Uganda. They were promptly dealt with and they could not disturb the peace in Western Uganda. Similarly, nobody at this stage can disturb the peace of Uganda from any other corner. So, this message should be clear to everybody: that we have peace and that this peace will stay. 

Meanwhile, forceful disarmament of the Karimojong cattle rustlers started in May 2006. The third division has forcefully collected 1,203 guns from the rustlers from January 2007 to May 2007. A number of 59 guns has been voluntarily handed in between January 2007 and May 2007. The third division court martial has tried 101 hard-core warriors and sentenced them to between five to ten years in prison. Recently while in Karamoja I asked the third division commanders why they did not punish more harshly the rustlers that kill people. I will ask the Army legal department to advise us on how these rustlers can be more harshly punished. There are those who raid cattle; these are being punished. Those who are raiding cattle and those who are found with guns are being punished. However, there are those who kill people in the process of raiding. I do not think a sentence like mere imprisonment is enough for that type of mistake. 

Karamoja is now getting peaceful. The impunity and lawlessness in Karamoja are ending. Recently I was there consecrating the Bishop –(Laughter)- I was not the one consecrating –(Laughter)- I was just a guest. You see I am translating from my language: “Nkaba ndiyo nitwemeka Bishop”, so I put it in English –(Laughter)- because you know that is how Africans speak. When you go to a function, you are part of it. That is how we speak. I cannot say that I went to watch when –(Laughter) So, when I speak my language in English do not worry. 

Anyway, that function was massively attended; there was a big crowd and when I asked why there were so many people, they said it was because there was security now. People are travelling without being disturbed by those indisciplined warriors. When we had just started the disarmament, people were telling me, “No, do not disarm these people. You should wait until there is development,” but I said, “Who said that development can come without peace?” 

You know, Africa is really amazing. Karamoja will be peaceful. Those warriors had really gotten spoilt; we gave those rustlers so many chances. At one time we said, “You could remain with your guns as long as you do not cross with them to the neighbouring districts”. You can imagine the sort of compromise we gave them, but they would not listen. When we started disarming them, I began to hear diplomats telling me about Karamoja. Diplomats! Karamoja is an internal issue of Uganda, it is not an interstate matter; it is not an international matter. So, what are you saying? Karamoja is going to be peaceful and nobody will stop that. The Karimojong were raiding cattle since the time the British were here. It had become a way of life, but now it will end. 

I hear false arguments: “How can you remove guns from Karamoja when there are guns in Sudan, Ethiopia, and Somalia?” That is a false argument. In West Nile, which is near Congo, there are a lot of guns in Congo but there are no guns in West Nile. Guns cannot come to West Nile unless somebody within West Nile brings them. So, the argument that we cannot remove the guns in Karamoja until we remove the guns in Kenya, Ethiopia, Sudan, Somalia and Yemen –(Laughter)- let those people stay with their guns if they wish but for us we shall have no guns in Karamoja. Is this possible? Yes, it is possible. 

Take this example, there are guns in Congo, but there are no guns in West Nile. There are guns in Congo, but there are no guns in Kasese, Kabarole, Bundibugyo, Kihihi; all these are bordering Congo. There are a lot guns and chaos there but that is their problem; it is not ours. Koboko, there are no guns there. The guns are just there in –(Applause)- so, that argument that as long as there is lawlessness in Sudan and northeast and western Kenya, Ethiopia and Somalia, we in Uganda will not have law and order, I do not accept it!

The impunity and lawlessness in Karamoja is ending. I would advise all elements that are still operating outside the Constitution and the law, to stop and join the people of Uganda on the journey they started way back in 1994 when they elected the Constituent Assembly that promulgated a Constitution for them. The Constitution is very clear. Whatever you want to do, there is a way for you. If you want to be President, they show you how you do it. If you want to be Member of Parliament, and unseat the ones who are here, it is all laid out there. If you want to be LC V Chairman -(Interjection)- of Kamuli; that was –(Laughter)- Kamuli was according to the rules of football –(Laughter)- any other line of action is no longer tenable given the capacity of the people of Uganda. We are also strengthening the Police and the intelligence services so as to contribute to the fight against lawlessness. 

On the economy, Mr Speaker, it may be recalled that last year I cautioned the country that although our economy was doing quite well, the energy challenge that was being faced at that time was likely to put some check on the country’s economic growth, both last year and this year. 

The measures to increase energy supplies using machines powered by diesel had been implemented. As a medium term solution, the construction of Bujagali and Karuma power stations has been pursued relentlessly and consistently. For Bujagali, all negotiations are almost completed and construction has started. (Applause) 

On this question of energy, I would like to inform the honourable members that we took a decision last year to create our own Energy Fund to build these dams ourselves in case we do not get money from outside or if it takes long to get money from outside. I think by this year we had more than US $100 million on that account. (Applause) We were ready to move on our own if the World Bank had not given us the loan they gave us. Fortunately, they gave us the loan and now we have used our money to give to this company that is going to build so that they start. When the other World Bank money comes, they will reimburse our money. The point is that we are going to continue building up that Energy Fund so that we can build these dams ourselves. The mistake of lagging behind the power demand will never happen again.

A comprehensive plan to meet the electricity needs of the country in the short, medium and long term has been formulated on the basis of the original plan contained in the Energy Policy. When you read my speech, which will be distributed, you will see the measures that we have taken. This speech is very long. I do not want to kill you with speaking - 49 pages! And I am now on page 14 –(Laughter)- so you can see why I am a bit considerate. Rather than reading all these measures, you will find them in the speech. There are a lot of measures to do with electricity: importing energy saving bulbs; using solar to heat water; using bio-gas; the construction of the Bujagali hydro power station which is for 250 megawatts; and the construction of Karuma, of 150 megawatts. 

The long term measures include development of two large, hydro power sites, namely Ayago North of 300 megawatts, Ayago South of 200 megawatts.

Use of indigenous petroleum resources for thermo generation

The petroleum, which we discovered in the Lake Albert region will be used not only to power vehicles but also to produce electricity using our own – what they call HFO, the heavy fuels oil, which is cheaper because it will not have transport costs. It will also not have taxes so it will cheaper.  

Inter-connection in the regional power grid

We are also going to connect with other countries of Africa, including South Africa and Congo, so that - but I want you to know that really Africa has potentially a power shortage because even if you take into account all the power – all the potential on the River Nile, it is not much. River Nile has potential for about 3,000 megawatts. Even if we build dams on all these sides, the other rivers may give us another 1,000 or so.

Congo has a potential for 200,000 megawatts, it has got the biggest potential. Ethiopia has a potential of 80,000 megawatts, but if you take a country like the United States, the Unites States produces 800,000 megawatts. So when you hear Africans saying that, “There is a lot of power, there is a lot of power”, it is because they do not really go into the facts. 

In fact the hydro power we have is not enough for a modern Africa. Even if you combine all the power of Congo, of Ethiopia, this little power here of Uganda, the little power on the River Zambezi, it is not enough because the population of African is now 900 million. Soon we shall be 1.3 billion, unless you say we shall remain backward, then of course this power will be enough for the few who will have the power. But if you are going to say that we are going to change the lives of all the Africans, then this hydro power is not enough. So we must look for other sources, especially the renewable sources. I have already instructed the Minister of Energy.

Just as we did in the past when we explored for this petroleum, you will hear our future plans. Fortunately other sources are there; we have the geo-thermo, we have other sources, so we do not have to worry, but you must be prepared intellectually to know how to move forward. 

You take a small country like Sweden, Sweden has only 8 million people and they generate 26,000 megawatts of electricity. You look at East Africa, very small amount of electricity! This is not acceptable; Africans, as if they are just asleep! We do not know what is happening in the world; this is not acceptable! We are going to build dams on all these little sites: Ayago North, Ayago South, all the other little sites, then we shall go for other sources, and they are there. We have 450 megawatts in the geo-thermo, but that is not enough still for a modern country. There is petroleum; we shall use a little bit of it to generate some more electricity but that is not enough. The Ministry of Energy is already developing capacity for the full range of the energy sources.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, let me now briefly say something about our petroleum. After confirmation that our country had sizable oil resources, we held national thanksgiving prayers for that gift you remember. (Laughter) You know, some people do not know that Mr Museveni is a religious man -(Laughter)- because I am not like the Pharisees who just go and show themselves in the Synagogues and pray in the middle of the road to show how religious they are. I pray quietly to God. But when I am happy I go public. So that time I went public, called for a thanksgiving - my staff told me that the arrangements were not ready. I said, “No, if you are going to God you do not have to be ready, you go as you are. God knows our limitations.”

In June 2006 we hit the first oil well. Then in November 2006 Hardman and the Government of Uganda signed a memorandum of understanding for an early production scheme; that is what they call it in their oil language, EPS, because where we have found the petroleum is only 6 percent of the potential area. This area, which some of the Members of Parliament have been visiting, is only 6 percent of the total production area because the area goes from Lake Edward. All that area has got petroleum underground and has potential. We need to confirm but we can see the structures; there are the type that can contain petroleum. From Lake Edward in Rukungiri up to Rhino Camp in Arua, including Pakuba, all those areas have potential for petroleum underground.  

One strategy could be: let us first explore the whole area and once we are sure then we shall start producing. But the other one is: no, what we have found is enough to start with, so let us start. So, we went for the second one and that is why we call it the early production scheme. What we have found here is enough to start - actually it is enough for our needs, for the needs of Uganda. The US $400 million we have been spending on petroleum can now be – of course we shall have to buy it but in our internal currency rather that using hard currency. 

The early production scheme has four components, namely: production, which means pumping out the oil; refining, you refine it then you generate electricity using some of that oil and then you transmit the electricity, you build wires to take it where you need it. Then there is production: initially a modest amount of crude oil not exceeding 4,000 barrels of oil per day will be produced from the Mputa field. Mputa is the proposed location for these developments, that is, a mini refinery and a power plant. So, both of these will be built there. 

To show you the maturity of our political behaviour, when we were still looking for this oil, one day I went to Kabarole and I found there a lot of excitement, “You know we have heard a rumor that when the petroleum is found, the refinery will be built in Mbarara.” (Laughter) You know why they were saying Mbarara? (Laughter)  But why! So, I asked them, “Who told you that and why?”  So now it is finished. The mini refinery and the electricity plant will be built at Mputa -(Applause)- and Mputa is not anywhere near Mbarara. (Laughter) 
 
The mini refinery will process 4,000 barrels of oil per day; to produce approximately 2,000 barrels of heavy fuel HHA4, 130 barrels of oil per day of diesel and the rest kerosene. The plant is modular such that once the optimum production rate is established; more units will be added onto the existing one until full capacity is attained. 

Power generation

The 2,000 barrels of heavy fuel oil per day will initially generate 50 megawatts of electricity. The generators will be located at Mputa to avoid transport costs and minimise any negative environmental effects. 

Transmission line

Power needs to be evacuated as it is produced, especially so since there are no plans to build storage facilities for the heavy fuel oil. This means that all systems must be in place before first oil is produced, that is, the refining, the generators and the transmission line. Then when you read my speech you will see that we have concessioned the building of a pipeline from Eldoret to Uganda to bring petroleum from the sea for now. 

Mr Speaker, what I have stated about energy will not be complete without a word about the fuel shortage the country has experienced during the last couple of weeks resulting into spiraling pump prices especially for those of diesel. Although the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development kept me informed, the public was not given the full picture and as a result there was a lot of anxiety and speculation. 

As I explained recently in a different forum, the problem, which afflicted the pipeline to Eldoret from where fuel destined for Uganda is normally loaded, would not have caused widespread shortage because the Kenyan Government permitted the vehicles to load from Mombasa. Nevertheless, the matter was complicated when the same government, especially the Kenya Revenue Authority insisted that VAT be levied on the Uganda bound fuel lest it be sold within Kenya itself. Since that condition was imposing an unfair burden on Uganda’s fuel dealers, I took it up with President Mwai Kibaki and it was resolved. (Applause) Consequently, the situation has gradually stabilised and there should be no more cause for alarm.

In spite of the past mistake of delaying Bujagali by the Sixth Parliament –(Interjection)- and the high oil prices that were global, the economy of Uganda has achieved a respectable GDP growth rate. This will be communicated to you in the Budget Speech - I do not want to interfere with the Budget Speech. As you can see, the Shilling is also appreciating – getting stronger. Part of the explanation is more exports to Southern Sudan and Congo and better commodity prices because of the impact of changes in China and India.

Now that we are solving the problem of power, the economy of Uganda will grow at an even faster pace. This resilience in the economy is because of the correct policies we put in place ever since 1987. The Ugandan economy is like an inflatable boat. However much the water level rises, it will never sink because it is well built. So when the water rises, the boat goes up, otherwise the problems we had last year of shortage of electricity, high oil prices, and drought - you can imagine all those afflicting us at the same time and yet you find the economy is strong. The doubting Thomases should also -(Applause)- you know this man Thomas wanted to touch the scars of Jesus. If you want to touch the scars you are welcome. So, the doubting Thomases – I can see them beginning to waver in their doubt.

We must also solve the problem of transport to the sea by making the railway more efficient. 

Finally on the issue of the economy, the Public Service and the political class should stop all delays in matters relating to the economy. Please, hon. Members of Parliament, this is the future of your children. We are competing with other people in the world so if anything to do with the economy comes to you, do not waste time, -(Laughter)-  move.

On “bonna bagagawale” that is “prosperity for all”, the Cabinet and the Movement caucus have agreed on how we are going to change the lifestyles of 68 percent of the households that were identified as still being in the subsistence agricultural sector by the 2002 census. There are three crucial elements here in “prosperity for all” or “lonyo pe ducu”.  

The first element is: let everybody produce food but also engage in cash generating activities because the problem now is that some families just produce food and eat it and that is the end. They have no money. A modern life is based on food and money. In our traditional way, we had no need for money. We would produce food and that would be the end. Much as we still need to produce food, we must also engage in activities that will give us money. 

In the detailed document, we are saying that every family should get money daily, seasonally and perennially. You should have three types of money: there should be money you get everyday either from selling milk, eggs or anything that you can sell daily. Then there should be the seasonal income say from coffee or mangoes, and finally a perennial income. That is why I do not agree with NGOs because when they go around, you find them telling people about food security. How can you have food security when you have money insecurity? How will it help you? How can you be food secure but money insecure? How will you manage? How will you send your children to school? Okay the government is paying for some of the school levels but not all. How will you buy clothes and how will you build a modern house if you do not have money? Therefore, our first goal is for every household to have food and money. 

Secondly, we want to ensure that those with less than five acres of land engage in high value activities that will bring them more money per acre per annum rather than engaging in low value activities that can only reward those with more land. There are some people for instance in Busoga or West Nile who are hard working but engage in low value crops. 

Take for example in West Nile where they grow tobacco, I have tried to find out how much one can get from an acre of tobacco in a year and I think I was told that it is something like Shs 300,000 a year and yet this farmer may have only two acres. If you use your two acres to grow tobacco in a year, and with the best of conditions, you will get a maximum of Shs 600,000. That is before they deduct the costs. So, these people remain with nothing and yet many of them do not even grow a whole acre. 

When I am driving from Arua to Nebbi, I see areas where people are growing tobacco on half or quarter of an acre and they were also calling themselves tobacco growers. Even if one grew a whole acre, one would get only Shs 300,000. It is the same problem with maize in Busoga. This does not mean that Uganda will abandon the growing of tobacco, no.  Tobacco will be grown by those with ten to 40 acres of land because such people exist. These can continue with the growing of tobacco. It also does not mean that Uganda will abandon the growing of maize, no. I grew maize at Rwakitura and it was on 100 acres of land and I got a lot of money. 

Maize is profitable provided you grow it on a large or medium scale. The person with five acres or less needs a different package of activities and we have been involved in some of these activities. We are looking at dairy farming, fish farming, poultry, fruits, vegetables and so on and it is possible. I have told you of some families like the ones in Masaka where somebody is getting as much as Shs 50 million a month from three acres.

Recently the Vice-President was in Arua and he brought back photographs of some people who are getting almost Shs 40 million in a small area. This is the second element in bonna bagagawale and we call it “enterprise selection”. Part of the poverty in Uganda is caused by wrong enterprise selection. When you select an enterprise, which is not in harmony with the size of land you have, you will be poor even if you work hard. If you grow low value crops on a small scale you will never get out of poverty. Low value crops can be grown but they need to be grown on a big scale. On a small scale, that is five acres and less, we need to grow high value crops or engage in high value activities. This is what bonna bagaggawale or “prosperity for all” means. This is the second element. 

The third element is to assist the big farmers and manufacturers by lowering the costs of production and accessing the internal, regional and international markets. We need a different programme for the rich people like the Madhvanis –[Hon. Members: “Mehta”]- and the Mehtas. Mehta is a very good man and I like him very much. (Laughter) We need a different programme for these. We have already started on bonna bagaggawale in some areas. 

In the new budget, we shall start in all the sub counties of Uganda, starting with 30 families per sub-county as models. In the next two to three years much of the rural economy will be monetised and more factories will be built to process what is produced. Speed is what we need. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, details about other aspects of the performance of the economy will be contained in the Budget speech for the financial year 2007/2008 just a few days from today.

My speech goes into the social sector, labour and education. You will read all this in my speech. The new thing in education is that we have started the Universal Secondary Education and you will see the details in my speech. There are details contained with respect to the pupil-teacher ratio, change in the curriculum, the polytechnics and so forth. 

On the side of health, you will see what I have said as it is all here. We are talking about eliminating the mosquito using a combination of ways. One way is to use DDT indoors residual spray and the other way is to use larvicide’s. These are chemicals that kill the mosquito larvae and we are using them. It is all here in my speech. I cannot come with one sheet of paper and say this is the State of the Nation Address. (Laughter)

On corruption, in my address last year, I dwelt at length on the challenge of fighting corruption and pointed out the different institutions that are at the forefront of this fight. Once again I want to reiterate Government’s commitment to “Zero Tolerance to Corruption” as spelt out in the party manifesto presented to Ugandans for the 2006 presidential and parliamentary elections. Not withstanding our resolve and determination to continue fighting the scourge of corruption, there have been persistent, baseless accusations that Government is not serious about fighting corruption. Those making such accusations have always cited the reports of the various commissions of inquiry. I would, therefore, like to inform the nation that there is no judicial commission of inquiry report on which Government has taken no action. What should be appreciated is that when Government receives such reports, the findings and recommendations made therein are thoroughly studied and a white paper is produced showing how Government is to move especially on the recommendations, which Government would have accepted. 

The critics need also to appreciate that where any recommendations that have been accepted need no additional resources, it can be implemented immediately. On the other hand, where a recommendation requires resources, which were not available in the budget of that year, there is no way such a recommendation can be implemented immediately. It would have to wait for the next financial year.

There are also instances where the recommendation is to conduct further investigations on some specific areas. In such cases, since we champion the rule of law, we cannot proceed to condemning the person or persons without conducting further investigations as recommended. What can be done is to conduct such investigations expeditiously by the institutions concerned. 

If I may illustrate, Mr Speaker, most of the recommendations which were accepted from the Judicial Commission of Inquiry on Corruption in the Uganda Police have been implemented, with the exception of the recommendation to construct the Police barracks and to hike dramatically the salaries paid to the Police personnel. We have not been able to do that because we didn’t have the money. Both recommendations, though accepted, require substantial resources, which are not readily available. There was, therefore, no alternative but to move gradually. Nevertheless, so long as we maintain the commitment, the goal will eventually be achieved fully.

On the Judicial Service Commission of Inquiry into the alleged mismanagement of the Global Fund to fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the report was thoroughly studied by Cabinet and the White Paper was released to the mass media by the Rt hon. Prime Minister on 10 April 2007. As shown clearly in that White Paper, there are at least 60 areas, which were recommended for further investigation mainly by the Criminal Investigations Department and the Director of Public Prosecutions. Government has given those further investigations a maximum of six months and a budget line has been identified for the same. 

As it may be recalled, the report of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry into corruption in the Uganda Revenue Authority was rendered incompetent by Court, although some of the information contained therein has been used to effect some improvement in the operation of Uganda Revenue Authority.

Apart from the judicial commissions of inquiry, the Inspector General of Government has conducted investigations into alleged cases of corruption or abuse of office. One such investigation was in the department of Land Registration. She submitted her report to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I have no doubt in my mind that this ministry will study it thoroughly and take action as appropriate. 

Recently, the Inspector General of Government submitted to me her report on the investigations conducted in the alleged mismanagement of the 2004 Global Alliance for Vaccine and Immunisation Grant. It is now common knowledge that some persons implicated as a result of the investigations took Court action to challenge the report. Since we respect the rule of law, no one can be stopped from going to Court if he or she feels aggrieved. Nevertheless, the Inspector-General of Government has powers to prosecute to their logical conclusions cases investigated by the Inspectorate of Government. 

The special powers of the Inspectorate of Government are provided for under Article 230 of the Constitution, while Articles 226 and 227 provide for the jurisdiction and independence respectively of the Inspectorate of Government. The investigations done by the IGG are different from the ones of the Judicial commission of inquiry. The Judicial commission of inquiry normally reports to the Cabinet, the Cabinet writes a White Paper. But the IGG is an autonomous body; their investigation can be acted on directly by themselves. 

The proposed Bill for strengthening the Office of the Auditor-General by granting it autonomy is already before Cabinet for discussion. In the meantime, the Bill to repeal the outdated 1970 Prevention of Corruption Act is ready for discussion by Cabinet. The Whistle Blowers Bill for the protection of those who give accurate information to assist in the fight against corruption is to be presented to Cabinet early July. The above illustrations are a clear testimony that Government does not and will not tolerate corruption.

Mr Speaker, my appeal once again to hon. members and all other leaders is to mobilise the population to join in the war against corruption wherever it may exist. Let every leader ask himself/herself what contribution he/she has made towards the fight against corruption, including corruption in elections. (Interjections) This is very serious and we better stop this very early. 

When I was campaigning for the elections last year, while in Bugisu, the villagers stopped me; they were drinking alcohol and they said, “Kama pesa”.  Meaning that I should give them money. I asked, “Why should I give you money. I am the one working for you. If anything you should be the ones giving me money, not me giving you.” So, I talked to them and I continued. 

Now, recently when I was campaigning in Kamuli against invasion by some group which wanted to invade the Movement area –(Interjections)– some young people maybe in their thirties stopped me – and they were ladies actually. They said, “Mzee, we have worked for the Movement for a long time but we now want to eat; nafe twagala kulya.” I answered, “But what you are asking for is illegal.” I asked them for their names and they told me. When I came back, I told the Inspector General of Police to send somebody –(Interjections)– yes, I am telling you – send somebody to go and talk to a group in such a place. They went and talked to them. I thought it was better to counsel them because they were doing this because somebody is corrupting them; I do not know who- because to dare to ask the President for money that means somebody else is giving them money, and I did not know who- but I have got my suspicions. (Laughter) 

Recently, when I went back to celebrate, I stopped at that place and they were waiting for me. I told them that instead of asking for money, which is also an insult – Shs 500 in five years – what is that? Leaders who do that are really criminals. It is cynical. That means you are just using these people. I told them instead of asking for this- you ask for development. 

After the elections, when I went back – the Police had gone and talked to them and told them that, “What you were asking for was illegal. You could be arrested. But it seems it is a widespread problem, we have now come to educate you. Please, also help us to find out others who are doing the same so that we can track some of them.” 

So, when I went to celebrate this time, I stopped and told them, “Now, we can talk about development.” Really, I ask you, honourable members, let us all stop giving money to anybody for political purposes. (Applause) I can see one group, which is not clapping. (Laughter) 

Of course the political leaders are putting themselves into a lot of financial hardships which is not necessary. Use public resources through Government programmes to develop these people. You do not have to use your money from your pockets. It is not necessary. What your constituency needs from you is guidance to show them the way. A leader does not carry the people he/she leads on his/her head. A leader shows them the way and they follow. You do not have to use your pockets to run a constituency. You should not. There are Government programmes NAADS. These are the ones that will develop your area. You take programmes and stop the practice of promoting corruption in the population.

On regional cooperation, since my last address to the nation, two countries, the Republic of Burundi and the Republic of Rwanda have been admitted to the East African Community. (Applause) Currently, in our respective countries forming the community, there are teams sensitising the people and collecting their views about the East African Political Federation, which is being fast tracked. 

I would like to re-state our full commitment to a strong community in our region because the advantages of such regional groupings far outweigh the disadvantages. Although there is still a lot of work to be done, we should not be discouraged. Our region has a lot of potential for prosperity for our people. Small challenges like the delayed swearing in of the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly from Kenya should not discourage us. We should be emphasising what is uniting us than those small impediments, which should be looked at as opportunities instead of threats. The next summit of heads of state of the five countries is due to be held in Kampala on the 18 June 2007.

Following the successful elections both in Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Great Lakes Region has gained more peace and stability. The arrangements put in place between Burundi, Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda on how to handle the terrorists who may be residing in Eastern Congo is a step in the right direction. 

Uganda’s relations with Sudan have continued to improve, thanks to the healthy relations with the Government of Southern Sudan. The good relations between Uganda and Southern Sudan has led to a big leap in the trade and commerce between our two peoples. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, the sending of our troops to Somalia is part of our Pan-Africanist obligations. People were asking me, “Why do you propose to send our troops to Somalia?” This is because we belong to a group called Pan-Africanists. This is our political orientation. We are Pan-Africanists. We think of the whole of Africa, not just our small places. 

During our struggle, when we were struggling against the dictatorships, Tanzania, Mozambique, Zambia and Libya extended solidarity to us. That is how we got out of the shadow of death of Idi Amin. How can we fail to extend solidarity to the Africans in need? How can we fail? How can we sit here and say, “No, Somalia is none of our business.” Some time ago, some people were saying that Sudan is none of our business. Now that there is peace in Sudan, they are the first to go and do business there. (Laughter)

When we were standing with our people in South Africa who are fighting against Apartheid, I invited ANC to come and have camps here. We had a stormy Cabinet meeting in Entebbe in 1989-1990. There some ministers who were saying, “No, if you invite ANC here, the whites will be annoyed with us. So we should not invite ANC.” I said, “But how can you fail to invite ANC? The whites in South Africa do not want ANC to be in South Africa; they also do not want them to be here in Uganda, and we listen to them? No.” So, the cabinet decided to welcome the ANC here in Uganda. Now after the freedom of South Africa, some of the people who were opposed were the first to dash to South Africa, the one who has got a toothache. (Laughter) 

Our sending of troops to Somalia is part of our Pan- Africanist obligation. (Applause) That is why we sent our soldiers to Somalia. They have done a good job; it is only on three occasions that the commanders on the ground relaxed and the soldiers were ambushed or were hit by harassing mortar shells - not really concentrated opposition mortar fire. 

The military situation in Somalia is not all that challenging. You know these people who do not know much about many things -(Laughter)- but who make it their business to be all over the place, they really – Somalia is not all that complicated. A disciplined force like ours, used to fighting wars, should not find that situation that challenging provided the commanders involved are serious and adhere to our well- tested battle procedure. 

When the four soldiers were killed, for instance, in a roadside bomb ambush, it was because the soldiers were driving in vehicles in an area that had never been under the control of friendly forces. This was a departure from our procedures. When you are in an area like that, you do not drive in vehicles as if you are going for a wedding. You walk on foot. You do not go to an area where there are buildings - you know Mogadishu is full of buildings which are deserted - and so how can you drive in a convoy; that is not our procedure. 

You know when they told me that those four soldiers had died, I checked and found that they had made a mistake. It was the mistake of our commanders. They were not following what I had told them. I addressed them in Jinja on all these issues. This was a departure from our procedures. I discussed those lapses with the army leaders and I hope they will never happen again. The only potential problem I can see is the delayed dialogue among the Somalis, and the conflicting concepts of organising that dialogue. This is the only little problem I can see. 

Happily President Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, the President of Somalia, the President of the transitional Government has delegated the former President Ali Mahid, to lead the dialogue. I am told he is coming here soon. We shall tell him our observations. Otherwise, our force is very popular with the wanaichi in Mogadishu. (Applause) I am even told wanaichi are hunting those people who are planting bombs. 

With the right type of dialogue, Somalia is not that difficult contrary to what the “itinerant problem solvers” keep saying. However, dialogue in a situation where legitimacy is contested is very crucial.

In my speech I have talked about the public service as well as the parliamentary pensions, which were almost overblown by the press and some of the actors but cannot be described as having been a standoff between Parliament and the Executive. Given the financial implications that were to be borne by the taxpayer for the two items, it was necessary to take careful consideration and come out with what could be reasonably afforded. As leaders, it would not be good to come out with a scheme that would overburden the people of Uganda who elected us to serve them or to send wrong signals to the country regarding what is reasonable remuneration and facilitation for the different clusters of people’s servants, of which the political leaders are a part. If we did so, we could be sending a wrong signal and would be prepared for the wrath of the people. The two issues have now been settled, thanks to the understanding between Parliament and the Executive. (Applause) 

The exercise of our respective powers as given in the Constitution must never lose sight of the fact that the same Constitution makes the people of Uganda supreme. Consequently, any decision that maybe injurious to them must be pointed out and handled appropriately.

Coming important events. Mr Speaker and honourable members, you are already aware that Uganda is to host the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), in November this year. Intensive preparations are going on for a successful hosting of that historical meeting. I commend those who have and continue to contribute positively to all the efforts that are being made. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has and will continue to brief Parliament about the preparations. 

Through periodic missions, the Commonwealth Secretariat has been checking on our preparedness in accordance with the guidelines given in what is commonly known as the “Blue Book”. The last such mission, headed by the Deputy Secretary General, Mrs Florence Mugasha, was here two months ago. Her mission assessed our level of preparedness at 75 per cent. (Applause) Our target is to attain the remaining 25 per cent by the end of August 2007. 

There are three parallel side meetings related to CHOGM that will take place before the main event. These are: the Commonwealth Business Forum, the Commonwealth Peoples Forum and the Commonwealth Youth Forum.

Mr Speaker, prior to the opening of the CHOGM meeting, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, will pay a state visit to our country. Preparations for that historical visit are also underway. (Applause) 

While rigorous preparations are going on, there have been some individuals and groups who have been working hard to see that CHOGM 2007 is not held in Uganda -(Cries of “Shame, Shame”) Well, I normally do not use those words, “shame, shame”, but –(Laughter) They have not only come out with unfounded and malicious allegations, but have all along been cynical about the ongoing preparations. Such individuals and groups are ready to go all the way to further their selfish interests at the expense of numerous direct and indirect benefits CHOGM will bring to Uganda which among others include: employment creation that is already being realised both directly and indirectly, because our people are getting jobs out of these activities; improved infrastructure. (Applause)

If for instance you take infrastructure, when the Commonwealth team came here last year, they said that we needed 4,000 beds to host the CHOGM meeting. When we checked at that time, we realised that we had only about 1,500. So, we stimulated action. As I speak now, we have got something like 4,300 beds; we have surpassed. (Applause) And we shall end up with about 7000 beds. Now, this means that not only are we creating capacity for hosting this CHOGM meeting, but also other meetings like Non-Aligned Movement, which we have been avoiding. Whenever I attend the meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement countries, I hesitate to invite them because I have not been sure whether I would have enough room to accommodate them. Take note that the Non-Aligned Movement is not like Commonwealth. Whereas Commonwealth comprises only 50 leaders, the Non-aligned Movement has 112 leaders. 

So, now that we are going to successfully host CHOGM, next time we shall invite bigger meetings like World Cup -(Laughter)- though I do not know much about World Cup –(Laughter)- but definitely we shall host the Non-Aligned Movement.

We also expect to achieve promotion of Uganda’s’ image abroad internationally; improved communication especially information technology, business opportunities, tourism boost and so forth. 

The benefits from hosting CHOGM 2007 are not for any single individual, but for the country as a whole. I am therefore appealing to all Ugandans who have their country at heart to continue working tirelessly towards total success of hosting CHOGM. 

Contrary to what appeared in The New Vision of 18 May 2007, I would like to state categorically that CHOGM 2007 has got its own budget and has not in any way encroached on the budget of Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Again contrary to what some people say, the hotel to be built where we used to have Shimoni Teachers College and where Shimoni Primary School was is not one of the CHOGM 2007 projects.

Let me also caution the urban authorities not to hide behind CHOGM 2007 while executing plans they had long ago but failed to implement for reasons best known to themselves. 

Contrary to the insinuation that after CHOGM Government is going to be extremely repressive, I want to reassure the nation that Government will continue to uphold and enforce the rule of law. (Applause) Those who wilfully break the law will be handled appropriately. Because after November as Chairman of the Commonwealth for the next two years, I will have to be very, very careful not to damage –(Laughter)- the status of the chairman. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, between the 11 and 14 June 2007, Uganda will host the eighth Commonwealth Women Affairs Ministers’ Meeting, popularly known as WAMMU. This is the first time for that meeting to be held in a country which is also going to host the CHOGM meeting. (Applause) Preparations have already been finalised. Although the WAMMU meeting is not directly connected to CHOGM, it will, to a certain extent, be used as a practical step in connection with the level of our preparedness for CHOGM 2007, since delegations are expected from all the Commonwealth countries. 

I already mentioned the summit of the Heads of State of the countries forming the East African Community, which is to take place in Kampala on 18 June 2007. So, let us commit ourselves fully, to have all the aforementioned meetings successfully hosted because there is everything to gain than to lose.

Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, this address has been made one year since the country moved into a multiparty dispensation. There has and there will be lessons to learn as we move on. Let us not ignore those lessons because they will enable us to perform better and to consolidate our democracy. We should all contribute to the building of institutions, which outlive us. 

In spite of extensive space bought in newspapers by ministries and Government departments to show the public all the achievements during the first year of Movement Government and a multiparty dispensation, there are still statements, especially on FM Radios, saying that nothing has been done. Nobody should have the liberty to mis-inform and mislead the public in the name of democracy and freedom of speech. As much as possible the hosts to those programmes should guide those they host instead of playing some lame disclaimers. The public deserves much more respect than feeding it on lies.

While this address has given a relatively broader picture, the Budget Speech, which we are due to receive in a few days’ time, will spell out in much more detail the performance of the economy and all that we intend to do in the next financial year. 

As we move on, let us all work together for a better Uganda today and tomorrow knowing that our motherland is our treasurer for the present and for the generations to come. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, on behalf of the entire Parliament and the nation at large, I take this opportunity to most sincerely thank you, for ably carrying out your constitutional duty. (Applause)

The first part of your address was an appeal that we adhere to the provisions of the Constitution. I want to say that you have shown it because today, after I proclaimed the beginning of the Second Session of the eighth Parliament of Uganda, under the provisions of Article 101 (1), to address Parliament on the state of the nation; you have indeed done so. (Applause) So, I thank you for adhering to Constitution and I would like to ask each one of us to adhere to the provisions of that same Constitution in one way or the other. 

Your Excellency, soon Parliament will embark on debating, scrutinising and analysing your address and we are prepared to make positive contributions to achieve the set goals.

As indicated before, the first session of the first year has been a learning process and I believe now, Members have acquired more capacity to be able to carry out their expected mandate under the Constitution, and I think they will do it.

I want to take this opportunity to thank all our distinguished invited guests for attending this ceremony and honouring it. Thank you very much for turning up. (Applause) 

Your Excellency, according to the programme issued to our invited guests, what we have done here is just the beginning of the process. There will be informal consultation over your address and this consultation will take place at the Parliamentary gardens. (Applause) Therefore, please complete the process by attending to the last item of the agenda on our Order Paper. 

Once again, Your Excellency, thank you very much for doing what you have done despite the fact that you have been engaged in various activities locally and overseas. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Honourable members, this brings us to the end, but as you have seen that the President, in the State of Nation Address, has indicated what has been accomplished in the past, and what is to be achieved in future, but this of course will have to be supported by “blood”. This “blood” will be the budget, which we expect to receive next week. We shall then compare it with the address, which the His Excellency has given to us. 

Since we did not get the text as the President was reading the State of Nation Address, we give ourselves time to receive the copies to help us start doing the necessary scrutiny and debate. Therefore, I adjourn the House to Thursday next week when we expect to receive the budget. The House is adjourned. (Applause)

NATIONAL ANTHEM

 (The House rose at 4.56 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 June 2007.)
