Thursday, 7 June 2012

Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. at the Serena Conference Centre, Kampala.

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca A. Kadaga, in the Chair.)

NATIONAL ANTHEM (Three Stanzas)

PRAYERS

PROCLAMATION

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a Sessional Parliament shall be held at such place in Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker, by Proclamation appoints;

AND WHEREAS the Second Session of the Ninth Parliament will commence on the 7th Day of June, 2012;

AND FURTHER, WHEREAS, the President of the Republic of Uganda is required, under Article 101(1) of the Constitution, to deliver to Parliament an Address on the State of the Nation at the beginning of each Session;

AND AWARE that it is expedient that Parliament receives the State of the Nation Address from the President at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 7th Day of June 2012 at 1400 hours to receive the State of the Nation Address from the President;

FURTHER, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament, Powers and Privileges Act, Cap 258 and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including the forecourt, the yard and the gardens be precincts of Parliament for the aforementioned purposes. Given under my hand, at Parliament House, Kampala this 18th May 2012.

Ms Rebecca Kadaga
Speaker of Parliament”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, and the First Lady, Mrs Janet Museveni; Your Excellency the Vice President, Mr Edward Ssekandi; my Lord, the Chief Justice; Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; Deputy Chief Justice; the Vice Chairperson of the NRM; traditional leaders; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the deputy prime ministers; ministers; the Leader of the Opposition; the ministers of state; judges of the Courts of Judicature; honourable Members of Parliament; members of the diplomatic corps and all invited guests.

I take this opportunity to welcome you all to this important event which marks the official opening of the Second Session of the Ninth Parliament.

As you are aware, this day has been earmarked for His Excellency the President to fulfill his constitutional obligation of delivering the State of the Nation Address under Clause (1) of Article 101 of the Constitution.

And as you will appreciate, this will be the second State of the Nation Address to be delivered to the Ninth Parliament.

Today, His Excellency the President is expected to review the activities and achievements of the government during the previous year, and present plans, programmes and strategies that Government intends to pursue during this session.

I also wish to report to Your Excellence and the Members present that the Uganda Parliament, on 30 May 2012, successfully conducted elections for Uganda’s representatives to the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA). Nine members representing all shades of opinion in Parliament were elected.

I also wish to report, with pleasure, that the Republic of Uganda has taken the seat of the Speaker of EALA. One of our Members, hon. Margaret Zziwa, has also become the first woman Speaker of the EALA following Mr Kinana, the first Speaker of EALA and Mr Abdi, the second, from Kenya. (Applause)

Honourable members, as you are aware, the business of the House, which was before us both in the plenary and the committees, was saved at the prorogation of Parliament. That means the process to facilitate the business of Parliament must commence now. I, therefore, call upon the whips of all the parties to expedite the process of assigning the various Members to committees so that we may start work in accordance with the Rules of Procedure.

I also wish to inform you that the Independent Members will be assigned committees by the Office of the Speaker as per the Rules of Procedure. The process for registration has already commenced.

Lastly, let me take this opportunity to urge all the committees of Parliament to quickly embark on their work so that we can do what is before us. I most warmly welcome you to this event of the State of the Nation Address. Thank you.

INVITATION OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT TO DELIVER THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS under Article 102, clause 1 of the Constitution, the President has to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation at the beginning of every session;

AND WHEREAS the Speaker has just proclaimed the commencement of the Second Session of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda;

NOW THEREFORE, as Speaker of Parliament, I now invite His Excellency the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation on this 7th day of June 2012.”

Your Excellency, I invite you to address the country.

3.06
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency the Vice President of Uganda; the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship, the Chief Justice; Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; Her Ladyship, the Deputy Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; honourable ministers; the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition; honourable Members of Parliament; members of the diplomatic corps; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen. 
 
As usual, I will start my State of the Nation Address with the economy. This time, however, I will concentrate on only four aspects: 

i) 	The recovery of the economy in the last 26 years; 
ii) 	Disagreement amongst us on the priority of allocation of scarce resources and the consequent delay in infrastructure development, with its implications for the delay of socio-economic transformation; 
iii) 	Sabotage of vital development projects by the indiscipline and, sometimes, selfishness of various actors, including some political leaders; and 
iv) 	Corruption as well as selfishness. 

Before I talk about the above four aspects, I should also talk about the five reasons that have caused the recovery of the economy since 1986 to-date. What are these reasons? Why did the economy recover? 

1. 	Security of persons and property brought about by the NRM, but more especially by the discipline of NRA/UPDF. When you see all this huge construction around Kampala and Entebbe, these are not Government projects. It is the work of the private sector. The private sector does it because of peace and security, of persons and property. And certainly, those were not brought by Mafabi or any of these gentlemen. Not an iota has the Mafabi type contributed to the stability of the country. You can claim other things, but please, do not claim stability. [Honourable Members: “Basajjabalaba”] Basajjabalaba is also stealing because of stability. (Laughter) And he has got something to steal because in the past, there was nothing to steal. He will be handled by the courts of law. He will not be found floating as a dead body in the Nile, as used to happen in the past.


2. 	The private sector, whose investments account for about 77 percent of all total investments in the economy, including investments of our citizens of Indian origin, who contribute 25-30 percent of all the total investments. 

3. 	The macro-economic stability and liberalisation of the economy, which enabled us to control inflation for a very long time, and to free the private sector from bureaucratic interference. 

4. 	The ever-expanding consumer demand in Uganda and in the region. 

5. 	Some little support from development partners that enabled us to repair some roads, to repair the Nalubaale Power Station, etc. In particular, I want to salute the former British Minister, Linda Chalker, who helped me to repair Nalubaale Power Station. (Applause) 

Most of these five are obvious and they need no explanation. The fact that people’s property cannot be grabbed by soldiers and that Ugandans can no longer disappear without a trace needs no explanation. (Interjections) I will only comment on two of the five. These are: The nature of the private sector that propelled our recovery; and the support from the donors, our development partners. 

Regarding the private sector that propelled our recovery, it comprises of three elements: 

    i) Those engaged in services such as transport (matatus, boda bodas, buses, etc.), hotels, restaurants, beauty salons, fuel stations, real estate and shopping malls; 

    ii) Those engaged in light industry, manufacturing for import substitution as well as some limited exports; and 


iii) Those engaged in trading, especially importing – the Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA) type. 
 
Some of the industrial activities are linked to agriculture like fruits, juices, coffee, cotton, etc. Agricultural production has certainly contributed to the recovery of the economy. Three players in agriculture have done so. These are: 

i) 	The plantation owners (sugar, tea and coffee); 
ii) 	The big scale farmers; and 
iii) 	The medium scale farmers. 
 
The subsistence farmers, who, according to the 2002 census, comprised 68 percent of all homesteads, still have much of their potential untapped because we have not yet mobilised them to do so. Mrs Josephine Kizza’s model farm is the solution to many of their problems. 

Nobody here can claim that I have not exposed all of you – those who wanted to come - to this fact. The Opposition never come whenever I invite them; except once, hon. Onzima, when he was still in the Opposition. This meant that he was on the way to his “salvation.” (Laughter)   Also, my daughter, the hon. Carolyn Okao, when she was still in the Opposition, I invited them for a study tour. All the other Members of the Opposition boycotted, but she came and there are advantages in good manners.  

If all the 40 million acres of land in Uganda that are suitable for arable farming are put to their full potential, there will be a revolution in this country. Uganda has got 40 million acres of arable land, but very little of it is being used and even what is being used is not being used properly, which is the challenge. Much of this acreage is under subsistence farmers whom I have been struggling to mobilise through you to help me make them produce in the right way. Everybody will be richer; the families themselves will be richer; the local governments, the churches, the mosques and the country. 

Through our zonal meetings, we identified the packages of enterprises for each area according to the households’ landholding. Let all the leaders get moving on this. 

The first two elements of the private sector, that is, those engaged in services and light manufacturing industries are the most useful because they add value to the goods and services produced in Uganda. They are not like KACITA which concentrates on turning Uganda into a perpetual market for the products of foreign countries. This is where the future lies.  We should have more and stronger enterprises of this type. These groups must be specifically encouraged; they should not be delayed in anyway by anybody if we want our country to go beyond where we are now, yet the economy cannot stay where it is now because it is already being overtaken by the demand for jobs by the young people, as well as the demand for dollars for imports.

As you know, the light manufacturing has been on sugar, soft drinks, beers, soaps, some little textile operations, vegetable oils like Mukwano and Bidco, fish processing, cotton ginning, coffee hurling, cement production, steel bars production (Mutayimbwa), recycling of batteries, milk processing, fruit juice processing, plastics etcetera.   These light industries save or earn the equivalent of $1.2 billion for Uganda per annum. If they were not there, these operations which have already taken off would have to import these items and we would miss the export earnings to the tune of $1.2 billion.

This category has got a lot of potential for expansion if we could, for instance, stop the bad fishing practices on our lakes; deepen coffee processing beyond coffee hurling to coffee roasting and grinding; expand juice and milk processing; link the steel mills with ironore deposits at Muko and Osukuru Hills etcetera; this economy would be totally transformed. 

We have seen that among the categories in the private sector, the most useful ones are: Agriculture, services, meaning transport, hotels, banking, etcetera, and light industry. The perpetual importers of products that can be made here are not a positive element in the long-run. As already mentioned, trading is partly positive if it involves internal distribution in Uganda and exporting our products to the region or beyond. Importers, however, have caused chronic haemorrhage in Africa, especially, because most of the imports are simply luxury goods and not production inputs. You find that our people even import hair, when God has ably catered for all our children. Somebody told me that this hair is from - I do not know what sort of people. Anyway that is not my –(Laughter)

Light industry is the most promising of all these. It is important to point out that even when the imports are inputs for production, it would be better if most of them were produced in Uganda and if the local products are comparable in price as well as quality to the imported ones. Light industry produces products that are indeed very much needed for human sustenance, which include transport, food, clothing, building materials, medicines for human beings, drugs for pest control or for livestock, etcetera. These are all basics for human life and their demand is durable. In addition, light industries produce weapons for self-defence and so that a country’s future is assured. These days, brains in form of computers are the ones that operate machines guiding them to do work.

These are the sectors where the whole political and administrative groups should focus because this is where the future of the country lies. With time, light industries will move into sectors of heavy industry such as steel manufacturing out of our good ironore deposits, fertiliser manufacturing, and earth moving equipment, etcetera. 

If you examine the sectors that have been growing very fast in the last decade, you will find there are the following: Importing vehicles, that is, transport in that sense, making the need for manufacturing the vehicles here; beauty salons - you find beauty salons everywhere; restaurants, hotels, bars, real estates, shopping malls and many others. 

These have been growing at the following average annual growth rate: banking sector - 17.2 percent, transport and communication services including mobile telephones – 14.3 percent, hotels and restaurants - 8.8 percent, real estate - 5.6 percent, other businesses, such as salons, stationery, etcetera - 9.7 percent. Manufacturing has also been growing at the rate of 6.5 percent, but agriculture has been growing at a rate of only 1.4 percent. Now, that is where there is a problem. Salons are growing at 9.7 percent; agriculture is growing at 1.4 percent. [Honourable Members: “Small budget.”] It is not the budget; you are just - You just talk without serious thinking.

All these, except for hotels, are characterised by little employment potential, low export earnings and low or no technology. These industries, which are growing fast - salons, bars, petrol stations - how much employment are they creating? How many dollars are they bringing in? Very little. That is where the problem is.

This is where Uganda is now. High rates of growth, but in sectors that create little employment, bring in little or no foreign exchange and actually, sometimes, squander the little foreign exchange we earn from coffee and other exports in the form of inputs imported for their operation. This source of growth does not bring socio-economic transformation quickly. Their main attraction is that they are of low technology and require little capital to start up. These are what the indigenous private sector can afford as of now. This is the paradox of the present economy of Uganda - growth without creating enough employment and without earning enough foreign exchange, but instead squandering the foreign exchange earned from coffee and other raw material exports.

Therefore, I think that it may be useful to distinguish between core industries that are a must in terms of sustaining human life and then peripheral or dependant industries that are either not as important as the other ones or are dependent on the other ones to thrive.

The second category is easy to set up by the private sector as they have done in Uganda. The core ones need deliberate nurturing by the State even if they are done by the private sector. It is the country that needs them and not the private sector. Mostly, you hear misnomers such as ‘factory eyomuyindi’ meaning the Indian’s factory. There are no Indian factories in Uganda. The Indian factories are in India even if they are built and owned by non-Indians. What we have in Uganda are Ugandan factories operated or owned by Indian families. Those Indians are working for us. Those factories by whosoever expand our GDP and not the GDP of India.

Whose raw materials do they buy? When an Indian has got a factory here, whose raw materials does he buy? Whose utilities - electricity, water, telephones do they use? Which market do they produce products for? Who benefits from their export earnings? Whose youth are employed by these factories, ours or the Indian ones? To which Government do they pay taxes? When you answer each of the questions above, you will discover that these are Ugandan factories and not Indian factories. The ignorant talk should stop. (Applause)

The three sugar factories in Uganda that is Kakira, Lugazi and Kinyara save Uganda $232 million in import substitution per annum. These factories paid Shs 400 billion in taxes in the Financial Year 2010-2011. They employ 19,000 Ugandans and engage over 200,000 people in indirect employment including out- growers, transporters, traders, stockists etc.

In the Financial Year 2010-2011, they earned $41 million in export earnings. When all the three expand as they plan to, these factories will earn about $60 million in export earnings and will pay over Shs 600 billion in taxes per annum. The three factories will also employ 25,000 Ugandans and produce a total of 450,000 metric tonnes of sugar per annum instead of the present 290,000 metric tonnes per annum. What is planned for sugar should also be planned for coffee, milk, fruits, maize, rice, Irish Potatoes, beans, wheat, beef and others. It should be the same plan for minerals, wood products and of course, fish products. 

This brings me back to the four factors I mentioned at the beginning of this speech, namely: One, the recovery of the economy in the last 26 years. Two, disagreement among us on the prioritisation of allocation of scarce resources and the attendant delays in our infrastructure projects. Three, sabotage of hydro-development projects; and four, corruption as well as egocentrism based on monetary gain or political opportunism.

Political opportunism involves failure to tell the people what the country needs and instead, pandering to uninformed, wrong and populist positions. This is suicidal; calling Cancer, “Flu”. If somebody has a cancer and you are a doctor and you say, “No, you are suffering from flu”, this is the surest way of killing the patient. It is better you tell the patient that you have cancer, let us see what we can do.

Now, when we have all these problems and you find leaders just playing cheap politics as villagers being led by villagers, then you feel pity for a country. Those are dangerous leaders. At one time, the British gave a wrong description to our elder Mzee Kenyatta. They called him a leader unto death and darkness, which, of course, was not the case. But in Africa, I can see some leaders who are really leaders “unto death and darkness”. When you do not tell the people the truth and you are a leader – you do not guide them about the future, you are a disaster! I can see that Mbabazi is popular with this group. (Laughter) 

I repeat; this is suicidal, calling cancer “flu” is the surest way of killing the patient. Uganda needs more factories, not just beauty salons, bars, fuel stations – like the ones of Nandala-Mafabi -(Laughter)- boda bodas and taxis. And I can tell you that I do not own a single shop or a single petrol station. And the reason I do not own them is ideological –(Interjection)– I do not mind other people owning a shop, but I cannot do it to sell other people’s products into Uganda. Ideologically, as a leader, I cannot do it. My economic activities, if at all, must involve creating wealth for Uganda. (Applause) Therefore, the message –(Interjection)– you should ignore these people like you did the other day; I will come to that and congratulate you on how you handled these people the other day. That is when I will say, “NRM ebeewo”. (Laughter) The main point I am making here is that Uganda needs more factories, not just beauty salons – I wish good luck to all the salons, but we must have more than this. That is what I am here to tell the leadership here.

As already said above, I have talked about elements of a modernised Ugandan economy based on natural resources such as agriculture, minerals, fishing, wood products, tourism, and others. There are, however, also knowledge-based industries; these are products of the brain such as cars, machines, computers, processing formulae for food – in form of value addition - medicines, vaccines, and others. Fortunately, our people have designed an electric car; they have processed flour out of bananas; they have made juices out of our traditional foods, and medicines out of our traditional medicinal herbs. They have made perfumes out of our traditional herbs like emigaju in Runyankore. These have got huge economic potential – much more than coffee as a raw material and the like. Scientific innovations and scientists in general must, therefore, be given priority, in terms of Government funding. (Applause)

I have already told you the factors that led to the recovery of Uganda namely: Security of persons and property – to which Nandala-Mafabi did not contribute - macro-economic stabilisation and liberalisation; expanding national and regional demand; the private sector that is responsible for most of the investments; and some little donor support. All these factors would, however, have assisted greater and faster expansion if we had dealt more decisively with the issue of infrastructure, especially electricity, roads and the railway. 

Depending on donor support, we have done some roads, repaired Nalubaale, and others like I have already mentioned. However, socio-economic transformation needs much more than that. For example, to be where Malaysia is now, we need at least 11,954 megawatts of electricity. With Bujagali, which is about to be completed, we shall be having only 781 megawatts. This will give us a kWh per capita of 196 compared to the one of the USA of 12,914. Although we are still lagging behind other developed countries, we recognise that we have made progress in this area. In 1986, Uganda was generating only 60 megawatts and had a kWh per capita of 28. This was a big shame! So, electricity production with Bujagali has expanded more than 11 or 12 times from 1986, but it is still very small.

We must also tarmac all the major roads for both economic and political reasons -(Applause)– in order to shut up these Nandalas; we need to put tarmac in their mouths and they will never speak again. (Laughter) That is how we shall seal their mouths. Depending on funding from foreign sources is not enough. The only sure answer is to rely on our own means. Tax collection in 1986 was only Shs 5 billion. Our tax collection next financial year is projected at Shs 7,132 billion. In the financial year ending June 2012, we collected Shs 6,169 billion. 

It was shared out as follows: 

    1. Wage bill and allowances – Shs 1,807 billion 
    2. Roads - Shs 1,284 billion 
    3. Energy - Shs 1,200 billion 
    4. Education - 664 billion 
    5. Health - 792 billion 
    6. Defence and Security - 407 billion 
    7. Local Government - 212.9 billion 

The fact that I did not read State House means that it is not among the big ones -(Laughter)- and State House is one of the most useful units of Government. All this recovery is from State House. If you do not know that then you need to go back to the kindergarten.

As you can see, the wage bill takes about Shs 1,807 billion. This is the largest share in our budget distribution. Recently, I launched the construction of the Arua-Oraba-Kaaya Road which will cost us Shs 142 billion including Shs 10 billion for compensating people’s properties near the road. If, therefore, the wage bill was Shs 1,000 billion instead of being Shs 1,807, we would have saved about Shs 800 billion per annum for roads and dams. Over a five year period, we would have accumulated about Shs 4,000 billion. That would enable us to do about 29 roads like Arua-Oraba-Kaaya. What impact would this have on the economy? 

According to Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) and according to me, in my capacity as the President who travels across the country quite often, there are 44 roads in Uganda with a total length of 3,466 kilometers that should be tarmacked. The list is attached. The young lady from the Opposition thinks Kanungu is in Congo, but it is not included here.

The estimated cost is US$ 4,076 million or Ugshs 9,791 billion. UNRA puts these roads in two categories: A and B. There are 19 roads in category A. These need US$ 1,428 million or Ugshs 3,435 billion. These roads are the following: 

1. 	Olwiyo-Gulu-Kitgum (167 kms)
2. 	Moroto-Nakapiripirit (92 kms)
3. 	Muyembe-Nakapiripirit/Moroto-Kotido (193 kms)
4. 	Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto-Lokitanyala (208 kms)
5. 	Kapchorwa-Suam (77 kms)
6. 	Villa Maria-Sembabule (48 kms)
7. 	Mpigi-Maddu-Sembabule (135 kms)
8. 	Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi-Nyenga (74 kms)
9. 	Ntungamo-Kakitumba/Mirama Hills (37 kms)
10. 	Rukungiri-Kihihi-Kanungu-Ishasha  (74 kms)
11. 	Kyenjojo-Kabwoya (102.4 km) this road fortunately is off this list because ADB has taken it up.
12. 	Buwaya-Kasanje-Mpigi-Kibibi-Mityana (90 kms)
13. 	Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko (111 kms)
14. 	Kayunga-Bbale-Galiraya(88.5 kms)
15. 	Kabale (Ikumba)-Kanungu-Buhoma (120.0 kms)
16. 	Ishasha-Katunguru (88.0 kms)
17. 	Kabale-Bunyonyi (6.0 kms)
18. 	Mbale-Lwakhakha (41.0 kms)
19. 	Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo-Afoji (104.0 kms)

I will tell you what we are going to do. That is why they call this the State of the Nation Address, which means that the one who is speaking is the President of Uganda. It also means that those who are not presidents should listen to what he has to say. When I came here, there was a young girl from the Opposition who was trying to throw me out of Parliament the other time. I do not see her now.

Today, I stand here with pride as one of the founders of NRM - ever since 1971, we started the struggle against criminality and misrule in Uganda! As I have repeatedly told you, tax collection was only Shs 5 billion in 1986. It is now Shs 7,000 billion! If this money was distributed in a kiyekera (guerrilla) way, we could certainly do these roads ourselves – at least the 19 roads in the UNRA’s category A that need Shs 3,400 billion. If the wage bill was only Shs 1,000 billion instead of Shs 1,800 billion, by saving Shs 800 billion per annum, we would accumulate Shs 4,000 billion in five years. This sum of money is more than enough to do the 19 roads we have been struggling with. 

The clamour for higher pay by public servants and political leaders is, therefore, untimely and unfair to the 34 million Ugandans. Remember political and Public Service workers are only 300,000 in number. Even if you assume that each one of them has five persons under him or her that would put the figure at 1.5 million beneficiaries. How about the other 32.5 million? The correct thing to do, now that we have some money, is to serve the many before we serve the few. (Applause) If we were patriotic and undertook a voluntary salary cut for a number of years, we would build these roads ourselves.  While I still await patriotic offers about the voluntary salary cuts - I am making this proposal; we could have salary cuts voluntarily.

I have initiated some talks with National Social Security Fund (NSSF) regarding the possibility of borrowing some money from them to do some of the roads. (Applause) The NSSF does not have that much money. It only has shs 2,800 billion. Possibly, we could borrow something like shs 1,000 billion from them. That would cover some of the roads but not all of them. There are other funding options which we are looking at with some people in connection with European Union banks and some foreign countries etc. I was recently in Turkey and I sent a group to China. They are also looking for a number of formulae. 

With our oil, matters will be easier. We shall be able to fund the roads, the railway and the power stations easily using our own money. For some of the roads, we may have to forego some of the expenditure items and concentrate on the roads instead. For instance, the money we send to Karamoja; some of it can be concentrated and we deal with the roads.

In the meantime, I demand that the clamour for more pay and allowances by public servants and political leaders must stop so that we concentrate on the roads and power. The only public servants that deserve pay rise are the scientists because they contribute decisively to the economy and their contribution is unique. It is not easy to replicate. A teacher can be dismissed and we get another one -(Interjections)- but if a doctor is not there you cannot replace him easily.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will have an opportunity to speak to this State of the Nation Address in Parliament. Do not disturb the President. (Applause)

MR MUSEVENI: They are not disturbing me. They are just checking on my brain to see whether it is very sharp. (Laughter) And I only hear them when I want to hear them. 

The promise we had made to the teachers and other public servants of 250 billion will go ahead for at least this financial year. (Applause) I feel very bad to see this Shs 6,169 billion we have succeeded in generating being used in a manner that does not build a higher threshold for our economy. Once we build a road, it will be there for 20 years. Salaries are monthly. Increment of salaries should wait until we have dealt with infrastructure or until our oil and gas are operational so that we can use the proceedings to fund infrastructure. Then, we can start moving again on wages -(Interjections)- the jets could not wait because we had to defend Uganda. You can hear his confusion. He thinks jets are the same as salaries of some clerks. This country would be in trouble if it was led by such people. (Laughter) The jets are the manvuli of Uganda. In the rain you need a manvuli; you need an umbrella -(Interjections) - Gaddafi was attacked by the West and not the local forces.  

I know inadequate salaries are also a challenge to the families of public servants. Uganda, however, is not like Europe. Many of the public servants have land at home and can grow food to supplement the yet small salaries until the situation improves. When we build the base of our economy, we shall all be better off.

Although I am not in favour of salary increases in the Public Service, there are two categories that are still left out: These are the councillors at the district level -(Applause)- and the LC I chairpersons. These persons monitor Government programmes, maintain security in villages and adjudicate cases yet they have been getting very little or no facilitation at all. A provision of about Shs 20 billion per annum could cater for these two groups provided creation of new villages and new sub-counties stops. The ones who took their bicycles are being made to vomit the bicycles -(Interjections) ­- I am a not a court registrar to know when the case will be heard -(Laughter)- unless Nandala wants to appoint me as a court registrar. What I know is that those people are before the law -(Interjections)– no, you leave these people I will enjoy educating them as I go along. Although it is not my primary aim today, but there is no harm in helping them because after all they are Ugandans although they are lost. (Laughter) And as a Christian, I am commanded by Jesus that I should look for the lost sheep. (Laughter)

Therefore, those who have been pushing for salary and allowance increases at this time, when we have not finished building the base of the economy, are committing a serious mistake. The only people that should get salary increases should be the scientists, as I have already said. These are people we cannot easily replace. Yet we need them -(Interjections)­– yes, if the money was there I would actually increase the salary of Kayihura -(Applause)- because he has done a good job in handling the Nandalas -(Laughter). The only people that should get salary increases are the scientists as I have always said. These are people we cannot easily replace. We need them for a knowledge based economy such as making cars, making computers, adding value to agricultural products, fabricating machines and machine parts. I have already talked about this above.

Those who push for salary and allowance increases as well as endless travels abroad are the same ones that complain that this road is not done, that project is not done, etcetera. This is hypocritical and should stop. Our discipline of buhekyera – guerrillas - educated us in the art of first dealing with the core issues and then dealing with peripheral issues later. As bush fighters, I have always told you that we concentrated on the gun and its ammunition, the recruits and some food. The rest, including clothes, medicine, etcetera would be got by attacking the enemy units. That is how we built our army. He says I am not a guerrilla now, but there is no harm in transferring the discipline from one area to another area.

The core issues in this economy are:
    • Defence and security; 
    • Law and order; 
    • Electricity; 
    • Roads; 
    • The railway; 
    • Piped water for the big towns; 
    • Education; 
    • Health; 
    • Tourism; and 
    • Scientific innovation. 

With this foundation in place, we can then start looking at wage increases. It was not accidental that the salary of the President was Shs 150,000 between 1986 and 1996. It was deliberate. If one consumes little and invests more, the future will be guaranteed. If one consumes a lot and invests little, the future will be doomed. 

Spending prematurely on wages is really bad planning. It makes Government spend too much on recurrent costs yet with capital projects, you spend only once and you do not repeat such expenditure for decades. By the way - although this is not part of my speech - you can see a lot of economic chaos in Europe - in Greece, Spain, Portugal and Ireland. I have not studied their situation fully. I am not an expert like some of the people are on all global matters, but from what I am picking from the radio and TV stations part of the problem is people living beyond their means. If a country lives beyond its means - you give yourselves high salaries when you do not have the capacity - you end up in that situation. 

I have spent a lot of time talking about two of the four factors I said were the main themes of this address as far as the economy was concerned. These are the recovery of the economy in the last 26 years and disagreements among us on the prioritization for the use of scarce resources. There are two other factors I need to talk about briefly; these are sabotage or delay of vital projects as well as corruption and selfishness.

It is bad enough for villagers to not fully understand the importance of factories. It is a disaster for leaders to do the same while at the same time they are drawing salaries out of money paid by the very factories. We have had delays of factories in Lugazi, Amuru, Tororo caused by this failure of leadership. This is not acceptable. If a leader has criticism about the method of introducing a factory in one’s area, bring out the criticism in a constructive manner in the right forum as you also quickly bring forward a solution. (Applause) 

Yes, there may be a problem in something, but it must be done and it is you to do it because you are the leader in that area. So, if there is something which should be this way, work on it quickly yourself. Why are you called a leader? What for? If these people have brought a project for some little problem there - That is what I told Gen. Muntu when they were delaying Bujagali. 

Gen. Muntu was on that committee of energy – [Hon. Member: “Salim Saleh.”] - Well, I can know Muntu very clearly when I see him and I can distinguish him from Saleh. (Laughter) The one I saw was Muntu and that is what I am telling you. (Laughter) Now, Gen. Muntu was criticizing the minister that time, - I think it was Minister Kaijuka or somebody – and they were saying he has not done this or that. Okay, if he has not done it, you do it. Show him how to do it! Let that committee of yours of Parliament show him how to do it, instead of saying, “We have rejected, you go back”, as if you are in a theatre. 

Whose dam is this? Is it Kaijuka’s dam? Kaijuka retired from politics long ago; we are the ones now stuck with lack of electricity. So, that is what I told Muntu. I said, “Okay, if Kaijuka has not seen this point, you show it to him”. Tell him, “Mr Minister, why are you doing this, why don’t you do it this way?” Finish it in the committee. But you sit in the committees, show how important you are and say, “You go back” and then they go back and they come back, as if you are acting. This is not a theatre. This is a hospital to solve your people’s problems. 

When Bujagali delays, who loses? It is not Kaijuka who is a minister today. Kaijuka retired long ago from politics but the people of Uganda have suffered so much because of the delay of Bujagali. So, if there is any problem in a project, you the leader who is there should be the first to say, “Okay, this project is good, but why don’t we do it like this?” quietly and quickly. 

There should be no acrimony, no delays because this is our factory. It is not an individual’s factory; it is ours. Do not deceive yourselves that investors are dying to come here. If you deceive yourself that investors are dying to come here, you are of no use to your country. (Applause) It says in the Bible that those who say they have no sin deceive themselves. So, if you think that by sitting there and appearing to be important – 

One time I brought a very rich man here, and I had a very big official whom I do not want to mention, whom I had invited. He sat on this side and this rich man was sitting on the other side. I said, “This man can do this, can do that” and then this big official said, “You write to me”. I told him in our local language that, “This man cannot write to you; ono omusajja tasobola kuwandikila gwe. Takwetaga; you are the one who needs him.” I had to tell him in Luganda. “You think you are very important. Ono omusajja tasobola kuwandikira ggwe.” The man has got wealth bigger than the GDP of East Africa and that man was sitting there saying, “You write to me”! (Laughter) I told him in Luganda that, “Ono omusajja tasobola kuwandikira ggwe.” 

It is good to be ignorant. You know, ignorance is like being in a theatre under anaesthesia. You do not know what is happening in the world. They can operate on you and you do not know what is happening. When you are suffering from anaesthesia of self importance - (Laughter) - anaesthesia of pseudo self importance, you say that, “You write.” (Laughter) Who are you? You should put yourselves on the proper minzani. You should always weigh yourselves. Do not over weigh yourselves, please. (Applause) I told this man in Luganda that, “Omusajja ono, tasobola kuwandikira ggwe.” He will not! Why should he? 

Do not deceive yourselves that investors are dying to come here. They have got many places to go to. I attracted BIDCO to come to Kalangala and after some hustles, they started. Kalangala is now completely transformed because of their effort. (Applause) From the beginning, they wanted to expand since they had idle machinery here. As usual, there were delays by the system here manned by people who do not know where the future belongs. Meanwhile, BIDCO has already got 70,000 hectares of land in Nigeria where they are going to produce 350,000 metric tonnes of palm oil. They are already in Nigeria. [Hon. Member: “They can go.”] 

Now, that leader unto under development - let me moderate it for now – has said, “They can go”. Do you hear what he is saying? He is saying that they can go. If they go, who will lose? Where will you get your salary from? (Applause) [Hon. Members: “From oil.”] From oil! Oh! They are preparing themselves to nyam nyam oil already. (Laughter) Nyam nyam means to eat in Ateso. So, you have eaten the money of taxpayers, you are now waiting for the oil also. Oh! You better check yourselves. 

They are going to produce 350,000 metric tonnes of palm oil. This is compared to 16,000 metric tonnes of palm oil produced in Kalangala today where Government gave them 6,200 hectares of land plus 2,800 hectares of land from out growers. These people have gone to Nigeria and they are producing 350,000 metric tonnes of palm oil while here where they started, – it is me who invited them - because of the endless confusion of the political groups and the bureaucrats, they are only producing 16,000 metric tonnes. And that 16,000 metric tonnes has already done so much change to Kalangala. So, please, do not deceive yourselves. 

Uganda is not China - (Interjections) - Yes, obviously it is Uganda but what I am saying is that it is not comparable to China. China is a big market. People are dying to go there because it is a big market. If every Chinese buys a bottle of soda, you become a billionaire in one day because there are 1,200,000,000 Chinese. Uganda is not like that. We need to attract these people. 

Who is the loser now? Certainly, it is not the investor. The ones tied to an under developed country are not the investors; the ones who are tied to Uganda are not investors. The ones who are tied to underdeveloped Uganda are not investors. The ones who are tied to this undeveloped Uganda are Ugandans, those who cannot go away for greener pastures. They are the ones who are stuck here. So, when you spoil chances for them, you are spoiling for them and not for the investor. The investor will go to another place where he is welcome. Of course, the others who have got qualifications can also go for greener pastures, but the ones who suffer are the people you say you are representing, the ones who cannot migrate, who cannot leave Uganda. They are the ones you are punishing. It is the Ugandans, especially the poor ones, who cannot go for greener pastures. The investors are mobile with their money.

All Ugandan leaders must learn how to okwogereza. When you are going to look for a bride – [Hon. Member: “We are married.”] - I hope you have heard of what we call metaphors. I am sure it was one of the elementary lessons in English. All Ugandan leaders must learn how to okwogereza when it comes to investors as you do with brides. You do not hold a press conference to discuss the issues with your intended bride. Matters are discussed confidentially and with respect. You may not agree, you may make further arrangements but it is all done with seriousness and courtesy. If you can do all that for a single bride, how about for this country of 34 million people? 

Are we not condemning the future of this bride to doom by our conduct as agents? The bridegroom is Uganda, she wants to bring investors here and we are the agents. We are the agents; we are not Uganda. So, when you conduct yourself arrogantly, abusing people – The other time when I called a meeting to discuss with Mehta about the environment, - my sister Anywar was there and some other group - there was a young man there who stood and said, “You Mehta, you Mehta…” Imagine, a young boy telling a man who is like his grandfather, “You Mehta”. You are bayaye. How were you brought up? The arrogance of people who have got nothing absolutely, no contribution! 

So, you agents, - you are agents of Uganda because Uganda is the bridegroom and she is the one who wants brides, the investors - you have no right to spoil the chances of this bridegroom. You have no right absolutely. If you cannot do it, get out and do something else. Go and look after goats or something else, so that you can misbehave like the children who are grazing goats. 

Nevertheless, the officials who handle these should also be serious.  Ask the questions quickly. Who is the legal owner of this land? If they are bibanja holders, how are you engaging them? If they are illegal squatters, how do you handle them? Handle issues thoroughly, knowledgably but firmly and fairly. (Applause) Knowledge creates confidence and firmness in decision making. 

There is the issue of corruption and selfishness. Some of the frustrations to the investors are caused by corruption. Investors are harassed for bribes by these traitors. I do not know why the investors do not report this. I intend to bring a law to punish severely those who endanger our future on account of corruption, selfishness and opportunism. (Applause)

Before I leave the sections on the economy, I would like to touch, briefly, on how the economy has performed since last year. You remember, soon after the elections of last year, the economy hit what I had long anticipated – some bad times. Owing to some drought but also due to increased regional demand, which itself is a great opportunity for the region and producers, commodity prices went up. This was also due to increased world prices owing to the emergence of bigger middle classes in China, India, Brazil, and to some extent Africa. 

As I told you in my previous speeches, it is actually good news for serious investors to have this big demand in the world. On account of increased construction in the world, the price for steel has gone up; the price for sugar has gone up globally because of increased demand, and so has the price of petroleum because of more people in the world, including Ugandans, driving cars. 

Additionally, the economies of the West are in decline because for long they have been leading an affluent lifestyle at the expense of the rest of the world especially Asia, Africa and Latin America. Prior to the emergence of China, India, Brazil and to some extent some parts of Africa out of poverty, much of the global resources were only supplying the West. That is why in the 1990s, when I was trying to market our steel in Muko near Kabale and Sukuru Hills near Tororo, I was told that there was too much steel in the world, that there was a steel glut. As a consequence of that, nobody was willing to invest in iron-ore processing. At that time, the price of a tonne of steel was US$ 200. By last year, a tonne of steel had gone up to US$ 900. Why? It is because steel, which was previously being used by only a small population of the world for construction of houses and making cars, is now being used by billions of the world population. This is good news for Africa and for Uganda. 

Indeed, in 2011 we earned US$ 449 million from the export of coffee against US$ 267 million which we earned in 2010. Why? It is because the demand for coffee in the world is now much bigger. In previous years, we earned as low as US$ 120 million annually from export of the same amount of coffee. – (Interjections) – It was not BCU, it was global demand. Nandala thinks global demand is BCU. You can see the brains we have. (Laughter) Nandala is like my Banyankole. You know, Banyankole in the past had a king whom they called Rubambansi, which means, the controller of the whole world. They thought Ankole was the whole world. Now Nandala thinks he is a Rubambansi because of BCU; BCU is just Bugisu Cooperative Union, - (Laughter) - it has no effect on the global demand of coffee. If the prices go up, it is because of the global demand and not because of BCU. I have got my issues with Nandala, which we shall sort out. 

Uganda had a lot of opportunities. On the one hand, regional demand was going up and on the other hand, prices for our commodities were also going up globally. The only negative aspect was that the consumption in Europe and USA was going down. We could, however, not fully take advantage of these opportunities because of previous mistakes committed against my advice and my entreaties to the various power centres. 

Particularly relevant for these problems were the delays of Bujagali and the sugar factories in Lugazi and Amuru. Instead of taking advantage of the regional demand, the prices went up for the consumers. The price of sugar went up to about Shs 10,000 per kilogramme. The charlatans went into full gear – “The NRM Government has failed; they are useless”. I took time and explained to Ugandans on the radios and also explained to the NRM leaders at Kyankwanzi. You can go back and refer to my speeches and see that there is nothing I predicted that has not turned out to be true. The price of sugar is now at Shs 3,000 per kilogramme. The exchange rate that had gone to Shs 2,800 per dollar has been hovering around Shs 2,450 per dollar and so on. 

However, we have not completed dealing with the real bottlenecks, except electricity which is beginning to work out miracles in the economy. With just three turbines operational at Bujagali, that is 150 MW of the 250 MW total, there is already a remarkable change. (Applause) I am told that industrialists are already very excited. They have shut down the standby generators that were causing them to “bleed” so much. This is just the beginning. The Banyankore say, “Ekihambo kirakutambire kikubanza obutuutu” – the pumpkin plant that will solve your hunger problems starts by giving you the young pumpkins. English is a poor language; you cannot easily translate these very precise statements. What then will happen when Lugazi is expanded, Amuru is built, Sango Bay is built, Ziwa Ranch is turned into a sugarcane plantation, Casements Sugar in Kaliro starts, irrigation around the Rwenzori and the Elgon areas are expanded and we start using fertilizers? The sky is the limit. (Applause)

The other time when you were having your meeting of IPU, I was driving from Entebbe to Kampala after one of the functions and all those hills between Entebbe and Kampala were dark. Recently, I drove from Entebbe to Kampala at night and the hills are now all shining. (Applause) Therefore, those who were predicting doom last year are now ashamed. Nevertheless, I should not forget to say “Shame to the charlatans - (Applause) - shame to the liars and shame to the opportunists.”  

Before I conclude this section, I would like to add that Dr Besigye’s lawlessness – (Interjections) - added to the problem of the relative scarcity of the dollars hence the loss of value of the Uganda shilling. The fujjo and the false stories that were being sent out of Uganda scared tourists for some time. (Applause)

The problem is that on one hand, we have got opportunistic politicians and on the other hand, we have got an irresponsible press. There was a picture that was put in the Daily Monitor where a policeman had arrested some people and made them lie down. Now, the Daily Monitor sent this picture out all over the world as if they were dead. They did not explain that these people – Okay it was a mistake, but that was a very bad picture - (Interjections) - Well, at least your guys did not loot the property of the Ugandans. The markets were - (Interjections) - I will come to that; everything is contained for you. You just wait for your dose. (Laughter)

Scaring away tourists meant that fewer dollars flowed in, the dollar appreciated and became more expensive and there were more difficulties for KACITA, the importers. However, for exporters and those who are dependent on local production, it meant more opportunities. Whenever you would export, you would earn more because a dollar was giving you more shillings. However, it should be sacrilege to have political actors who tell lies about the destiny of the Ugandan people.  
                  
The Minister for Finance, in the Budget Speech, will deal with the short-term and medium-term tactical issues that are meant to further help the economy. I have been dealing with the strategic issues in this speech. Apart from the economy, the other issue has been the indiscipline of Dr Besigye and a small clique of his. I congratulate the Parliament of Uganda for administering democratic political kiboko to the FDC – (Laughter) - during the EALA elections. (Applause) I congratulate all the candidates that were elected, NRM or non-NRM. (Applause) The egocentrism of Dr Besigye and his group has totally isolated them from all positive thinking people. (Applause) Once you pass the Public Order and Management Bill and I sign it, the fujjo will stop. (Applause)

I congratulate the Police for defeating this conspiracy by Dr Besigye of attempting to overthrow the Constitution by insurrection. (Applause) The Police was able to protect people’s property in the markets and shops – (Interjections) - from looters organised by Dr Besigye. Unfortunately, there were some deaths including that of a police officer. The Public Order and Management Act will make all this impossible. (Applause)

There is, however, some laxity in the legal system. Why should any judicial officer release on bail somebody who has repeatedly abused the terms of the bail? Is this not an abuse of office? Is this not possibly corruption? The media is also another corrupt, - (Applause) - irresponsible and unprofessional group. Some of my supporters have been asking me for money to bribe characters that are called DJs - I had never heard of them - so as to get favourable coverage in the media. Some of my supporters have come and said, “Mzee, you need to give us money; we need to give money to DJs.” I asked them who DJs were and they said that DJs are some characters who control the news, and if you do not bribe them they do not cover you. I told my supporters that I would never give them that money. 

It is the duty of every media house - radio, TV or newspaper - to ensure that they give balanced and objective coverage of any story. (Applause) It is an obligation on them and not a favour to the public. Any media house that does not do it will lose out. I will show you how if they continue. We do not have to bribe anybody. The power of licensing belongs to the state. The State of Uganda has got a historical mission - nationalism, Pan-Africanism, socio-economic transformation and democracy. These are the historic missions, whether you are on this side or that side. It is the duty of every media house to further these aims. I hope they will listen to my advice. 

Otherwise, the country is peaceful and the UPDF is much stronger than ever before. (Applause) There are only a few gaps in our overall defence, which will be closed in the coming years’ budgets. 

Ugandans have relaxed on HIV/AIDS. I hear the prevalence rate has gone up to seven percent. More dangerously, new infections were 129,000 in 2011 up from 115,000 in 2007. This is an increase of about 3,500 new infections per annum. What a big shame! Why should anybody get HIV/AIDS today when all the information on prevention is available? HIV/AIDS is only transmitted through promiscuity because all the other loopholes, we covered. Close this gap. Some of the interventions cover up this failure. Anti-promiscuity measures must be emphasised. 

On the nodding disease, my sister, hon. Betty Anywar, for reasons best known to her, missed my function where I launched the campaign to treat river blindness. I decided to concentrate on river blindness because there is 90 percent association between river blindness and nodding disease. There is a strong suspicion that nodding disease is actually caused by the parasites that cause river blindness – [Hon. Member: “Teargas”] - There was no teargas in Namkola, there was no teargas in Mucwinyi, there was no teargas in Atanga. That man does not even know Acholi; I do not know where he comes from, the one who is talking. Where do you get teargas? There is no teargas. There are no police stations even in some of those areas. 

There is a strong suspicion that river blindness may be the one causing nodding disease although there are some other two or three other suspicions. So, therefore, after consulting the health workers, I decided to launch mass treatment and prophylaxis against river blindness. Here, I do not want to quarrel with some of my leaders because I really do not want to shame people. 

My reasons were as follows: There is suspicion that this disease is caused by river blindness although there could be some other causes, which are still being investigated. My question then was: why don’t we eliminate river blindness so that if the nodding disease continues, then we shall know that it is something else? What is amusing, and that is why we as leaders need to check ourselves, is that river blindness is a totally curable disease. You only need to take medicine two times in a year - after every six months. Once you take the tablets, even if the fly bites you, within six months the parasite put in you will also die because the medicine stays in the body. So, my question was: why we are not eliminating this disease? 

The government solutions are there but they need to be brought down by the leaders. In the case of Acholi, the problem was that there was prolonged war there, so health officials were not reaching there. That is why the fly was not killed. However, that does not justify why mass treatment was not going on. Yes, the fly can remain in the river, come and bite us and go back, but if we clear the parasites the fly will have no parasites to spread around. There are two ways; we eliminate the parasites from our bodies by repeated mass treatment on the one hand, and we spray the fly on the other hand. This mass treatment was not going on. So, I launched a campaign in Atanga and it is going on. All our people are going to get mass treatment. 

However, there is a gap - you cannot give this drug to a child who is below five years. So, there is a gap there. Apparently, the drug can damage their systems or something. Also, if you are a pregnant mother or breast feeding, you cannot take the drug. One of our MPs missed; she was engaged in some activity – (Laughter) - but we have launched the campaign and we are also going to spray the flies in the rivers. So, this problem will be solved like we solved the one of the guinea worm. What happened to the guinea worm? Where is the guinea worm? It is finished. The NRM finished the guinea worm and it is going to finish the river blindness – (Interjections) - We shall also deal with the jiggers. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I congratulate you, your deputy and honourable members upon completing some work of Parliament over the past year. As at 21 May 2012, you had been able to transact business as follows: You had passed 11 Bills. You passed 40 motions for resolutions, for better or for worse. We had to reject some of those resolutions because they were misconceived and some of them were really malicious. So, we had to refuse some of them. But some of those resolutions were good; they were about loans of the government and so forth. Apwoyo matek; thank you very much. 

Reports considered were 23; petitions considered were 20; ministerial statements presented and debated were 35 and other statements were 15; Questions for oral answer responded to were seven.

Among the Bills passed were: 
(i) 	The Companies Bill, 2009; 
(ii) 	The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010; (Applause)
(iii) 	The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill 2010; 
(iv) 	The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, your deputy, the honourable members and the technical support staff for what you have been able to accomplish during the last 12 months. (Applause) Since quite a number of Bills are still pending, I request the Business Committee to look at what is pending and sort out what can be fast tracked. A list of Bills from ministries and departments which may be presented to Parliament during the next 12 months is appended hereto as Appendix II. 

Finally, I congratulate hon. Margaret Zziwa – (Applause) - who was elected as Speaker of the East Africa Legislative Assembly the other day. There was some confusion in the newspapers that there was an official candidate. There was no official candidate because we did not get time to get one. I do not know why there was a hurry. I was going to Turkey through Eritrea and I thought I would call a caucus meeting and have primaries. They had a caucus to defeat you people, which they did very well. I congratulate the NRM; this time they were more organised to defeat the skills of FDC especially.

We had no primaries in the caucus, so when I came back I was told by the Rt hon. Eria Kategaya, on phone, that there was a little problem in Arusha. First, Burundi wanted to bring a candidate yet there were three Ugandans who wanted to also stand – there was hon. Sebalu, hon. Margaret Zziwa and hon. Dora Byamukama. What I did was to deal with the main problem, which was coming from Burundi. I spoke to all the presidents in the East African Region and we agreed that Burundi should pull out. I must thank President Nkurunziza, in particular, because he is the one who helped most by withdrawing the candidate from his country. Once that was done, I authorised the Rt hon. Eria Kategaya to forward the two names of hon. Dora Byamukama and hon. Margaret Zziwa. 

I read some statements talking about an official candidate but I do not agree to that. You know that the Speaker of EALA is East African; that is not our speaker. So, I would want to call upon you to always be careful; you can play your games here within Uganda, but when it comes to other countries, please – (Applause) – The President is the one in charge of foreign affairs. I would advise you to be cautious when it comes to those kinds of elections.

I was also surprised to hear that our people were campaigning for this speakership job. How! There is no need to campaign for speakership; people should actually just grab you to be a speaker. You do not have to go around begging to become speaker because to be a speaker is to be somebody who does not speak. (Laughter) To be a speaker is to be a non-speaker because your work is only to moderate, for as long as you do it fairly. It should be the people to look for you.

I was not happy to hear that some of our people like my daughter, hon. Lydia Wanyoto, were campaigning for so and so and that hon. Dora Byamukama was campaigning and maybe hon. Zziwa was also campaigning. That is not good. You should just be there and if you are good, you will be picked for such posts.

Anyway, it is good that has been solved, and I congratulate hon. Margret Zziwa. Please, when you go to EALA, you should know that East Africa is East Africa; do not conduct yourselves there – (Applause) – the way you conduct yourselves here. As I said earlier on, the President is the person in charge of foreign affairs, so always ask him for an opinion. 

These are small matters if they are not repeated; if they are, that will be a problem. So, that confusion is cleared. There was no official candidate. Yes, Bahati said that there was an official candidate but there was no official candidate. (Applause) (Interjections) – No, he did not lie; he was excited (Laughter) Hear what they are saying, that he lied! No, no, he thought. There was some consultation by some few leaders, but that did not amount to the primaries. It is only primaries that would have resolved that issue. (Interjections) – Now, you hear what this one is saying. (Laughter) There was a vote, the votes were counted, results were announced, and then you say, “NRM bad manners of stealing elections”! The NRM does not steal elections. The ones who benefit from stealing elections are the Opposition because they do not have the support of the people. (Applause) (Interjections) 

“Where is Singh Katongole?” (Interjections) Fantastic! If he has been thrown out by the court, where does the credit go? It goes to NRM, because it is NRM that brought about the independence of the courts. Where was the independence of the courts during the time of the UPC? (Interjections) I was part of UPC for five months - (Laughter) - from September 1970 to January 1971. I told the late Dr Milton Obote what to do, he did not do it and UPC lost. I was also in DP. (Laughter) I was a very strong supporter of DP and I told them that if they did not want to move, I would move out and they would never see the inside of State House. 

With those few words, Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the Parliament for listening to my few remarks. Thank you very much. (Applause) But Madam Speaker, is it in order to have people of bad manners on that side? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, our Rules of Procedure require that when a member is contributing, or in this case you are addressing the House, the rest of us are expected to listen to you in silence. That is according to our Rules of Procedure.

Your Excellency, I want to thank you for fulfilling your obligations under Article 101(1) of the Constitution. As is the usual practice, this statement will be debated in the House. It is also expected that the Leader of the Opposition will formally make a reply to the State of the Nation Address and both of them will be debated. 

However, before I come to the end of these proceedings, your Excellency, it is customary for you to join us in the gardens for a reception here at Serena Hotel, which has been organised to mark the opening of the Second Session of the Ninth Parliament. 

Secondly, I would like to inform the honourable Members of Parliament that the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda in conjunction with the Parliamentary Commission has organised a prayer breakfast for tomorrow morning between 6 O’clock and 10 O’clock here at Serena Hotel, Victoria Hall. This is to pray for the beginning of the Second Session of the Ninth Parliament.

After we adjourn this House, you are invited to go to the steps so that we can have a group photograph to commemorate this activity. I now adjourn the House to Thursday, 14 June 2012. Parliament will again sit at the Serena International Conference Centre at 2.00 p.m. to receive the Budget Speech. House adjourned to Thursday, 14 June at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.08 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 June 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

