



Thursday, 4 June 2020

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is Statutory Instrument No. 72 of 2020 - Proclamation by the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda: 

“WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such a time as the Speaker may, by proclamation, appoint;

AND WHEREAS the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament commenced on the 6th Day of June 2019 and Parliament was prorogued on the 2 June 2020;

AWARE THAT the President of the Republic of Uganda is required, under Article 101(1) of the Constitution, to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation at the beginning of each session;

NOTING THAT it is expedient that Parliament receives the address of the President on the state of the nation;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Article 95(2) of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at Parliament Buildings on the 4th Day of June 2020 at 1400 hours to receive the State of the Nation Address from the President.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala, on the 26th Day of May 2020.

Rebecca Kadaga 
Speaker of Parliament.”


COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to inform you that this morning, the Constitutional Court made a ruling on the issue of our colleagues, hon. Asuman Basalirwa, MP for Bugiri Municipality; hon. Elioda Tumwesigye, Sheema Municipality; hon. Patrick Ocan of Apac Municipality; hon. Rwaburindora Tarsis of Ibanda Municipality; hon. Hashim Suleiman of Nebbi Municipality; hon. Lokii Abraham, MP for Kotido Municipality. 

The court says that the applicants have satisfied the conditions necessary for grant of a stay of execution. They have granted stay of execution in the following terms:
“(a) The decision, decree and orders of the Constitutional Court in Constitutional Petition No. 20 of 2018, delivered on 27 December 2019, are hereby stayed, pending the determination of the applicants’ intended appeals or until further orders of this court. 

(b) The Registrar of the Constitutional Court is hereby directed to expeditiously produce the record of proceedings to enable the applicants file their appeal. 

(c) The costs of this application shall abide the outcome of the intended appeals.”

This was issued today by Justice Stella Arach-Amoko, Judge of the Supreme Court; Justice Rubby Opio-Aweri, Justice of the Supreme Court; Justice Prof. Lillian Tibatemwa-Ekirikubinza, Justice of the Supreme Court. 

Therefore, the honourable members may continue to do their work until the legal issues are sorted out.

Secondly, honourable members, you may recall that on 2 June 2020, the House amended its rules to provide for a virtual Parliament. The House, among others, was expanded beyond the physical presence of Members in the Chamber of Parliament to include virtual presence via a designated digital platform.

Consequently, by the powers vested in the Speaker under rule 8 (1) of the Rules of Procedure, I have designated a virtual Chair of State for the President in the House for the purpose of delivering to Parliament an address on the state of the nation as mandated under Article 101(1) of the Constitution.

I would like to remind you, honourable members, that as provided by rule 236A, the Rules of Procedure apply to all parliamentary processes online and to a Member virtually present in the House, unless otherwise expressly stated.

Therefore, as per rule 10 of the Rules of Procedure -  
1. The House shall be called to order and stand in silence when the President enters or leaves the House.
2. The President shall be heard in silence.
3. The address of the President shall not be followed by any comment or question;
4. The President will not participate in the proceedings of the House in any way. 

The President is, therefore, now present in this House.

Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and the First Lady; Your Excellency the Vice-President, Mr Edward Ssekandi; My Lord the Chief Justice; Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business; the deputy prime ministers; honourable ministers; the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; the ministers of state; Dean of the Diplomatic Corps; honourable Members of Parliament; the head of Public Service and Secretary to the Cabinet; the Chief of Defence Forces; the Inspector-General of Police; Commissioner-General of Prisons; ladies and gentlemen. I welcome your Excellency, our guests and the honourable members to the address on the state of the nation, which signifies the opening of the Fifth Session of the Tenth Parliament. 

Today’s address is significant because it is the fifth and the last State of the Nation Address in the Tenth Parliament. Indeed, today, we are operating using a hybrid of a virtual and physical Parliament, as the address will be managed from two venues, partially from State House and partially here. 

The Uganda Parliament is not alone in this situation. Many parliaments are facing many challenges to their effectiveness. The current COVID-19 pandemic is stretching the capacity of Commonwealth parliaments to remain fully functional, requiring costly resources, specialist services, as well as the ability to be rapidly adaptive to the new ways of working. To survive such pressures, parliaments need to have robust leaders, services and finances to respond to such pressures. 

Your Excellency, following your first address to the nation on the COVID-19 pandemic, my office contacted Ministry of Health and the World Health Organisation (WHO) in Kampala, requesting them to provide specialist and technical information to determine whether the measures in place at Parliament could provide safe access and use of the parliamentary facilities. I am glad to report that upon receiving the observations and recommendations from the WHO team, we instituted various precautionary and safety measures and improved on the facilities that were available, to enable Parliament to operate as follows:

1. Committees were suspended except those which had urgent business to process.

2. Access was curtailed for visitors to Parliament.

3. Body temperature checks were instituted at the main entrance of Parliament, together with handwashing and sanitisation. 

4. Only parliamentary staff whose services were deemed to be essential were selected to continue working while others were to continue working from home.

5. The sittings of Parliament were shifted first from the Parliamentary Chamber to the Conference Hall and then to the tents in the parking yard.

6. The Rules of Procedure were amended, as you have heard, to address the circumstances imposed by COVID-19.

7. We still observe social distancing and the use of masks, which has now been emphasised.

8. We introduced a hybrid system of deliberation in Parliament in which some Members will be allowed to participate through a virtual system while others are physically present here.

During this function, honourable guests, His Excellency the President will highlight the activities and achievements of the Government during the previous year and present to Parliament the plans, programmes and strategies that Government intends to pursue during the Fifth Session.

I would like to thank the chairpersons and members of this House; it is because of their continued commitment and vigilance that we have been able to continue getting business for the plenary and also handling our constitutional obligations like the budget and the revenue collection Bills. 

Your Excellency, in terms of legislation, the Fourth Session has put up a commendable performance, as Parliament has enacted 25 Bills as compared to 11 in the First Session, 17 in the Second Session and 26 in the Third Session. We need to mention the Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, which was finally passed, having moved back and forth since 2015. 

However, it is noteworthy that Parliament lost a total of 35 working hours in terms of plenary sittings as a result of the onset of curfew at 7.00 p.m., because we had to close business at 5.00 p.m. The committees of the House lost 1,800 hours for the same reason. 

Three private Members’ Bills were passed in the Fourth Session, namely the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2020; the National Local Content Bill, 2019; and the Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous Amendments Bill, 2015. We also had the Human Rights (Enforcement) Bill earlier in the year and the Minimum Wages Bill.

The Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill is intended to play a great role in providing training for legislators at the national and district levels, parliamentary staff, and other public servants within Uganda and the East African region.

The National Local Content Bill was moved and passed a few weeks ago. The Bill seeks to impose local content obligations on a person using public money, utilising Uganda’s natural resources or carrying out an activity requiring a licence, among other things.

The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous Amendments Bill, 2015 was moved and affected the following laws: The Penal Code Act, Anti-Terrorism Act, Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act, and the Trial on indictments Act. The aim was to remove references to the mandatory death penalty prescribed by those laws and to restrict the application of the death penalty to the most serious crimes by converting maximum penalties prescribed in those laws into other penalties, which are detailed in the Act.

Your Excellency, you returned two Bills to this House - the Minimum Wages Bill, 2015 and the Genetic Engineering Regulatory Bill, 2018, which is yet to be considered again by the House. Your Excellency, in your wisdom you withheld consent to those Bills and returned them. I will implore the Members to look more carefully and see how we can deal with the remaining part of the Bills.

Your Excellency, Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and rule 120 and 121 of our Rules of Procedure permit Members of Parliament to move private Members Bills. Members are increasingly using this opportunity to seek leave of Parliament to present their Bills. In the Fourth Session, leave was granted to 10 Members of Parliament to introduce the following private Member’s Bills:
1. The Real Estate Agents Bill, 2020 by hon. Othieno Okoth.
2. The Fish (Amendment) Bill by hon. Anthony Okello.
3. The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill by Dr Lyomoki.
4. The Constitution (Amendment) Bill by hon. Paul Mwiru.
5. The Establishment and Management of Markets Bill by hon. Margaret Rwabushaija. 
6. The Constitution (Amendment) Bill by hon. Jack Odur Lutanywa.
7. The Veterinary Drugs and Feeds Bill, 2019 by hon. Fred Mwesigye.
8. The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019 by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba.
9. The Constitution (Amendment) Bill by hon. Michael Mawanda. 
10. The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill by hon. Remigio Achia.

Your Excellency, there are many areas in our jurisprudence that require new legislation and this is not being addressed as expected by the Government. It is, therefore, necessary that Government expeditiously reviews the laws on our statute books. Following the enactment of the Law Revision Act, 2019, many laws, which were passed before and immediately after Independence, are now archaic and out of touch with the current realities; for instance, the Ferries Act, 1905, Cap. 355; the Vessels Act, 1904, Cap. 362; the Rivers Act, 1907, Cap. 357; the Liquor Act, 1960, Cap. 93, among many others.

I, therefore, urge your Excellency that the Uganda Law Reform Commission and the office of the First Parliamentary Counsel be supported to work on updating our laws. We look forward to Cabinet’s expeditious handling of the outputs of the First Parliamentary Counsel.

In terms of oversight, Parliament was able to handle the following:

1. Nine resolutions were passed to authorise Government to borrow. 
2. 10 resolutions to grant leave for the introduction of private Member’s Bills, as I have already indicated. 
3. Six resolutions paying tribute. 
4. 28 other resolutions on various matters. 
5. 105 ministerial statements were considered. 
6. One statement by the Leader of the Opposition. 
7. 314 urgent questions were responded to. 
8. Eight questions for oral answer responded to. 
9. 252 questions responded to during Prime Minister’s Time. 
10. Committee reports adopted were 15. 
11. Statements by Members were five. 
12. Reports of parliamentary delegations were 20. 
13. Report by the Leader of the Opposition was one. 
14. Response by the Leader of the Opposition to the State of the Nation Address was one. 
15. One petition was concluded. 

At the international level, Members of Parliament have effectively engaged in parliamentary diplomacy at fora like the Inter-Parliamentary Union, Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, Pan African Parliament, International Conference of the Great Lakes Region, among others. We also have, of course, our colleagues in the East African Legislative Assembly.

Your Excellency, Parliament successfully hosted the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference and related meetings from 22 to 29 September 2019. This conference was well planned and handled. Many jurisdictions in the Commonwealth and participants who attended the conference communicated their appreciation and compliments about the organisation. The Parliament of Uganda has since been approached at local and international level to assist in hosting big conferences of the same nature.

I wish to express our appreciation to Your Excellency for your personal involvement in the organisation of that conference and for the Government support - financial and logistical - which made it possible for us to host that conference. It gave us visibility at national and global level. It enhanced hotel and hospitality standards in the country, provided an opportunity for learning, sharing knowledge and networking on best parliamentary practices and socio-economic interventions, and enhanced our capacity to innovate. 

It also assisted in addressing the gaps the country has in terms of transport. As we speak now, for instance, the Parliament handed over its buses to the Ministry of Health to transport workers and a number of patients. This has been going on for the last three months.

Your Excellency, I wish to report that Parliament enjoys good working relations with the watchdog agencies like the Auditor-General, the Inspector General of Government, Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Equal Opportunities Commission, among others. I am happy to report that information on gender and equity compliance has been useful to the committees in their oversight work.

Unfortunately, we continue to receive allegations, from the public and mass media, of corruption, abuse of authority and office in the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), as well as violation of human rights. The Office of the Speaker and Parliament will continue to engage watchdog agencies with the view of working out better strategies of enforcing accountability by providing an independent assurance of the use of public resources, fighting corruption, abuse of authority and public office, and effecting measures to promote human rights in Uganda.

Last session, I made an undertaking that annual reports from the agencies would be considered. Unfortunately, because of many interruptions, this was not possible. However, we shall make an effort during this Fifth Session.

Your Excellency, Parliament receives many petitions from individuals and the general public on matters which relate to the functioning of ministries, departments and agencies. Some of these organisations are not satisfactorily executing their responsibilities, causing dissatisfaction from the public. A number of MDAs have customer service charters or client service arrangements, which set out service standards that individuals and public expect from them and how such services would be delivered.

In terms of complaints handling and dispute resolution, MDAs need to improve so that complaints and disputes are dealt with quickly and clients are informed about the progress and outcomes of their complaints or disputes. Ministries, departments and agencies also need to carry out sensitisation through the use of the mass media and public outreaches to explain what their responsibilities entail. Once that is sorted out, Parliament will be able to handle more business as less complaints will be forwarded to Parliament as petitions.

However, Your Excellency, there is a matter that has repeatedly come to this House since October 2013. This concerns the money owed to the Uganda-South Sudan traders. Following the complaints, the Government of Uganda held negotiations with the Government of South Sudan. As agreed, the Government of Uganda committed to pay US$ 41,623,513 owed to the Uganda-South Sudan traders by the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. Parliament has carried out its role in respect to that matter. To date, however, many of the small traders have not been paid. It is unjust and inconsiderate for Ugandans to continue to be treated like this. Your Excellency, I call for your intervention so that these traders’ payments can be settled.

In the same vein, a number of court awards from statutory tribunals remain unpaid for a very long time. These cases require urgent redress. Unfortunately, ultimately, they end up in Parliament as petitions.

Your Excellency, this date marks the commencement of the fifth and last session of the Tenth Parliament. It is worth noting that the presidential, parliamentary and general elections are scheduled in this particular session. This means there will be limited time available to Parliament to handle business. Once party nominations take place, it will be difficult to balance public responsibilities as well as individual interests until after the general elections. 

I, therefore, urge the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business to ensure that Government business deemed important or urgent be brought to the House within the first two months of this session, to enable the committees process them in time for Parliament’s consideration.

Parliament has continued to engage the public in activities both in Kampala and outside Kampala. Committees have carried out field visits and engaged the public on various Bills, policies and programmes to seek their input. 

Parliament has also conducted outreach programmes, the Parliament Health Week, Parliament Week, Science and Technology Week. The committees held 845 sittings during the Session and carried out 44 outreaches in various parts of the country. I would like to thank the Government for the resources that have been availed to Parliament for its operations. Without this financial support, the achievements enumerated above would not have been possible.

Today, a few of our Members have not been able to attend the sitting. Hon. Kato Lubwama, Member of Parliament for Rubaga South, is still hospitalized and hon. Francis Zaake is equally indisposed.

Honourable members, as is the practice, the business of Parliament we had before the House was prorogued has been saved. I call upon the whips to expedite the process of assigning Members to committees in line with the Rules of Procedure. As usual, I will assign the Independent Members to committees.

On behalf of Parliament, I welcome you all to the State of the Nation Address and appreciate your kind response to our invitation despite the circumstances. Thank you very much. 

INVITATION BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER TO H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO DELIVER THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: This is part two of our proceedings – Invitation to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda by the Speaker of Parliament to deliver the State of the Nation Address.

“WHEREAS under Article 101 (1) of the Constitution, the President is required to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation at the beginning of every session;

AND WHEREAS the Speaker has just proclaimed the commencement of the Fifth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, as the Speaker of Parliament, I now invite His Excellency the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation on this 4th Day of June 2020.”

Your Excellency, you are welcome to address the Parliament and the country. 

3.13
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Museveni):  His Excellency the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, His Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the deputy prime ministers, Members of Parliament, members of the diplomatic corps, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, all the citizens of Uganda and our visitors.

Madam Speaker, in fulfilment of the constitutional requirement under Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I am here to deliver the State of the Nation Address, 2020.

While still fighting, precisely at Kanyaara Camp in Ngoma Subcounty, the combined meeting of the High Command and the National Resistance Council (NRC) adopted the 10 points of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) political programme. These 10 points were as follows:
    1. Restoration of democracy.
    2. Restoration of security.
    3. Consolidation of national unity and elimination of all forms of sectarianism.
    4. Defending and consolidating national independence.
    5. Building an independent, integrated and self-sustaining national economy.
    6. Restoration and improvement of social services and rehabilitation of war–ravaged areas.
    7. Elimination of corruption and misuse of power. 
    8. Redressing errors that have resulted in the dislocation of some sections of the population. 
    9. Cooperation with other African countries. 
    10. Doing all this following an economic strategy of a mixed economy.

As far as the economy is concerned, of these 10 points, the crucial ones are Nos 5, 9 and 10. Point No. 5 talks of building an economy that is independent, integrated and self-sustaining. Point No. 9 talks of cooperation among African countries; in other words, market integration, among other factors.  Point No. 10 talks of using the strategy of a mixed economy - Government and private enterprises working together in doing all this - rather than being morbidly fixated, ideologically, on either private enterprises alone or public enterprises alone. 

As usual, many of the people did not bother to grasp the importance of these points or indeed of the other seven points. They thought we were just talking to justify our role in national issues. On account of this, even when we captured power, we continued to face resistance in pushing these points, from elements of the political and bureaucratic class. We have actually continued to be in the bush, even when we are in the Government, and we have continued to wage guerrilla warfare against the neo-colonial and colonial interests in Uganda. Much more could have been achieved, if it was not for this opposition.

It is the partial implementation of our programme that is helping us to survive in this crisis of the virus and to even use the virus to take-off, in terms of the social-economic transformation we have been talking about since the 1960s.

When this global crisis, therefore, descended on the world, I started hearing screams of pessimism coming from all sources. Immediately, I authored two documents - and I will distribute them to all the honourable Members of Parliament - that talked about the “real economy” on one hand, as well as the “vulnerable economy” on the other hand.  

The real economy is the one that deals with the nine basic human needs of food, clothing, shelter, medicine, security, physical infrastructure (the railways, roads, electricity, telephones), health infrastructure (hospitals), education infrastructure (schools etc.) as well as the teaching of numeracy, literacy, skilling, intellectuality and spiritual work (churches, mosques, etc).  This is the real economy. It deals with the basic human needs.  It is durable. Even during wars, this economy will survive. It is comprised of agriculture, industry, Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and some of the professional services such as engineering, medical and legal services.

This economy deals with basic human needs, as already pointed out. It is, as already pointed out, also durable and reliable. It is also beneficial to society. If we were talking of human nutrition, we would say that it would be body-building or body-nourishing - adding nutrients to the body. It is also an economy for survival and prosperity. If you want to survive as a people, that is the way to go. If you want to prosper as a country, that is the way to go - real economy. If you want to benefit, the real economy is the way to go.

The other economy is the vulnerable economy. The vulnerable economy also happens to be the economy of leisure and pleasure. Leisure and pleasure are optional. If you can get them, it is all right. If you cannot, you will, nevertheless, survive. These are activities that add leisure and pleasure to a human being but if necessary, he or she can survive without them. They are optional and additional. These are sectors like tourism, entertainment, bars, night clubs, cruises on ocean liners, theatre-going, import business of luxuries such as carpets, perfumes, wines, spirits, wigs, etc.  

Some of these activities are not only for pleasure, leisure and optional, they are also parasitic. They take nutrients from us and do not add any energies to our growth. These are activities like the import of luxuries. Luxuries are good. We should, however, produce them ourselves. It is wrong to buy luxuries from other countries when they buy little from us. Banyankore call this “obubaagyi”, meaning squandering wealth.  

Some of the leisure sectors, although vulnerable, are however, beneficial to us. These are sectors like tourism, entertainment, etc.  They bring in money instead of taking money out of Uganda.

Nevertheless, to have a firm economy, we must go back to the Bible and read the Book of Matthew 7:26-27. It talks about a foolish man who built his house on sand. The exact quotation states thus: “But everyone who hears these words of mine and does not put them into practice is like a foolish man who built his house on sand. The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that house; and it fell - and great was its fall.” That is the foolish man who built his house on sand. 

It is now 78 days since the lockdown we launched on 18 March 2020 in response to the coronavirus pandemic. In the lockdown, we have stopped all international flights in and out of Uganda. Tourists are no longer coming, foreign investors are not coming, Ugandans abroad may be sending less money to their relatives because they are also facing problems where they are, etc. 

However, Uganda is still standing and coping with the virus, with floods, landslides, rising water levels on the lakes, locusts, floating islands, security of the country, crime, feeding millions of our people, etc. Why? It is on account of a few of our ideas that we have managed to implement in spite of the endless opposition that we always face.

We have built a strong army, a powerful Local Council (LC) system, the fact that it is not well facilitated financially notwithstanding. We have surplus electricity on account of correct prioritisation with the support of Parliament in 2006. We have a good road network of tarmac roads totalling 5,111 kilometres. On account of our correct agricultural policy, we have a lot of agricultural products for food security and for commerce in the form of bananas, maize, beans, Irish potatoes, cassava, coffee, tea, cotton, cocoa, milk, beef, fish, poultry, eggs, flowers, etc. 

Apart from feeding us, these agricultural products end up earning for us $ 2,005 million, if we take the year 2019. Even in this lockdown, since March, the following agricultural products have earned for us as follows:
    1. In March alone, coffee brought in $ 45.87 million. In April, coffee brought in $ 36.9 million.
    2. Tea brought in $ 5 million in March and $ 6 million in April. That is during the time of the lockdown. 
    3. Fish, in March, brought in about $ 15 million. In April, it brought in about $ 7 million.
    4. Maize, in March, brought in $ 10 million and $ 6 million in April. 

Our agriculture is, therefore, not only feeding us almost 100 per cent but also earning dollars for us to the magnitude of $ 2 billion a year. 

Our correct policy on the private sector, the corruption and obstruction of many of our public servants notwithstanding, has also attracted a total of 5,200 factories. These are producing cement, steel bars, soap, mattresses, iron-sheets, sugar, cooking oil, rubber tyres, textiles, beverages, beers, etc that bring in a total of $ 2.1 billion. This sector is ready for a qualitative change by starting to manufacture buses, mini-buses, pick-ups, small cars, bicycles, etc. 

The ICT sector is a growing one, employing 1.3 million persons with 380,000 companies engaged in information technology, telecommunications, broadcasting, postal, courier and audio-visual. Therefore, these are the sectors of the economy that will not easily collapse because of the coronavirus. The son of Mr Warren Buffet, whom they claim to be the second richest man in the world, came to visit me at Kisozi. I asked him how many cattle his father had and he told me that he did not own cattle but owned railways, etc. I had never seen a rich man without cattle and land and I told him so. 

Recently, I saw some people trying to get rid of shares in the airline companies as hot potatoes because of the coronavirus pandemic. The airlines were running into problems. My farm-based wealth and land on which the farming takes place are going nowhere. My cows were here yesterday, they are here today and they will be here tomorrow. They were here since the time of Jesus. 

In spite of the obstructions by the neo-colonial actors and foreign bankers, Uganda is able to stand up today and weather this storm because of the correct actions we took. The vulnerable portions of the economy have collapsed. However, the real economy is standing up and expanding, especially in agriculture and industries. 

If we take industry, in just the last few months of this crisis of the virus, by March 2020, we had only two factories known as Saraya East Africa Limited and Luwero Industries making sanitizers. We now have 107 factories. Therefore, in the lockdown, factories are expanding. We had only two factories making sanitizers but now, we have 107.  

By March 2020, there was not even one factory making facemasks in Uganda and we were told that there was a global shortage. I told some of our factories, including Nytil, UIRI, NEC, etc to make these masks. We now have factories making facemasks. 

We have received requests from 61 factories but only 10 have been certified. There was a big shortage of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) in the world. I told some of our factories, including Mulwana, to solve this problem. They have risen to the occasion and they are producing PPE. 

The pharmaceutical plants like Quality Chemicals and scientists like Dr Nantulya have all joined the battle of banishing the unhealthy dependency on the outside for our livelihood and paying a lot of money in the process as well as losing a lot of jobs. In the area of manufacturing medicines, there are young Ugandans who have been tossed around and even persecuted by unpatriotic colonial agents in the system. These are people like Dr Nambatya, Mr Mathias Magoola, etc. 

However, their protracted struggles are finally going to succeed. Dr Nambatya is moving ahead, with Government support, to isolate important substances that will help us fight many viruses. Mr Magoola and Dr Kyakulaga, now supported by some African banks such as Equity Bank of Kenya, are creating a world class pharmaceutical group known as Dei-Pharma that will make any and all the medicine the country needs and even export. 

Incredibly, three days ago, a group answering to the description of the so-called Financial Intelligence Authority had closed their bank accounts claiming that they did not know where their money was coming from and what it was doing. Yesterday, I visited one of their huge factories in Matugga, near my camp number three of the National Resistance Army (NRA) - the bush fighters - near Buwambo; during our bush war. 

Why couldn’t this Financial Intelligence Authority check what these people were doing on the ground? How could they fail to know that the money was coming from Equity and other banks? I am going to get to the bottom of these treacheries by all these elements that have been fighting our Revolution. Anyway, the Bible says that whatever you sow, is what you harvest. “Omuntu ekyabiba nikyo agyesha (buli muntu yenna, kyasiga, kyakungula).” This is in the Book of Galatians 6:7-9. It says: 

“Do not be deceived, God is not mocked; whatever a man sows, he will reap in return. The one who sows to please his flesh, from the flesh he will reap destruction; but the one who sows to please the spirit, from the spirit will he reap eternal life. Let us not grow weary in well-doing for in due time, we will reap a harvest if we do not give up.”

As I visited Dei-Pharma Factory yesterday, I could hardly recognise our ambush sites from where we used to ambush Government soldiers: Kawanda, Matugga, Kigogwa, Migadde and Kakelenge. They are all built-up now, especially with factories. The only mistake is that some of the factories are built in the wetlands. Those already built or being built should be allowed to continue. Demolishing an already built factory is not common sense; they are very expensive and useful. 

However, I direct the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) to take an aerial map of that area that will show us the factories already in the wetlands or being built so that no new ones are added. We want more factories but build them on dry land, not the wetlands. 

The Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs), the Gombolola Chiefs and the Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs) in these areas will be held accountable if this is not followed. 

The Import Bill of Uganda is normally $7 billion per year broken down as follows:
    1. Animal and Animal products - $40 million
    2. Vegetable products, Animal, Beverages, Fats and Oil - $452 million
    3. Prepared Foodstuff, Beverages and Tobacco - $220 million
    4. Mineral products (excluding Petroleum products) - $1,246 million
    5. Petroleum products – $956 million
    6. Chemical and related products - $559 million
    7. Plastics, Rubber and related products - $380 million
    8. Wood and Wood products - $149 million
    9. Textile and Textile products - $243 million
    10. Miscellaneous Manufactured Articles - $271 million
    11. Base Metals and their products - $439 million
    12. Machinery Equipment, Vehicles and Accessories - $1,200 million, and so on. 

You can see that this whole import list, except maybe for petroleum products because we have not yet started processing our petroleum; but for the rest, we can make many of these imports here. 

When you look through this list, you see that there is no reason we should import many of these items: medicine, textiles, leather products and industrial sugar for use by Coca-Cola; industrial starch for use by the Pharmaceutical Industries, paper, packaging materials, glass products, automobiles and bicycles among others. Many of these can and will be made here.

The coronavirus pandemic has temporarily blocked the channels of dependency and collapsing the economy of leisure and pleasure but it has re-enforced we, the patriots that have for long stood against neo-colonial dependency of the unhealthy kushaka (kusaka is in Luganda).
 
Kushaka is the act of a lazy homestead that does not grow their own food and have to buy from other families. It is a disgrace to be in that situation in the villages. This is different from Kuchurika (barter trade) because that one is symbiotic. You give what you produce and get what you do not. Uganda and Africa’s position has been the unhealthy kushaka of even what we can produce ourselves. 

The Cabinet has accepted this analysis of emphasising and fully developing the real economy of survival and prosperity on a durable basis as already pointed out at the beginning. The real economy, capacity and potential of Uganda are in agriculture, industry, ICT and some of the services that have durable demand that is not easily affected by crises. 

In agriculture, we have bananas, maize, cassava, beans, Irish-potatoes, millet, sugar-cane and cattle for dairy products, beef and leather; coffee, tea, cocoa and fish. We are going to produce more and better of each of these 14 crops or livestock activities and process industrially each one of them to achieve the full spectrum benefits of each for the local, regional and international markets. 

I can give you a few examples to illustrate this point. Our scientists like Dr Florence Muranga, many years ago, discovered that flour from bananas can make better and safer bread than wheat flour that contains a substance known as gluten that is not good for human nutrition. 

With a lot of resistance from the agents of colonialism, I have been funding the banana project, including patenting of the formula.  This year, Shs 9.5 billion has been released and next financial year, Shs 12 billion will be released to conclude this project. 

The global demand for wheat is worth $43 billion. This is, potentially, the market that is waiting for the banana flour. The wheat flour imported into Uganda alone, today, takes $ 300 million per annum. You can imagine if we could assist our sister, Dr Muranga, to make the banana flour - which is better than the wheat flour - then all this $300 million, which is being wasted, will be saved. We shall be able to give the world, by export, better flour which is fairer than wheat flour because of the grade. 

On cassava; out of cassava, you can get pharmaceutical grade starch to use in making tablets. We have a young pharmaceutical industry, making medicines. Making tablets, for instance, needs high grade starch. This is now being imported from China and India. This cost adds 7 per cent to the cost of medicine per unit, moreover, in foreign currency. 

We are getting cooking gas from the alcohol from the cassava starch. Animal feeds can be made from the cassava flour. Uganda has been importing animal feeds worth Shs 28 billion per year. That is about $7 million, yet these are from cassava and maize. These are crops that we have in plenty here; cassava which produces 4.1 million tonnes per annum and maize, 5 million tonnes per annum. 

I have already mentioned the issue of industrial grade sugar for use by soft drink-makers like Coca-Cola and pharmaceutical grade sugar for use in making baby medicines that need sweeteners. With Uganda alone, we import industrial grade sugar worth $40.251 million per annum. 

Wasted foreign exchange; yet we are suffering with unsold drinking sugar that simply needs more refinement to save the $40 million that is spent on that unnecessary import. I have not checked on whether our people have isolated the amount of pharmaceutical grade sugar that is needed to sweeten all the baby medicines that we use in Uganda. However, Uganda imports medicines for humans and livestock, including vaccines, worth $383 million per year. We intend to make most of these here and also to make most of the inputs (raw-materials) here. 

Dairy products; Uganda is now producing 2.6 billion litres of milk per annum. This rose from 200 million litres in 1986, when Uganda was importing powdered milk from Denmark, adding Lake Victoria water and a funny little Government company that was answering to the description of the “Uganda Dairy Corporation” would stamp that product as, “Made in Uganda”.  The only Ugandan-ness in the product was the water from Lake Victoria. 

Today, we have a huge surplus because the demand in Uganda is 800 million litres yet production has hit 2.6 billion litres and is growing. Of course, the surplus itself is artificial.  It is simply because Ugandans are still under-consuming when it comes to the milk the human body requires. According to the World Health Organisation, a human being needs 210 litres of milk per annum to get all the calcium and phosphorous the body needs. 

With 43 million Ugandans, the country needs nine billion litres of milk per annum. Hence, this so called “surplus” is actually artificial but it is the present reality. This, however, is not a problem. The global demand for milk products is worth $ 718 billion. Uganda can get quite a bit of this. Our farmers and processors, however, need to know that to sell internationally, we must have good quality milk and cheaper than the milk of New Zealand, Ireland, etc. The market, however, is there. 

On beef, pork, poultry, etc, the global demand for these meats is $ 946 billion. Uganda can get quite a bit of this money with our 14.4 million cattle, 15.6 million goats, 50 million chicken, 4.1 million pigs, 3.9 million sheep, etc. We just need to work on the quality. 

Then there is the fish. The global demand for fish and fish products is $125 billion. The Uganda portions of the lakes: Nalubaale (Victoria), Kyoga, Mwitanzigye (Albert), Rweeru/Masyooro (George), Butuumbi/Rutshuru (Edward), can produce a total of 447,000 tonnes of fish per annum, if we eliminate the cancer of bad fishing by parasites in our society.  

In addition to fishing from the lakes, I have been promoting fish-farming using the miiga (edges of our papyrus swamps) – in Runyankore, the edge of the papyrus swamp is Omwiiga - the myegyeego (the edges of the other swamps), to do fish-farming instead of destroying our precious wetlands with low-profit rice, yams, etc. 

The example we have shown at Limoto in Pallisa District, where the population is now earning Shs 70 million (after removing the operation costs) per annum from five fish ponds, only using 1.23 acres, instead of the previous Shs 7 million per annum, using almost 10 acres of the swamp area. These people stopped growing rice in the swamps and instead, with our help, built fish ponds on the edge of the swamp. That is what they are earning; Shs 70 million from one 1.23 acres with five ponds, instead of the Shs 7 million they were earning from destroying 10 acres of the swamp. Everybody can go and see that example in Limoto in Pallisa. 

The swamp in that zone is now fully restored and the community is earning better. At Kawumu, in Luweero, my four fish ponds on one acre are earning, for my people, Shs 68 million per year. Fish farming, therefore, can generate more fish than even the lakes. The swamps in Busoga, Bukedi, Teso, Lango, Kigezi, Ankole, Buganda and the Nile valley between West Nile and Acholi, should only be utilised for this highly profitable fish farming and for environmental protection. Nothing else should be allowed in or near those swamps, lakes and rivers. 

The recent losses to those who had encroached on the lakeshores, the wetlands and the river valleys should be an eternal lesson to all of us. In the Bible, in the Book of Genesis, Chapter 11:1-9, there is a story of the Tower of Babel. It says, “And the whole earth was of one language and of one speech. 2 And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there. 3 And they said one to another, go to, let us make brick and burn them thoroughly. And they had a brick for a stone, and slime had they for mortar. 4 And they said, go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. 5 And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men built. 6 And the Lord said, “Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. 7 Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech. 8 So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city. 9 Therefore, is the name of it called Babel because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.
 
So, these people had become too arrogant. They thought they could build the tower to reach where God was by doing their own things but that is what happened. By trying to turn what God said was dry land or what God said was water into farmland, we are really opposing God. 

It is neither common sense nor good economics for anybody to oppose what God arranged. In the Book of Genesis, chapter 1:9-10, God marked the boundaries between dry land and water. It says: “And God said, ‘Let the water under the sky be gathered to one place and let dry ground appear.’ And it was so. 10 God called the dry ground ‘land’ and the gathered waters he called ‘seas’.” And God saw that it was good.” 

God saw that it was good to have where water belongs and where dry land belongs. Now, Yoweri Museveni, son of Kaguta, comes and says God was wrong; what He made water, I will make a farm. That is not a wise investment. It is like the other foolish man who built his house on sand. 

Most of what we have said above is the implementation of point No. 5 of the NRM 10-points programme, “Build an economy that is independent, integrated and self-sustaining.”  Have we not sustained ourselves in this crisis or in a bunch of crises: coronavirus, locusts, rising water level of the lakes, floods, landslides or floating islands? Much of what we said above is the partial integration between agriculture and industry. 

Our plan is to intensify, broaden and fully take advantage of that integration to fill all the unnecessary gaps that I pointed out above and also fully benefit from the global economy by joining the export businesses. 

The economies of Africa are correctly described as under-developed because, indeed, they have a lot of potential, which is not fully utilised; it is under-utilised, under-developed. We are going to fully develop that potential and become developed countries. 

We are lucky because we have everything: agriculture that produces so many products; entrepreneurial classes that can process all and every agricultural product using appropriate factories; electricity and other infrastructure elements that assist processing; a large, educated, young population that can run modern economies; a big regional market created by the African Pan-Africanists ever since the time of the Lagos Plan of Action; and huge international markets availed to Africa, Uganda included, on account of the historical factors that favour Africa. 

In the other document, which I will send to the Rt Hon. Speaker and Members of Parliament, I quote two examples, that of Ireland and New Zealand. Ireland is a very small country, with a land area of 68,883 sq. kms, which is about one-third of Uganda. Eighty per cent of that little country is used for the dairy industry. They earn $5.2 billion from that activity alone. New Zealand earns $7.8billion from the dairy sector. 

Here, in Uganda, we are not talking of one or two activities. In agriculture alone, I have identified for you 14 products, each with a potential of earning for us billions of dollars in addition to creating very many jobs. 

The little we have done in the direction of building an independent, integrated and self-sustaining national economy, has seen us through endless regional crises of problems in South Sudan, the war in Rwanda, problems in Congo, Somalia, etc., as well as navigating us now through a pandemic of the coronavirus and the other natural calamities I have already pointed out above. 

The above, is all based on the utilisation of our agriculture potential and integrating it with manufacturing (industry). How about then, minerals, forestry and the human resource (products of the brain through IT, engineering, etc.)? There is even a bigger potential there. We are already self-sufficient in cement and we are exporting cement worth $57 million (2019), a decline from $103 million exported in 2013. However, this decline is due to increased internal usage of cement on account of the heavy infrastructure investments we are undertaking and growth in the real estate sector.  

We produce 289,183 metric tonnes of recycled steel (mitayimbwa) and we earn US$ 110 million from exporting steel products. Therefore, we are satisfying the internal market with these industrial products but also earning from exporting them. We are in the process of developing vertically integrated steel industry from our iron-ore (obutare) at Usukuru in Tororo, Muko in Rubanda and Butogota in Kanungu.  The global steel industry is US$ 2.5 trillion. 

Although we are making steel products using recycled scrap, strong structures like dams need fresh and alloyed steel that we are still importing. We end up using US$ 444.619 million for this imported higher quality steel products. We are going to end this by developing our own vertically integrated steel industry, as already pointed out.  

We built a gold refinery at Entebbe. That gold refinery was and is still being fought by the neo-colonial agents. We shall, however, defeat them. The refinery is earning US$ 1.256 billion per annum. When I was trying to control the mining of gold in Uganda, I was opposed even by Members of Parliament. They do not want Uganda to have a gold refinery. Refineries do not belong to countries like Uganda. They should be in Dubai, South Africa, among others but not in Uganda, according to these enemies. 

We said, “No, the gold refinery in Uganda will be defended by all the policy instruments”. Now that gold is being refined here, Madam Nakyobe, using my small innovation fund, should start to teach some of the grandchildren the skills of jewellery. Rich Ugandan ladies will be able to buy gold jewellery made here instead of squandering money buying the same from distant sources. 

We already have a good ceramic industry at Kapeeka making ceramic tiles and saving US$ 28.5 million in imports and also bringing in US$ 3.05 million earned from exports. These ceramic tiles are from our clay (eibuumba). When copper mining resumes at Kilembe, that sector will be linked to the making of cables for electricity and transformers for electricity rather than what was happening in the 1950s and 1960s when copper would only be processed to 94 per cent purity (blister copper) that could only be exported as a semi-processed raw material. It could not be used in our cables’ industry. To do that, you need to purify copper to 99.9 per cent known as cathodes copper. 

Regarding uranium, I rejected the plans of neo-colonial agents of exporting uranium so that others use it to generate electricity when Uganda has only a total potential of 4,000 megawatts on all the River Nile sites and those of its tributaries. 

A country like Japan generates a total of 298,350 megawatts. Where will Uganda get all the power it needs if hydropower is not enough? Or has it been biologically proven that Africans do not need electricity? As long as I am in charge of the country, no uranium will ever be exported from Uganda. Let it remain in the ground. When solar power becomes as cheap as hydropower, the politics and economics of energy will change. Until then, sita kange (I do not give up what is mine).

Having fully exploited our mineral wealth by linking minerals with industries and with the real economy, that leaves wealth based on the human brain and human skills in the form of IT knowledge, engineering etc. With our educated population and literacy rate of 75 per cent, this is now a real opportunity. Our scientists, in particular, apart from being active in the agro-based industries of starch, processed fruits, dairy and products, etc have also moved into engineering of designing and fabricating automobiles and the bio-chemistry of vaccines, etc. Besides, the private sector is also active in import substitution by assembling computers, TV sets, mobile phones, radio sets, etc, here.  

How will all this be funded? Some of the funding is Foreign Direct Investment, mainly from our Chinese and Indian friends. A lot of new factories are coming up funded in this way. The recent examples of these are: Simi Factory for mobile phones and radios; Saachi Factory for televisions, flat irons, radios; and Goodwill Factory for ceramics. With Ugandan entrepreneurs, the Government has put Shs 1,040.5 billion in the Uganda Development Bank (UDB) to give low interest loans to anybody that wants to go into manufacturing and maybe, commercial agriculture. We shall continue putting more money for this purpose into the UDB. 

The third source of money for this effort is our wealth funds that need to be reinforced. These are especially the Myooga funds (funds based on the respective specialisations - metal works, carpentry, etc). This is on top of the youth, the women and the NAADS funds. A Ugandan family named one of their children Balibaseka, which means, they used to laugh at my efforts, not believing that value will come out of them. 

Those who thought that not much would come out of NAADS should do something to themselves, maybe kwetuga (suicide) out of honour because what they laughed at has now pushed Uganda’s production of coffee from 4 million (60kg bags) to 7 million bags. Last year, Uganda exported 7 million bags of coffee. Only now, agriculture needs to tell us what more guidance is needed to ensure that the coffee gives the big size berries known as screen 18 etc. Once we know where the science is, we shall sensitise our people and they will do it correctly, as we mobilised them for war and they did or recently for coronavirus and they are doing it. When we mobilise our people, they will do what is required, if we are sincere ourselves. 

Some of those funds will be modified to deal with the categories of our people that have been affected by the lockdown. Those affected include: the boda-boda riders, salon operators, the bars, the night-clubs, the artists, and so on. These funds can be used at low interest, for these categories of our people to possibly do other activities. They will have to think about safer and reliable activities rather than the activities, which are very sensitive to adversities.  

A team from Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) sent by Gen. Saleh, has looked at the budget and suggested ways of savings that can save as much as Shs 5 trillion, from the budget that can do all those efforts mentioned above. Besides, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is proposing the following measures to provide liquidity to private firms that have been affected by the COVI-19 lockdown:

    • Allow corporations including small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) to delay payment of corporation tax or presumptive tax for taxes due between April and June 2020 and tourism, manufacturing, horticulture and floriculture to defer until September 2020.

    • Defer payment of Pay-As-You Earn (PAYE) tax by those sectors, which are most affected until September 2020.
    • Waiver of interest on tax arrears.
    • Support to water and electricity utilities in order to ensure continued supply of these essential services to consumers during the period April to June 2020.
    • Expedite payment of outstanding VAT refunds.
    • Payment of domestic arrears for goods and services supplied to Government by the private sector.

    • For those unable to pay their loans, Government through the Bank of Uganda has already put in the Gazette the measures to support businesses including allowing extension of repayment periods, postponement of loan repayment for a limited period, relaxing the conditions for non-performing loans, reduction of reserve funds commercial banks are required to keep with Bank of Uganda and creating a special liquidity facility to rescue businesses that are not able to meet operational costs due to low demand or reduced production due to COVID-19.

    • Capitalisation of Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) with Shs 100 billion to enable Government to invest in strategic areas. This is for UDC not Uganda Development Bank (UDB). For Uganda Development Bank, we have Shs I trillion while UDC Shs 100 billion.

    • Boosting funding to Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) in Financial Year 2020/2021 to continue with innovation research and incubation of business start-ups.
    • Securing funding for the development of Kampala Industrial Business Park at Namanve and for power transmission and substations for Mbale, Kapeeka, Bweyogerere, Kasese, Soroti, Luzira, Jinja and Mbarara industrial parks.

    • Provision of additional Shs 300 billion, immediately to boost agricultural production and productivity for seedlings, fertilizers, irrigation, storage facilities and value addition. The target crops are coffee, cotton, tea, palm oil and other oil seeds, cassava, maize, cocoa, dairy, beef, and fish production. In the budget, the minister will give more details of these efforts.

All these efforts will be much easier when our Government scientists are paid well. They will be able to contribute to the economy without being distracted by having to survive, when it comes to the basics of life. Our scientists must be paid at a level comparable to international standards; of course, taking into account our low cost of living. The prices of food here and other products are much cheaper than in other parts of the World.  This factor should be taken into account when fixing the salaries of scientists.  

The Government will not allow the landlords evicting tenants on account of not paying rent. Discussions have started with both groups and a solution will be found. This lockdown is new for people in the towns. However, we the cattle keepers repeatedly face lockdowns, lasting for many months, whenever there are epidemics of Foot and Mouth or Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia (CBPP). Quarantines are normally imposed. However, we survive and thrive later. 

The people affected should be registered and an appropriate formula of support will be found that does not create dependency. Food distribution for the genuine groups will continue until the problem is over. However, I do not want to encourage people to depend so much on food. 

I talked to people in the villages on phone but many of the people in the villages do not need food from anyone. It is only some groups that live on lejaleja, especially those in towns. Otherwise, in the villages, people have their own food. I have been talking to them on phones. I ring them randomly, especially the ones I know. So, the leaders should not mislead people by using food for campaigns. That is okulemaza; to make our people disoriented. We should give food to people who do not have an alternative.

In 1980, we were in Kampala with Mama Janet and I was a minister in the Government but the salaries were very low and they could not support us but our people in the villages sent us food. They would send us millet flour. In fact, the villages would support the towns. Even now, some of the village families can support their families. Yes, we shall support the groups, which have been dislocated, but as a matter of honesty to God, do not demand food when you can feed yourself. Otherwise, you can bring to yourself bad luck by wishing to be what you are not. If you are alright, say so and the ones who is not alright should be the ones to stand out and be supported. 

Food distribution for the genuine groups will continue until the problem is over. Nevertheless, many families in Uganda do not need free food; they just need seeds and low interest money for borrowing and markets for their products. These measures will deal with the deepening and expansion of the real economy. 

This does not mean that we do not value or appreciate the vulnerable economy; the economy of leisure and pleasure. Of course, we value it, if it is available. We only note its vulnerability. With the real economy consolidated, the vulnerable economy will come back stronger when the pandemic is over. By correctly managing the pandemic, the reputation of Uganda will grow in the world. After the pandemic, people will flock here. The diaspora is now sure of a secure and respectable base wherever they are because I speak to some of them there. They are more worried than us here. I think they are proud of their home base - the Ugandans I speak to. 

When the Coronavirus was starting, some of the people who were in London were calling and we had to evacuate some of them, yet they had good homes in London - Uganda was better. So, Ugandans now, wherever they are abroad, are proud of their country.

Some of the people were saying that Africa is helpless; Africans are going to die. No; we are not maggots. We shall struggle; we are not maggots. We survived epidemics in the past before the Europeans came here. Now, we are more informed. Actually, our problems are the neo-colonial agents within us. These are the problems but fortunately, we are now dealing with them.

The vulnerable economy will come back stronger once the Coronavirus is over. The reputation of Uganda will be up - and I am sure even of Africa as a whole because Africans have shown that they can survive. We can survive; we can be more productive. We can build our own capacity. This actually will help the other vulnerable economy to rush back. I have talked to many foreigners who are happy to be here saying, “We are better here than being in other places”. 

Hence, to harvest from the economy of leisure and pleasure, we need to consolidate and expand the real economy. Happily, the leisure and pleasure economy was already integrated with portions of our real economy. The hotels in Kampala were buying a lot of food from our agricultural sector. 

The drying up of the local hotel capacity has created a marketing problem for some of the food industry. That is why some of the farmers are beginning to process the foods, e.g. eggs, into food supplements. 

Out of egg yolk, they are extracting mayonnaise, shampoos, body creams, protein supplements; and from the egg white, they are making low density cholesterol and from the egg shell itself (ekishankara) they get calcium and potassium. So, they are learning how to use the whole egg; ekitororo, orwiizi, ekishankara, the yolk, the other egg white – you call it egg white – and the shell.

Out of milk, apart from cheese, butter, yoghurt, etc., they also get casein, which is a protein supplement that is used for body builders, for cancer patients and it can be used by pharmaceutical companies to make the digestible shells of capsules that carry the medicine powder into our stomachs.

You can imagine we did not know that the shell of the capsule which we swallow is actually from milk; we did not know. I just got to know the other day. A factory in Lyantonde is selling a lot of casein to the United States. I asked, “But what are they using this casein for?” They said they are using it for body supplements - creating supplements - but also for making the capsules for the medicine which we take - from milk! We did not know; we are just here asleep.

Therefore, the portions of the real economy that were integrated with the leisure and pleasure industries will find ways of surviving the temporary collapse of the vulnerable economy. By the time the vulnerable economy stands up again, our agriculture and industry will have broadened their opportunities. There is nothing to lose; only we are becoming wiser and stronger. We have everything.

Therefore, in conclusion, the pandemic should help those who had not believed the NRM before that there are two categories of the economy: the real economy around the nine human needs of food, clothing, shelter, medicine, security, infrastructure, health, education and spirituality; and the leisure and pleasure economy around tourism, entertainment, holiday-making, sports, concerts, music, etc. The former is for survival and prosperity and the latter is additional and optional.

In this crisis, Uganda is emphasising, consolidating and broadening the real economy. Ultimately, Uganda will benefit from both.

I will conclude this address by asking the whole country to remember some of our well-known citizens that died since the last State of the Nation Address. These include:

(i)	Late Justice Ntabgoba, the former Principal Judge.

(ii)	Late Meddie Kaggwa, Chairman, Uganda Human Rights Commission.

(iii)	Late Dr Kanyerezi Masembe, Chairman and co-founder of Kampala Hospital, former Head of Department of Internal Medicine at Makerere University School of Medicine.

(iv)	Late Prof. Edward Ddumba, former Executive Director of Mulago Hospital.

(v)	Late Maj. Gen. Benon Biraaro, former Senior UPDF Officer.

(vi)	Late Maj. Akorimo Kanuti who hoisted the Uganda National Flag for the first time on 9th October, 1962.

(vii)	Late Luwemba William Apuuli, the Under-Secretary, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

(viii)	Late Jimmy Kirunda, a former footballer who captained the national team to the African Cup finals in 1978, and

(ix)	All other Ugandans who have passed away since the last State of the Nation Address.

Through the Speaker, I ask all of you to stand for a moment of silence to remember these people. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

GEN. MUSEVENI: Thank you.

On the programme of Parliament in the coming Session, the head of Government business in Parliament will give the list. I thought that if I added the list of the proposed legislation, it would be too long and I want my message to be clearly concentrated on the economy.

With these few words, I thank you. They have attached the legislation here but it will be communicated by the Leader of Government Business. It is better to know clearly. I thank you and I wish you good luck. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, I want to thank you for fulfilling your obligations under Article 101(1) of the Constitution. As is the usual practice, the statement will be debated in Parliament; so, it is expected that the Leader of the Opposition will make a formal reply to the State of the Nation Address and both will be debated.

I would just like to confirm that your statement and the two articles have already been uploaded for members’ information on their iPads. 

Your Excellency, this is the first time in the history of Parliament that there is no official photograph or reception after the address of the State of the Nation. Therefore, the year “tweny-tweny” – (Laughter) - is very unique and will stand out that no reception was held and yet this is the fifth and final State of the Nation Address for the Tenth Parliament. We pray to the Almighty God that the COVID-19 pandemic disappears, and that the guests, at the next State of the Nation Address, will be able to enjoy the reception as before. 

In the meantime, I adjourn the House to Thursday, 11 June 2020 when we shall receive the Budget Speech. As usual, honourable members, you are expected to arrive well before the Head of State. Those who arrive late will not be permitted into the venue. Please read the programme and be advised about the time you will arrive. 

I am glad that we have finished well ahead of our normal time of 5 o’clock to give time to members to transit before the curfew and get home by 7 o’clock. House adjourned to 11 June 2020 at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 4.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 June 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)

The East African Anthem

The National Anthem
