Tuesday, 7 June 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, the House does not realise a quorum, so, I suspend the sitting for the next 15 minutes.

(The Council was adjourned for 15 minutes)

(Quorum realised).

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I want to amend something slight on Chapter 2, I am very, very happy with the broad aims of education as presented by the Minister, but on page 8 of that Chapter, Article Roman (v), where it says, to eradicate illiteracy and to equip the individual with the basic skills and knowledge, to exploit the environment for self-development.  At that juncture, I would like to insert the words, ‘self-development and self-reliance.’  Mr Chairman, the reason - for a long, long time, we have had this democracy syndrome.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  So, before we go to page 8, I wanted to make my point, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  We are in the Chapter, just wait. 

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr Chairman, so much of our people particularly when they have left school, tend to be very dependant on either guardians or parents or government and there is no motion that they could branch on their own in a self reliance voyage and actually, make it and therefore, even when the world self development cannot be achieved unless there is some God Father like a Government or Local Government to assist them.  Therefore, I believe that this aim would be much more explained if we added that phrase and self-reliance.  I beg to move, Sir.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, I have no objection to this very brilliant amendment.

MR WANENDEYA:  I have something on page 6, under creating national wealth.  It is under Roman (iv), the first sentence.  This reads as follows.  This refers to the development of an independent, national economy and thereby improving.  I would like to get the words an independent national economy and thereby, the reason, Mr Chairman is -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  What do you want to do?

MR WANENDEYA:  To get rid of the words, an independent national economy and thereby’ Mr Chairman.  The point over there when we say independent national economy cannot or give this connotation an independent national economy, whereas our economy and indeed economies of most countries in the world are not necessarily independent, because as an example, you find that Uganda is dependent on oil which is imported from overseas and from other countries, we also import other things.  Therefore, there are hardly many countries in the world which have got an -(Interjection)- it is, Mr Chairman, but 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  I beg to direct, Mr Chairman, because I am not all that following the exact reference that the hon. Member is making.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  What are you not following?

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  I am on page 6.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes hon. Member, proceed with your -

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, as I was saying that there are hardly any economies of many countries which are independent and national economy which are independent, we are dependent literally on a number of factors which are outside our own control, literally most countries own control.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  So, you propose deletion of those words, which you mentioned?

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I read again.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please hon. Members, take you seats, and let him clarify.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, Roman (iv), the first sentence, this refers to the development of improving the quality of life of the people; so that the words an independent national economy and thereby’ are omitted on that first sentence, Mr Chairman.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I think we are here confusing the economic terms and general social objectives.  Really, in economics, an independent economy means, an economy, which has the capacity and ability to think, and plan for itself.  We should not therefore confuse the relationship between economies in the world and independence of economies.  For instance, the British economy is independent, although its import Bill is in billions of dollars, but it plans for itself, it organises what it wants to do.  What we are talking about, a dependent economy, is an economy which depends purely on the directives of other non-national leadership like if the World Bank was the only one going to determine whatever we do, then we would cease being independent.  But if we are able to negotiate our own lines of credit, negotiate how we grow coffee, where we sell it, that is what the independency in this sense means and it is an objective that I think is noble but we should aim at being an independent economy as a country.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived).  

MR WANENDEYA:  Chapter 2, Mr Chairman, I would like under No. 14, to have under No. 14, you see Romans (i), (ii), (iii), now I would like to have No. 4 included.  It should read like this, developing awareness for study of humanity and the universe.  The point over here, and I would like Members to listen carefully instead of laughing, in some few countries, teaching of things like astronomy, so that we are aware of our universe and how it came to there, teaching of subjects like psychology, philosophy, sociology, it would be a good thing if it is included among some of these objectives which should be developed.  I, therefore, move that we include the words ‘developing awareness for the study of humanity and universe.’  I beg to move.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, I think it is irrelevant.  I am not accepting it.

(Question on amendment put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Anything on Chapter 2?  Can you put your point precisely and be brief?

MRS VICTORIA SSEKITOLEKO (Woman Representative, Jinja):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Among the broad objectives on point N. 4, I would like to add page 8, as No. 4, I would like to add, ‘to learn for being able to use whatever we are learning, other than to learn to pass the exams.’  For developing knowledge to be used for what we are learning, other than to learn for passing the exams.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You are proposing a new paragraph?

MRS SSEKITOLEKO:  Yes.  Number 14, to add No. 4, because most of our schools now, they learn to pass the exams.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But what are the words you are adding?  Can you read the wordings that you want to add?  How to read No.4, which you are proposing?

MRS SSEBAGEREKA:  Number 4 is to develop awareness of learning for using what we have learnt other than for passing the exams.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, my proposals are a duty for curriculum developers; because in four above, is that, promote scientific, technical and cultural knowledge skills and attitudes needed to promote development and then later on, the Chapter on continuous assessment, there is a provision to undermine - when we come to the subject on the examination on curriculum development.

(Question on amendment put and negatived.)

MR KAHERU (Historical Member):  Mr Chairman, I would like to make two amendments on paragraph 11 Roman (iv), creating national wealth.  At the end, I wish to add the following sentence at the end of the paragraph, ‘priority should be given to promotion of agricultural education and training in improved agricultural practice.’  Let me repeat it, ‘priority should be given to promotion of agricultural education and training in improved agricultural practice’ and similar amendment is made to - I will give a reason; paragraph 13(iv), to promote and before scientific, I wanted to add on agricultural -(Interruption)    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order; let us deal with the first one, which you have moved.

MR KAHERU:  Mr Chairman, it is because it is really the same idea.  While I appreciate the educational policy, not adequate emphasis has been put on agricultural education.  Agriculture has been considered just like any other vocation and yet, this agriculture holds the key to the future of our education policy.  No education will be able to make much progress without progress in agriculture.  

Now, it is agriculture which can support the rest of the economy, and it is agriculture which is available to most of our children - most children who want to practice agriculture are likely to succeed as opposed to practising other vocations and from the figures the Minister of Education gave practically, 97.6 per cent of the children at the moment.  Only 2.7 per cent, are going to secondary schools and, therefore, it means we have to have adequate activity for these children and so far, emphasis on agriculture in primary schools has been very scanty.  

In fact, the children who have been dropping out of primary schools and those who have completed primary schools have been misfits in the villages, because their friends who did not go to school are able to go to the gardens and cultivate.  But they themselves who have gone to schools have acquired a sort of a white-collar attitude.  So, although one can find some reference to agriculture somewhere, it is not emphasised adequately and, therefore, I would like to ask the House to approve this emphasis.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  First of all, we are writing this paper not for today, but for the future.  I was discussing with some South Koreans last week, all 20 years ago, Korea was a largely agricultural; country, now 25 years later, it is heavily industrial. So, that will depend on the moment of the day, but if one look at page 28, in the areas to be provided, farms, animal husbandry and related facilities.  If you turn to 52, subjects to be taught and examined, agriculture and pre-vocational subjects is 100 per cent, marks and with time, you cannot write in the paper, that we shall teach agriculture, as if Uganda will remain largely an agricultural country - keep writing the curriculum, of the day, will see which fits in the vocationalisation.  

If you are from say, Bukungu, you will be teaching people fishing, if you are from Nyabushozi, you will not teach children how to fish, you will teach them how to look after animals and if you are in Kisenyi, for sure, you will not teach any of the two.  That is really a detail for curriculum developers although I welcome the spirit, but it is really catered for in broad detail and the curriculum detail will come depending on the circumstances and economic situation of the time.  Thank you, Sir.

MR OBWANGOR (Soroti Municipality, Soroti):  Procedures were taken.  This White Paper was a product of the Government in reaction to the education at Review Commission.  Now, the government produces through the cabinet, it is proper and what it contains here, it is in reaction to that Paper, in relation to education.  What is the House - we are wasting time.  

What the House should do, how you pass the White Paper, let the Minister go and draft a law with which intelligently and properly implement this policy on education. What does education - really here, because, no court of law, I am not a lawyer but I am intelligent.  No court of law will uphold that thing we are doing now; this is not law.  What we endorse, whatever we endorse, let us tell the Minister to go and make a draft, go and amend Education Act of 1970, bring it here.  Then, this policy will be endorsed, and will work out.  But for us here to amend ideas as they were in the Commission’s report, to myself, is actually awkward, it is not the right way.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes, hon. Member, your point is taken, but we are giving each hon. Member a chance to look at Chapter by Chapter and at the end, we are to do it exactly.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, as a point of procedure, I would like to know whether anybody can raise an amendment on the Floor without having given the Minister a chance to read them and think about them; because I think we are being very unfair to the Minister.  I would like to propose - because we have a problem of time, when we read the budget, we shall get into a new Session and as far as I can see, we do not have time at this pace to be able to go through this report.  

I would like to propose that maybe, we draw it over a hurry, we arrange to amend the relevant Rules here so that we are able to continue with this White Paper even in the new session, because I do not see us going through this one today and tomorrow, because otherwise, we shall be breaking all the Rules in front of us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, we have already started the job and we are going on.  I think if any Member has a technical point, which he wants to raised under the Rules, I will be very happy to know.  The hon. Minister is here and I think he is generally comfortable with what we are doing.  We were on Chapter 2.  Had we finished with you hon. Zack?

KAHERU:  Since I am the one who moved the Amendment, I wanted to respond to what has said.  Mr Chairman, this point that I am raising is not a matter of detail.  In fact, this has been our problem.  In fact, in various reports, it is said peasant agriculture has been ignored and agricultural education in primary schools has been marginalised and therefore, I do not think it is a question of detail; we should give priority to agricultural education so that our children who leave primary - who are really the bulk, about 97.6 per cent who leave primary school and go back to the villages, who cannot do any work should have some elementary training so that when they go back they improve on agriculture.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Will those in favour of hon. Kaheru’s Amendment say, I to the contrary no.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Do you still have anything on Chapter 11?  Hon. Marwas.  Can you be brief and straight?

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Minister on Page 6(11) (i).  That is forging national unity and harmony.  This Paper came out even before we passed the law on the institution of culture and it came out even before the law on decentralisation came out; but my feeling is I think some of the innovations here are a bit out of place now.  I am asking the Minister, what he will do because after decentralisation, there is also a clamour for federalism that may somewhere go through some other places.  What will happen?  What will you do to remove the regional imbalances and economic disparities?  If the money which -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order hon. Member.  Which section exactly are you referring to?

MR MARWAS: 11(i), Page (6)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes, wind up your point.  What do you want to know?

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, I am saying with decentralisation, the power of the money should be decentralised.  Where will the Minister get the money of removing these regional imbalances and economic disparities since he will not be responsible for the money approved for these areas?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, answer this.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Under the Decentralisation Law, there is a provision where the government will be giving grants to the various district administrations and in the granting of those grants, there is consideration for attending to regional imbalances, but I have been looking for the relevant law but you know it better that one, I have proposed that really Amendments which were not circulated are harsh for me and Members of the House because this is now my personal paper.  This is a paper of government and a country and we have not made adequate consultations especially when the amendments are substantial and as Members have been with the paper for close to a year, it becomes difficult to adjust.  

I would request that we talk according to our rules; the amendments which were circulated and on which were made consultations.  Two, so that this paper does not go over the next budget year.  I mean the next session.  We may have to start all over again and then it will appear as if we are not serious on education.  Government has been accused several times that the paper has been on shelves for years.  It does not want to pass it because it is not serious on education.  Then we pass the principles, and then the details will be drafted by the relevant government departments as I said earlier, for debate and consideration by the hon. House.  Thank you, Sir.  

MR KANYOMOZI:  A procedural point, Mr Chairman, which may be helpful to the House.  Given the gravity and importance of education to this nation, I know the fears of the Minister maybe are justified, because if this drags on and the Session closes and we open a new Session, procedurally according to the rules, it would be another chapter being opened at the new session.  Procedurally, we could avoid that situation.  We could finish this problem by allowing since we are the supreme body, by allowing us to continue the debate even if the Session on Thursday or next week.  

Procedurally, I think it is possible for us to waver the rules, we have ever done it before, so as to allow the Members and then the Members should now take the option to go and propose the amendments, so that the Minister is able to answer them rather than raising them on the Floor as we debate.  Otherwise, he is not a super - I know he is a superman alright, but he is not superman to be able to come with the answers instant.  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members there were many amendments raised and actually many of them have been circulated.  We have got copies.  The hon. Minister can always indicate if there is an amendment being raised when it was not circulated.  We shall take appropriate action.  Otherwise, I appeal to you that we have already started to discuss this in the manner we have and we should continue.  

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, since we have already started and we have already allowed on the Floor of this House, Amendments that have not been circulated, some of them have already been passed and others have been rejected.  It will not be fair for you to reject any Amendment that has not been circulated.  Either, we continue like that or we are given time because we can amend Rule No.2 of the Rules of Procedure.  This can be amended so that pending matters can continue in the next session.  There is no problem.  I think we should be given a chance to do this properly, bring in written amendments so that only the Minister but also Members can study these amendments and come ready to contribute on to them instead of just rushing through it.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Any additional point of Procedure?

MR MWANDHA:  Point of Procedure.  Mr Chairman, this is the first time that we are treating a White paper in this manner to the best of my recollection and I suppose it is okay because education is very important.  If we were to do justice to this White paper, we have to proceed like we are doing and if we proceed like we are doing right now, it is not likely that we can finish it within the next two weeks, because first of all, we are now treating amendments that are not circulated.  We have made a precedent, people who never circulated Amendments were proposed here and were discussed, others were thrown out, and others were accepted.  So, we cannot go back to that one but if we proceed like this, it is going to take us a long time.  

The proposal by hon. Obwangor is not a bad proposal because really here we are not making a law.  The role of this House is to make laws, it is not to pass principles like the Minister was requesting.  We are here to make laws.  Even if we pass anything in this White Paper here, we are not making a law.  Therefore, after discussing this White Paper exhaustively, we should simply have passed a Motion to approve the White Paper, and then we would have examined the law that would have come out of that White Paper in absolute detail.  Okay?  
Now, we passed a Motion approving the White Paper, and we are informing the Minister that we are approving the White Paper but when you bring the law, you must take into account the various issues that Members raised on the Floor of this House because if he does not put into account of those issues, he will have difficulties to get those laws through.  Therefore, there are two options.  We accept that education is important, we can proceed like we are doing, but we must be prepared to provide time for it.  If we are not prepared to do that, we do what we have done in the past simply to pass a Motion and accept a White paper and then the Minister can bring laws later. (Applause)  

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr Chairman, I do not see a major problem.  We have just been dealing with the introduction and I do not support the idea of saying that we should only deal with legislative matters, we should only deal with laws.  We are handling policy here and I think the purpose of the White Paper, important as it is on the education, is that it should have the consent of the House on all the recommendations that government would like to implement; so that it goes into the laws as a second stage.  

I think what we are doing is not bad except that we could see how we could do it quickly and I would like to propose that since there are a number of recommendations, we better handle recommendation by recommendation and it will be faster than having to go paragraph or sentence by sentence.  So that we are faster and we can go through all the recommendations and go to the next stage of the laws later on. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Very well, let me hear another view.  

MR KAYONDE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do not differ very much from my Colleague hon. Tumwine.  I think it would be wrong if really this House did not amend, because the law will be based on the recommendation contained in the White Paper because the Minister will have difficulty to know whether we have recommended for three years at secondary school or we have recommended four.  

So, I think really, we should, painfully as it may be, but it is an obligation we have to do.  I recommend that rather than looking at every recommendation as proposed by my friend.  Anybody who has got an amendment on a chapter or on a recommendation should be circulated and then it is discussed.  You may find that they are few amendments in which case, we need not to discuss that chapter where there is no amendment.  I thank you.  

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, debate ended sort of prematurely.  That was indicated by the flurry of points of information that followed when the Minister was winding up.  When this Order Paper came out today, and it detailed debate on individual chapters of the White Paper to be followed by consideration for the adoption of the government recommendations and amendments.  I thought that this is a proper way of doing it; that we would now have detailed debate on individual chapters then, we will later choose to consider whatever government had recommended and whatever amendments were granted, that the Paper is very confusing.  

You look at the amendments - government says, here are the amendments.  Then you look further down and you find amendments to be amended.  Some of the amendments have no apparent relationship to the recommendations that the Commission had made.  So, it is a confusing paper that has to be done carefully.  So, I would say, if it does not hurt, we continue debating on individual chapters and then give time for considering the recommendations and the amendments.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, this Paper is very important.  Important in such a way that in the past week, it gave a lot of disturbing debates in the House, outside and in the campuses.  As we are going on with this Paper, should we really joke?  We are going to see the outcome.  I am proposing that we follow as we have already started.  When you have started the engine, put the gears.  Recommendations are there.  Some of us have circulated them.  Let us continue.  Whenever we stop, let time consume us but let us get rid of this paper.  It is a working paper because part of it has been implemented partly.  So, it is trying us with a lot of work.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, you have debated the White Paper in the past weeks, generally and quite a lot.  What we are doing now is not different from what you have been saying.  So, I am giving you chance to look at chapter by chapter and especially look at the recommendations which have been made by government and raised only an issue if you have an amendment to that recommendation, then let us examine that and as briefly as possible because on passing this paper, it is true we are not making a law but we are going to adopt a policy.  The detailed law will come later on.  Can we now continue to chapter three.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am requesting that for the smooth flow of this discussion, can we get section by section other than somebody quoting section 24 and then the other one - could you please guise this, that now the next one is section 16 and chapter three.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Very well, I have taken your note.  Can we go to three?

DR TIBERONDWA:  Chapter III, Mr Chairman, on page 9.  Mr Chairman, I have three amendments, they are all related.  The first one is R(1), to read as follows: -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Which Clause are you reading?

DR TIBERONDWA:  I beg your pardon?  It is R(1) - the very first one, the first recommendation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Recommendation 1, under Clause 17?

DR TIBERONDWA:  Yes.  Under paragraph 17, ‘The National Flag should be hoisted in all Educational Institutions.’  The government version had added there another thing to say it should be hoisted at Administrative offices.  I am bringing this amendment just to remove the precision put in by government because in some schools the administrative offices are behind the classrooms.  Sometimes they are on the third floor.  

So, I would rather, we leave where the Flag is put to the administration of the school instead of being specific about where the Flag should be, the administration is capable of deciding the right place where Flags can be.  So, I would rather leave it but the National Flag should be hoisted in all education institutions without being specific about the place.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, the hoisting of a national flag is a serious business, and flags even in all government buildings always is put in he centre of power in that institution. Now, to leave it to each individual headteacher or principal to choose where to put it will not be guiding our institutions.  Even if it is on the third floor there will be an entry on the third floor, and this is what is done, actually in all institutions.  So, we should insist that the flag really be put on the administrative building so that when a visitor comes, you know where the head of the institution is - thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR TIBERONDWA: Under R(2), about prayers, these prayers were included in the Commission’s recommendations but government removed it.  I would like tot propose with the reinstate prayers, but add there the word ‘appropriate’ that is R1(2) we should say, ‘The school should start with an assembly every morning  in which national anthem and, and then here, I want to put the word ‘appropriate’ form of prayers and then leave the rest as it is. I say this because I think it is very important to start every new days activities by communication with God the creator through prayers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  So, your amendment is the addition of the word ‘appropriate’? 

DR TIBERONDWA:  Just add the word ‘appropriate’. Otherwise, I want the word ‘prayer’ there.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, on the same chapter, I would like to -page 9, the government recommendation (2), it is a very good recommendation except on page 9, amendments by Government.  I would like to add that one there and to keep it but to remove the words ‘properly, seriously, patriotically, correctly’ and so on.  I think it is important, as the government has suggested that in education institutions students will be taught and the appropriate levels the process of development and the content of Constitution of Uganda.  It is correct interpretation and importance of citizens observing it.  ‘Properly, seriously and patriotically’, surely the teachers know how to do what they are supposed to do.  I would like to remove those adjectives that seem to be over-emphatic because I think the teachers know how to do what they are supposed to do.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, do you have any objection to that?  That Amendment is accepted by the Minister.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  I have no problem with the Amendment, I accept that all teachers know exactly what to do.  The amendment is okay. (Laughter)

(Question put and agreed to.)

Structure of Education:

DR TIBERONDWA:  Paragraph 21 ‘The Structure of Education’, Mr Chairman, this paragraph gives background to Recommendation (2) and, therefore, I think it is better to talk about it here.  The Recommendation 2, states -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Recommendation 2 on which page, page 11?

DR TIBERONDWA:  On page 11, but it comes from - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Can you go straight to the recommendation?

DR TIBERONDWA:  Okay, thank you very much.  I would like to propose that primary level of education should remain 7 years instead of making it 8 years. (Applause)  I say this because adding primary 8 will be too costly for the parents and for the government for no obvious advantage.  Because if you look at the appendices, the addition of primary 8 alone will cost those involved that is the government and the parents Shs 42,000,000,000/- just the additional of primary 8 alone.  It will mean another classroom, it will mean another teachers’ house, it will mean additional equipment and it will mean another for primary school because, primary 8 is not a substitute for senior one.  Senior one is preparing students for a different reason.  

In fact, if classrooms and dormitories and so on would be moved, I would say you can move the structures from the changed senior secondary schools to primaries but classrooms cannot be moved, and therefore, you have got to put up new buildings and also allow wastage of the rooms you are not going to use in the secondary schools if you being them to three years.  

To summarise my submission, I would like the structure of education to remain what it is now. (Applause)  That is seven years of primary and four years of ordinary secondary school because -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please stick to recommendation (2) primary 7 or primary 8.

DR TIBERONDWA:  I mean primary 7, Mr Chairman.  Then we come to secondary education, I talk about - but it is difficult to talk about one without making reference to the other, but I mean that we keep primary 7 now.

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, I support the Amendment of hon. Tiberondwa.  If you look at my sheet, that is exactly what I had started that the primary education should remain at its level of p.7 and then secondary education should be as it is up to S.4, then ‘A’ level up to two years, then you go to other tertiary education.  

Some of us have lived long enough and I understand we are living in other people’s arrears.  Primary education in the past used to be at first four years, after which it was called vernacular an examination was given at the regional level, then you proceed to another two years course, primary five and primary six after passing that, you go to junior secondary school for three years and then senior secondary school for another three years, before you proceeded to university where you will do two years of elementary which is a sort of ‘A’ Level, then you go to University.  But later on, this was adjusted; primary education was extended to six years, then junior secondary school three years and senior secondary school for another three years.  

But another Commission recommended that junior secondary school should be abolished, two of the lower classes should have been taken to the primary side and then one retained in the senior secondary school.  This experiment went for sometime and it was found difficult to retain these people at primary level for eight years.  It was then reduced to seven years, which I think is the most suitable sort of education system.  

If you look on page 11, we are told that at the secondary level, that is 23 (iii), much of the time in S.1 is wasted in revision of the previous courses, and those courses in S.1 and S.2 are light.  Hence the entire ‘O’ Level programme can be covered in three years instead of four years without much loss.  Now, , if you take into consideration -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the system which we are trying to adopt has been tried in the neighbouring country Kenya, and they have found it so unworkable that they are now re-thinking of dropping it. (Applause)

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, last year, we had a meeting of Education Ministers in the region as the Ministers of Malawi, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania and Ethiopia here in Kampala, with their technical experts because here say not the best system, and some of experts we were with are in attendance here.  The Kenya question was debated and the Kenyans insist that it is very beneficial to them inspite of an adverse commentary by the International Community.  Two, I met the Minister of Education two weeks ago in Nairobi, we had another meeting and this Minister accompanied his Excellency Moi when he came here, we discussed the same matter.  

So, I would like people to report at least, what is factual because Kenya - we are not adopting Kenya. Kenya is four; eight; four; four, and they had obstacles in changing.  They are insisting that what they are doing is beneficial and the initial leasing problems have been overcome.  I would not like to see Members telling other people as if they are experts of Kenya, we have sent our own technical men to Kenya, study their system so that we avoid their mistakes, it is not correct that we are just adopting the Kenya system.  It is different.

MR NDEGE:  Point of information.  I would like to maybe, first of all, inform the hon. Minister that you do not expect the Minister in nyao Government to disagree with his Government Policy given the circumstances.  Two, I would like to inform the hon. Minister that all of us are supporting the Motion for the purposes of our children and by doing that, Father Grimes also gives his experience and wrote to us here, and if you read carefully what he wrote, I think, we should accept the status quo of the present system, because even Father Grimes gave a scientific approach.  Thank you.

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, taking all those into consideration, I find no reason why we should extend the system to primary 8.  I would rather suggest that what you would use in adding additional classrooms and providing furniture like desks, chairs, teachers table, cupboards, blackboards and then salary to those - teachers’ houses and teachers’ kitchen, teachers’ latrine.  (Laughter)  

So, I suggest that all this money which we would really waste, and which we would spend, be really used or profitably utilized in buying text books, library books, improving teachers salaries, improving teachers welfare and then training proper teachers.  It is the quality not the quantity, it is not the eight years which count, it is the seven years with properly qualified teachers, properly trained teachers, with proper adequate teaching materials, with very good health weather -(Laughter)- I think our children would do very, very well without adding an additional classrooms, Mr Chairman.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But try to be very brief.

MR NTIMBA:  Yes, I will be very brief as usual.  Mr chairman, I want to remind Members of this hon. House with the fact that one of the important reasons why it was proposed to increase the primary cycle from the present seven years to the eight years, was to give enough time for the injection of the vocational element in education. (Applause)  

At the present moment, our children are being taught the subjects that we know English, social studies, mathematics and so forth.  All these are theoretical and they are accommodated in the seven-year primary cycle we have.  Now, the recommendation stipulates that somewhere at around primary 5, we should inject in vocational subjects.  

Nobody will convince me that it would be possible for us to inject in the vocational element of education and the same time keep confined ourselves the seven years, we need to prolong it a little bit.  If we insist on keeping it seven years, we must just as well remain with the present status where we simply teach these theoretical subjects.  I will not talk about the need to add the extra year for the kids, but let us give serious attention to the element of vocationalisation of our primary education and keep the primary cycle to eight years.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR AYIVU:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much indeed.  I wish to support the White Paper of extending seven years to eight. (Applause)  You are aware of what is happening now, teachers in primary schools have stopped teaching, they are coaching our children, drilling them to pass an exam, just because the syllabus is over congested, now because the syllabus is over congested, other new things are being brought in -(Interjection)- can you protect me, Mr Chairman?  

Another good reason why we should extend t to eight years is because they are bringing in our area local languages, these languages we need time.  You know very well that these languages have been neglected, people are becoming illiterate in their local languages and we need more time.  

I am saying that because it should be extended to eight years, one, you allow time for vocationalisation; two, to allow time for bringing in the local languages and three, to allow a restructuring of the curriculum in primary schools so that our children be given ample time to teach.  Five, to grow, these children also need to grow, by the time they - many of these will leave school at primary 8 and when they leave school at primary 8, they need to leave when they are a bit mature.  Thank you very much.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, first of all, I want to make a statement that the extension of primary 7 to primary 8, is not directly connected, you can have the two with the four years at senior.  Secondly, these recommendations are not going to be put in place tomorrow.  They will be put in place -(Interjection)- we should be protected from these unfriendly forces, behind me.  In the first place, people are being mistaken whatever is passed, will be in place tomorrow.  It is to enable government of the day to plan according to pay down procedures.  But there are two important points for this aspect which people miss.  

The majority of our children do not go beyond primary four level of whatever level you give.  So, by enabling the children of today and the children of the future to stay in primary as long as possible will be an immense contribution to the future of the country.  In actual fact, the original report had talked of 10 years, they say it was not workable, then when they went to nine and compromised on a minimum of 8 at least, if we are to make sense, there are also studies which have been made in indicating at when children stay in primary cycle longer, they mature and production of the country improves tremendously -(Interjection)- they are there.  We have read them and they are there.  

Finally, I have actually, I have been visiting some primary schools, some of them have already started constructing P.8 classes in anticipation, and I would like to end by saying, before this House was extended to its current volume, you can see the original green benches and the recent green benches, two on this side and two on that side, it costs the country more money but has it been worse by having more Ugandans contributing to the national debate.  Should we have not spend the money so that the remain 200 people actually, they were 82 at independence or is the extension worse the more views - would have the House been better for the country with an extra expenditure but few people we presented with the extension and more views from our country.  

So, we in government - if, Mr Chairman, you could protect me from Mzee Wanendeya hon. because, though it is a mark of civilization that when men have acquired a certain age, they reflect it in national debates by accepting the views of other people.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Minister of Education to use unparliamentary language, especially when he should be representing as a servant of the people and not only that he does not have even the money to extend from primary 7 to 8, where is the money?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member is in order, but I would like to invite you hon. Members, to please bear with the rules of the House, including hon. Wanendeya.  Hon. Minister, please continue.  

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Thank you, Sir.  There is a provision that when a Member is contributing, others will pay attention.  So, one of the pillars of this Paper really is the primary cycle and the primary content and if you are going to introduce subjects that need practice, then you must also extend the time because the current curriculum is already over-tied with the seven years and if you are going to include vocationalisation at all levels, you need really to give it more time for it to make an impact otherwise, vocationalisation will be a white elephant on the paper.  

So, either we say we shall give vocationalisation to our students or children, most of them do not go to the primary cycle and give them more time so that the curriculum takes this inter-content or we stick to the seven years and in practice, we continue to give your children the theoretical work, they finish quickly and the nation remains where is it.  So, the government insists that the strongest recommendation in this paper is vocationalisation and the eight-year cycle to give our children a good send off to the field of work or secondary school.  Thank you, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KALULE SENGO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  While I am for eight years of primary, I feel the secondary school should be left intact at four years.  These are my reasons; we have been told that apart from academic subjects, we are going to add vocational subjects and these subjects are going to be examinable.  On top of that, there is a proposal to introduce Swahili so that it can be developed gradually into a national language and on top of the Swahili, there is also the area language to be taught in secondary schools.  

When you combine all these things, I feel if you are to come out with the students that are properly prepared, we need the four years.  You will also appreciate that the structures are already in place.  We have secondary schools running for four years.  Now, when you reduce them to three years, you are not going to transfer these classes to any other place.  This to me is a wastage if you stick to three years.  Since we already have the structures in place of four years, and since the content of the course if being increased or being extended, or being made wider, I fully support the idea of remaining with four years even at ‘O’ Level.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KAYONDE:  Mr Chairman, I also support the four years of ‘O’ Level.  What should be noted here is the emphasis of vocationalisation and education?  Now, if somebody has been subjected to technical subjects, he needs the four years and by Recommendation 3 part 1, there is general secondary and comprehensive secondary and vocational secondary.  This is fundamental because formerly, the emphasis was on theory and academic.  Now the emphasis is on vocational and practical subjects.  So, I support strongly the four years for secondary.  I thank you. 

MRS MPANGA JOYCE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to oppose the four years for secondary.  It is my belief and I am an educationist.  I will give you my professional teaching.  When we retain four, if we have retained eight for primary, we retain four at the top.  We are adding one year.  So, it will be a cycle of 12 years up to ‘O’ Level.  I worked for seven years with the Examinations Council, and the examinations syllabus to the schools covers only three years.  The first two years is preparation and people who are lazy may want to introduce these subjects a little lower down the stream and therefore give these children a leisure time to learn.  There is hardly anywhere in the world where people will wait for you afterwards.  

So, they need to learn the pace, we need to bring out these people.  You are delaying the outcome of the university.  You should remember that, it will take the doctor a year longer to come out, it will take the engineer a year longer to come out and can this country afford it?  This was quite well thought out by people who have professional experience.

MR RUTARO:  Mr Chairman, I stand to support four years.  I wish to inform Members, I agree partly with hon. Karuhanga that the four years are not given to the total syllabus but the other part of education is not totally irrelevant, if you talk about ancient history, to me, it is very, very useful for the students to study.  By compressing the fours years to three years, you are actually saying, you will cut out those sections that concern ancient history, that concerns, say, in geography, if Russia is not in the syllabus, then you will not be able to learn it and if I have to define education, education is broad.  It does not deal with only examination results.  This recommendation of three years is only tailored to the results at the end of he ‘O’ Level and I think education is much more than the results at ‘O’ Level.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

DR BYARUHANGA:  I stand to oppose this recommendation to extend the secondary school years by one year to four as opposed to one is recommended in the White Paper.  We are debating as if we are not aware of the parents’ problem in the village.  The problem is school fees.  Now, we want to give him another year of school fees.  

Secondly, I was thinking that if we reduced secondary education to three years, we would free some classrooms, which would turn into workshops so that the vocational of secondary schools would become much easier and would be done more quickly since we do not have to invest in the construction of new blocks.  But if we retain the four years, it could mean that vocationalisation will be a very goal to obtain given our problems of shortage of cash.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand strongly to support the four years.  If you look at the current standard and situation, the four years leave the students when they are well fit with enough subjects they have acquired and this one has earned us a good name in outside countries.  For instance, a senior four leaver from Uganda can easily be absorbed in the university of Zambia or somewhere else but if we reduce the years, that means we shall be reducing our standard that is already recognised outside.  Thank you very much.

MR ORYANG:  Mr Chairman, I also stand to support the four years.  Some of us who went to school earlier, did twelve years for our education.  Six years in primary, six years in secondary, altogether 12 and we came out much more mature than children of today.  The vocationalisation of secondary schools or primary schools is necessary.  This is because hitherto, we have not had any career guidance.  Children simply go on reading and reading, when they come out, they do not know what to take.  If you do not have an uncle as a doctor, you do not have a nephew as an engineer, they do not know what discipline to follow.  

So, I think the eight years in primary will enable the children to develop and at least, choose a line to follow.  They will have grown one year more to tell the difference between an accountant, an engineer and a doctor.  I had an experience only two weeks ago, when a student came from Kenya wanting to join ‘A’ Level in Uganda having done ‘O’ level in Kenya.  They are two brothers, and they all went for MEG.  I did not know why, but the headmaster helped me to explain that MEG is at the moment flooded and the headmaster was so good.  He told us that the number of students going for MEG this year may be as many as 16,000 against 400 places in tertiary education; that is, they may be a hundred in Makerere and three hundred in both ITEK and Nakawa et cetera.  This meant children have not had enough guidance and they have not had enough time to consider whether Uganda is becoming industrialised which line he has to fit in to contribute.  Because of that I think eight years of primary is appropriate and four years in secondary will just add the total number to 12, which is no different from what we went through, and we were mature.  I want to support the four years in secondary.  Thank you.

MR LATIGO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the four years of the secondary school education.  My remarks are very few coming from the fact that I have been an educational planner in education and I have held comparative education studies of England, USA and Uganda.  In USA, a child goes to school for nine years to junior, then four years in secondary school and whatever he does later, he will have finished nine years of junior and four years of secondary and that is for one reason, maturity in United States.  

In England, they do basically the same because they would like to strengthen the vocationalisation of the primary and middle secondary education in order to offer the manpower eventually and they do not believe in this white collar job for which we are supposed to experiment in the years after independence.  Ours is purely experimental and also for introducing mass manpower.  That time is over; we should have gone back to nine years and compromise for eight.  Let us simply go back to four years and the rest of it will be okay.  

Lastly, I really agree with the sentiment of hon. Members here who say, one class will be added and then they need school fees.  Okay, but we are planners here now and in planning, you do not have to have money in order to plan.  You plan and when you have money, you put that plan into practice.  So, please, let us plan for the future. Not for ourselves, and not for our children tomorrow.  Four years in secondary school is my proposal.  Thank you very much.

PRO. KABWEGYERE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to oppose four years.  I am for three years.  If people can bear with me, we are talking of three types of secondary schools.  We have had eight years, we have had an introduction of technical education from primary 5, so that by primary 8, the kids are already familiar with a new subject and we are not introducing this tomorrow.  We are to introduce the whole programme when the conditions have been worked out.  

I see, therefore, three years after primary 8 a very convenient period in secondary.  Two reasons; One, that the curriculum, you adjust it to include hon. Rutaro’s point of doing ancient history and so on which will have been done to be incorporated in primary 8.  Now, here I do not know how many of us are experts but this can be done and you will have introduction to all those subjects that will be covering in senior one.  In other words, you have reduced on the content that will require four years.  Now, if the specialisation is already reasonably introduced.

MRS SSEKITOLEKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give the speaker on the Floor is that for sometime, Kings College Budo experimented with taking children from senior three, they sat their ‘O’ Level and they did very well.  One of the current best Under Secretaries in Uganda did his ‘O’ Level in three years at Budo; that is George Mugabi.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. (Laughter)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, it is true the experiment of three years was tried at Budo and a few students from Ntare School also tried it.  It was found unworkable and it was dropped because the time was not enough.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Mr Chairman, I reject the latter information.  In this case, we are not talking of three years.  We are talking of four years only that the fourth year will be learning in primary 8.  Why can we not see that?  Now, talking as somebody who has been to a classroom, social maturity can be nurtured following the content that is given.  I am saying as we talk now, that the point that is given by hon. Tiberondwa is not relevant here, we are talking of senior three, senior three is not senior three now, the person will be older that the senior three of that time.  Why can he not? Anyway, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, when you read recommendation 26, page 4, pre-vocational education should be offered in the upper primary grade, it should include agriculture, arts and so on and so forth.  As far as I am concerned, at senior three level, if the curriculum is properly well organised, alright, you would have specialists who can take on programmes for ‘A’ Level.  I, therefore, do not believe that four years are required after eight years.  

Lastly, if anybody has been arguing earlier on that parents cannot afford, why do we think now it is easier to give them an extra year especially in secondary where it is going to be even more expensive than we have had before.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to give the following information for Members to vote; one, the proposals for three year would have freed more room; take a school which has three streams, a good number of schools have got three streams by not taking senior one, you are freeing at least, four classrooms which could be used for either for vocationalisation the intake at the secondary level.  I want that one to be looked at.  

Two, there was a paper circulated by our respected Fr. Grimes that senior one is for relaxation, it is there, people relax and they learn about one another.  The view of the government is that, a few children should not come and relax at the expense of many, and that relaxation should be spread across the board from senior one up to university to be incorporated when we call holidays and half terms.  

Three, hon. Tiberondwa had argued of extra dinning halls and the rest, the majority of schools now use the cafeteria system and we recommend it, so that instead of the students sitting at ago, they can eat in shifts so that more can be accommodated, for secondary education is much more expensive than primary education because those who argued for expense that primary really cannot turn around and say, it is cheaper at secondary logic, only shows that if eight was very expensive then senior four will be astronomical, it is only logical that secondary education is more expensive especially boarding.  

Five, the argument for shifting that year to the secondary level which was used for relaxation in order to take primary where most people never see senior, applies here more seriously in that we are shifting resources from the area where they are not benefiting many and not properly used, both parent and government and shifting them t the primary side where the majority benefit and never go beyond.  

Six, this will be one of the longest cycles of education in the world.  Have the eight years where the majority of our children for the short time will be stopping and then the few continue adding on another four, then another three for ‘A’ Level, then adding another three for university minimum, you are talking of 17 years of study minus repetition and that is a big expense to the element.  For those who have been arguing for the system at Ntare, it was abandoned because it was weak but it was not supported nationally.  

For example, Dr William Kalema whom I was with at Budo, the executive director in Uganda Manufacturers Association did the four years in two.  So, if it is comprehensive for the whole country, definitely there will be a lot of wastage in four years, but since our strongest point was the eighth circle; our strongest point was the eighth circle because that is where the majority of Ugandans benefit.  I am giving this information so that when we are voting we do not - because I heard one or two friends saying you have lost, nobody should lose here or win.  It should be Uganda to lose or benefit.  That is why I am giving for a free vote.  I leave it at that.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Member please, take your seat.

(The recommendation put and negatived.)

Recommendation 4 on page 16.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.  Proceed.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  I do not think it is proper to go to recommendation number 4 before we listen to amendment I moved on recommendation number 3 and I circulated, and I defended it, and Members got it.  So, I would like to say that I have a further amendment on recommendation number 3.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Recommendation number three?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Which one is that?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you.  First of all, I would like to say that I congratulate this House for being a revolutionary House – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Can you please go on to your recommendation?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Yes, Mr Chairman.  First to build the Amendment I am moving is that recommendation number three, should read as follows; 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Recommendation number three?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Recommendation number three, that is on page 12, Section 25.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Are you taking of recommendation number three subclause 2?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  No, subclause (1).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Subclause (1) we have already voted on it.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Yes - no, there is a further amendment on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Okay.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr Chairman, since as we have passed the four years, I am having that, ordinary level secondary schools namely, Comprehensive secondary and vocational secondary schools should have to stages.  The four years should have two stages namely; junior stage – (Interjection)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of procedure.  We have rejected three years of secondary education that does not necessarily mean that we have adopted four years; we have not gone through that stage.  We have rejected three years but we have not adopted four years, Mr Chairman.  I would rather - we formerly do that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.  When we voted the alternatives were very clear.  So hon. Members, can you go ahead with your point please?  

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I am suggesting that we break the four years into stages; the junior which lasts two years for both types of education, both vocational and comprehensive, and they are given certificates of Uganda Junior Certificate of Education and Senior Certificate of Education.  Reason; the whole purpose of this Paper and of the reviewing the education policy is to create a wide base of educated people for the foundation of Uganda and for the development of this country.  If we have the majority dropping out after primary, as the case is, and will be for a long time, it is important to know that many people might not easily go through the four years.  So, there is a need to add them another two years of either vocational or comprehensive education which they could have, have a certificate stay with, go out and at a later stage, if need be, or when capacities allow them come back and complete their secondary education.  

Secondly, Mr Chairman, we are talking of expense and capacity building, most of the counties and sub-counties in Uganda will not be able to have an eight year primary school, a four year secondary school which is comprehensive or which is vocational.  So it is important that we allow those which are still developing to have junior secondary and a junior vocational secondary school, even if they take three, four, five even six years at that level, it means that people in that county can have two years of additional education and we improve the whole base of education from the bottom, and then later, they can go to other secondary schools or sub-county and can add two more classes after six years or after four years so that we improve on capacity building.  

The other point is on equalising the certificates, which I am moving in that same Amendment because it is also contained.  The certificates which are given for the vocational schools and for the comprehensive schools, are the same so that, anybody goes to vocational school by choice and by excellency of performance rather than feeling that, I must first have first choice in a comprehensive schools and put second choice in a vocational school so that we make sure that all certificates are given at the same level and the same certificate is given to a junior vocational, and a junior comprehensive. A senior vocational and a senior comprehensive.  And I will be making an amendment also on two.  So, I would like to propose, divide the four years in two to allow more people to have junior secondary on top of the basic and allow them time to go and to allow the community to build on its capacity and ability to fund those schools slowly by slowly.

MR KIIZA BESIGYE (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do not intend to comment on the proposed amendment as such, but I intend to make a remark of a general nature.  I consider, Sir, that education is a very involving and rather technical matter whereby the people who make curricular, people who make the various structures of education must do so after making thorough research; and it is my considered view that, that is why government commissioned the Education Policy Review Commission to go and actually make research.  I have very subjective ideas about education myself just like I am sure many Members of this House have, which are influenced either by my own experience or influence by the experience of those who are near me whom I see.  

I think in order to give a considered view of what we require strategically in education as a government or as a nation, one needs to carry out a deep and far reaching research and I consider that the Education Review Commission did that, I would like to believe that they did that, I have read their report, the report of the commission and I have read the White Paper of course, and I have no reasons to believe, if I had, I would be raising areas of contradiction in the report of the commission.  But I have not found sufficient ground to raise any objection to specific aspects of the report of the commission.  

I would, therefore, like to believe that, it was a considered view and that Members should take it in that spirit.  We are now debating aspect by aspect, eight years, now we have come to four years, or three years, we are going to come to two, later on, we shall come to the University but this is one structure, I think it would be necessary to consider it as one not first of all as four.  I do not know now where hon. Tiberondwa for example stand when we come to the question of four or three when he was advocating for seven and we carried, and where somebody else - we are going to find ourselves involved in an intricate and may be mixed up debate by debating sector by sector.  I think this is one complete -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, hon. please, order, order, hon. Member.  Yes, please finish.

MR KIIZA BESIGYE:  I would have loved to be informed by these educationists if they have useful information and I believe they have.  But my point is that, this is an involving subject, it is a comprehensively considered subject, it cannot be considered in a fragmented way that we are trying to do stage, it is all one structure - one package and, therefore, I would like to appeal to Members to while raising the various amendments which they are justified to make, I believe if they have considered the report of the commission and the White paper and feel that we should make other amendments, to treat it in a comprehensive manner.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OLUM ZAKARY:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Having heard what hon. Besigye has just said, I also feel that, I think we are not doing the right thing with the discussion on the main structure of education.  I think we cannot do it piece meal.  The Minister here came with a structure which he has already put in this White Paper and I think we should consider this structure if any other person or any other Members here have different structure they want to bring to the House, I think it should be brought as a package rather than we discussing the structure individually and already we have accepted eight years somewhere in primary next in secondary school.  We may go for years, you find that there is one more year we have to pay for and education is going to become more and more expensive.  So, that my proposal, Mr Chairman, we should discuss the structure as a package.  Thank you.

MR ONGOM:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I remember very well that, hon. Tiberondwa tried to bring exactly the point hon. Ongom was bringing, but the Chairman ruled that we go by part.  So it is in order now to over rule the Chairman?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  He is not in order, he is not in order.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have actually discussed an amendment with hon. friend Maj. Gen. Tumwine in and out – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, could please raise you voice?

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  I said I have discussed this matter with hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine in and outside this House but in fact, his amendment proposal is an 82223 structure.  That is what it will be proposing and it is a fundamental and in one of the Motion, they said that when you are making a fundamental amendment to a Motion, then the Chair may accept or reject it, because once the amendment is so far fundamental, then we go back really to Kajubi’s report.  So, one you have the eight years then junior secondary will mean a new level, then senior secondary another level, then ‘A’ level the whole thing really is cumbersome.  

Secondly, there are too many breaks and too many examinations, we have to take into account the tediousness of the structure and our view is that once you have adopted because the Government Paper a three tear structure the fourth being the tertiary.  Primary cycle, secondary cycle ‘O’ Level, secondary ‘A’ Level.  Now this will be introducing a new structure and this is a fundamental departure.  So, it is an acceptable to the government in that it is really a major departure from normal amendments and that we stick to the primary cycle, secondary cycle ‘O’ Level, and secondary cycle ‘A’ Level then tertiary.  Thank you Sir.

(Amendment put and negatived.)

MR NTIMBA:  Point of clarification.  I am seeking clarification, I wish I had been given the Floor to seek clarification when hon. Tumwine was still on the Floor - but we have left the question hanging in air now, we do not have an education cycle of eight, four and then what do we do with recommendation 3(a) with ‘A’ Level remain two year thing?  We are creating a situation where we are having too many segments in our structure, with too many examinations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But hon. Members, you look at the recommendations -(Interruption)- order.  Hon. Members if any Member sees anything in the recommendations which he wants to say something about; that is we are interested in.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am on recommendation 3(ii) on page 12, in accordance with the purpose of vocationalising all the levels, I would like to recommend that, recommendation 3(ii) be amended like this, ‘A’ Level secondary education of two years ‘duration to be offered in two types of secondary schools, namely; comprehensive secondary school and vocational secondary leading to the Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education for both so that the vocationalisation takes the same levels like those of the comprehensive’, if you take four years when you also have two years of vocational and you give them the same certificates.  I am bringing the question of the same certificate at ‘O’ Levels until university.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, I think hon. Tumwine’s recommendation is not in tune because here we are talking about duration’ now when it comes to content and examination that is when it will be examined because what is circulated to me reads; there on page 2; Higher Primary Leaving Examinations, he said will mean the same.  So we are talking about two year duration now, and when we come to certification then that is when the recommendation will be relevant but I think that he has stated it is not relevant to the debate and it is likely to confuse him.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Point of information.  And it is on that Paper that we are talking about what sort certificate one get.  On page 12, recommendation 3(ii), ‘Advanced Level Secondary Education of two years’ duration after UCE, leading to the Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education (UACE).’  I am adding there, it should be for all.  Not only for the comprehensive but also for vocational because in the vocational part this certificate is not contained.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  It is contained on page 64, recommendation 45, which states, ‘Vocational Secondary Education should not only cease to be terminal but should also provide students with diversified opportunities for further studies in their chosen vocational fields’.    It is his concern to take care of; except that for sake of emphasis may be it would be better to put it here as well, but definitely it is there but I think we should put it there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Do you concede to that?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  I would not mind where you put it as long as the same certificate is given.  If the Minister accepts that he can put it on that part, I do not mind.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, you cannot give the same certificate to different things because the reason on the first page has been about vocationalisation, and it has been treated as if it was a second class qualification, but the arrangement in the whole part of the White Paper is that vocational and technical education will not be terminal if you are doing technical drawing, you can continue and end up being an architect, but you cannot give a certificate to somebody who did say, agriculture, wood work and technical drawing to be the same as somebody who did divinity, literature and health science, so there is no way you can have the same certificate for two systems which are different.  They are serving different purposes and we should give them Advanced Certificates, which should indicate that they are vocational subjects and another one getting an advanced certificate indicating that it will be done; and as far as that is concerned, they will be well-certified with room to continue, but there is no need really to raise hell on this Amendment. 

(Question on amendment put and negatived.)

Recommendation 4.

Recommendation 5.

Recommendation 6.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, recommendation 6, talks about five languages.  I want to comment about Runyakitara and I have brought an amendment that Runyakitara is not a language, but an academic subject taught at Makerere University, it may be difficult to speak at lower level and especially before the children learn their mother tongue -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  The Runyakitara is being taught at Makerere, there are Professors in linguistics who are teaching that language, is he in order to mislead this House by saying that Runyakitara is difficult cannot be taught when exactly it is being taught?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You are not in order hon. Member; you are out of order.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I want to propose that if there is no person called munyakitara and there is no person who speaks Runyakitara as a language, I would like to propose that we change the word five to six languages so that we have Rukiga- Runyankore as a language and Runyoro-Rutoro as a language, because it makes more sense and you cannot teach Runyakitara at primary level.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Put your amendment as like hon. Member.

DR TIBERONDWA:  That is my amendment and I have already circulated it.  I said delete the word ‘five’ and put their ‘six’ Uganda languages and delete the word ‘Runyakitara’ and remove brackets and cross out Rutoro and Runyankore-Rukiga after you have removed brackets and cross out the word ‘Runyakitara’ that amendment has already been circulated.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose the amendment on the following grounds, languages do not ask people to be named, languages involve, the Runyoro-Rutoro, Runyankore-Rukiga, Rwamba, Ruhaya, you can add many other languages do share a lot in common, and the faculty of arts in Makerere founded an area of important linguistic study and came up with a subject which was approved by the Senate which is being taught we already have graduates in Runyakitara, now, the fact that, that has happened and we are here talking of education and I am talking as an educationist, talking about people who are experts in their different fields in linguistics, I have found it convenient -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the Member to labour a point out of context, because here, we are talking about languages, we are not talking about subjects, is it in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, as I widely mentioned, he is in order.  Please go ahead.

AN HON. MEMBER:  The difference between a subject and a language, we can privately share it.  Mr Chairman, this is an area which has been explored and which has academic achievements, we know people like Mr Mubangizi who has been external examiner in Runyakitara and I would want hon. Tiberondwa to compete with him in this field who has published over 50 books, so I think, there is a suppose even to be a conference which has been postponed for Runyakitara where I think hon. Tiberondwa can go and give a paper so, I think to eliminate the possibility and remove it from here.  I am not talking of a language we could have even other cultures including Luganda, Luganda is part, you find parts of it in Runyakitara and just as in Uganda, you find some Runyankore-Rukiga, some Runyarwanda.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, we are objecting hon. Tiberondwa’s amendment because, in bracket, we have put there Runyoro-Rutoro, Runyankore-Rukiga, to explain what we mean by Runyakitara.  Already one, if you listen to Radio Uganda when they read the News in Runyoro-Rutoro, Runyankore-Rukiga, one day it is read by somebody with a Rukiga accent, another day it is ready by somebody with a Runyoro accent and or Rutoro.  

There is a Newspaper called Orumuri, all of the write in and I think this is best on studies that there has been more emphasis on our differences which are minor and ignoring the fundamentals which are more political but really these are languages with one different dialects for example, if you go to England somebody from Yorkshire, his English may not be understood by somebody in Paris and I have been consulting my Luo friends that Luo from Lira may be slightly be different from Luo from Kitgum, but it is all Luo.  

So, it is here, it is emphasising the fundamentals while my hon. friend is concentrating on the culturals, so it is the Runyankore-Rukiga, Runyoro-Rutoro and this is the accent already taking place in the National Media and so, I will not accept the Amendment, but this is for progress and not for going back to history.  Thank you very much.

(Question put on amendment and agreed to.)

Recommendation:

MRS KULANY (Women Representative, Kapchorwa):  Mr Chairman, I seek clarification on area languages because in the Eastern Region, we have many languages -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Which amendment are you moving, under which Clause?

MRS KULANY:  On languages - clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Clarification on what?  Please take your seat.

Recommendation 8.
.
Recommendation 9.

MRS KULANY:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order to limit the languages?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, please take your seat, we have already voted over that.

Recommendation 10

Recommendation 11

Recommendation 12

MR BAMBALIRA:  Point of order, Mr Chairman.  In view of the fact that language is an aspect of culture and culture is very crucial, is it in order really to limit languages when some languages do not have the same cultures with other languages?  For example, Rwamba does not have the same culture with Rukooki.  The culture of Lusoga may not be necessarily to the culture of Luganda or even the culture of Sebei may not be the culture of Bagisu, they are different languages.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, you are out of order.  We have already finished to vote on that, we are not going back. (Interruption)- Hon. Members, you should try to keep quiet so that you can listen.  Hon. Ongom, what is it?

MR ONGOM:  Mr Chairman, I have a suggestion.  I have submitted and circulated an Amendment, which is affecting the government response on page 19.  My suggested Amendment is contained on page 19, paragraph 36,recommendations 4 - 6, that is responding to the government’s amendment of the recommendations and I have circularised amendments to recommendations 4-6 (b) where the government says, ‘In urban areas the medium of instruction will be English throughout the primary circle.’ My Amendment is to the effect that we should, at the end of that, add a phrase which says, ‘provided that other local languages may be taught as subjects in such urban schools.’

In connection with that, I have also suggested in (b) that we remove the word ‘areas’ and substitute it with ‘schools’ so that it rhymes with the suggested Amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Can you start with (a) then?

MR ONGOM:  That is (b), that substitutes areas with schools so that the amendment in (b) can read as ‘rural schools’ rather than ‘urban areas’ so that the amendment reads as follows:  ‘In urban areas the medium of instruction will be English throughout the primary cycle, provided that other local languages may be taught as subjects in such urban schools.’  

The reason I have asked this to be included is that at the moment in many urban schools, even in that level where the local language should be taught, they are not taught, children are taught straight in English as it is suggested.  This is a good thing but the result is that most of our children have actually lost their roots, their culture and since a language as an hon. Member pointed out is an important cultural aspect of our life, we should allow schools to teach these languages as subjects in those schools.  We cannot use it at that level in the urban areas as a medium of instruction because of the number of languages involved. 

But at the same time, we should not make it compulsory but leave it to the schools to chose which local languages should be taught in these schools because if we make it compulsory, then even if we have only one or two students in a school speaking a language different from others, then they are going to be forced to teach that language as a subject. That may be very inconvenience but at the same time, we should allow the schools liberty to teach languages where they see that children from a particular local area are many in that school and they can therefore institute a class which will be taught in those schools, Mr Chairman.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, we are sympathetic with the spirit of the amendment.  Actually what goes on in the urban areas today is that the children are taught different cultural dances and other things and really the teaching of the culture is primarily that one of the parents and the community from where they come?  The problem will be in practice if you say, who will choose which language that is to be taught?  

So, it is likely to meet more problems than it is solving but at the moment, there is nothing prohibitive.  This is saying what will be done; it does not exclude what else should be done.  It will depend on the administration of the school and the local understanding.  I could give an example in some schools in Kampala some teachers have taken to teach Luganda at all and some parents have withdrawn their children.  So, this should be left to the local communities depending on the situation to decide that because there is a question of the teachers themselves.  I am not accepting the Amendment because it is impracticable.

MRS NTABGOBA:  Mr Chairman, I am not opposing the Minister’s idea as such but I would like to bring to your attention on page 17, recommendation 6, the last sentence, where it says, ‘The area language will be an examinable subject in the Primary Leaving Examination.’ That is where my concern is.  If every child starts school using the mother language up to primary 4, then up to primary 8, you put a language for everybody in Uganda to be examinable, I do not see any level ground in the results of that exam. I will bring an example of Bafumbira who use Rufumbira from home to primary 1 and then up to primary 4, imagine them sitting an exam in Runyankore-Rukiga for Primary Leaving?  I do not see it workable, and I seek hon. Members to support me.  Thank you.

MR KAJUBI:  Mr Chairman, we are running into trouble by starting the local language teaching it between primary 1 and primary 3 or primary 4 because we are going to have varying standards in different areas of the nation.  I recommend that English remains the medium of instruction right from primary 1 and then the local languages be taught as a subject otherwise, I think we will be like Tanzania where they emphasized the teaching of Swahili and then they found it very hard to compete with other East African countries.  I think this is a retrogressive step teaching a local language as a medium of instruction.  Let it be taught as a subject from P.1 upwards and then the medium of instruction remains in English to keep the same standard both for rural and urban schools.  Thank you.

MISS ABU DOMINICA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I quite concur with the view of the hon. Member from Kisoro. In West Nile, there are some 20 tribes or so, small ones, but they have their indigenous languages.  Are we saying that in 20 years these tribes and their languages should phase out?  Because how do you start learning in Madi, for example, in primary 1 up to primary 4, when you get to primary 5. You are taught Lugbara which is actually a different dialect altogether, there is no similarity apart fro a few words that are similar and then this child is going to be examined at the end of Primary along with the Lugbara child whose Lugbara is the mother tongue.  It is not the fault of some of these small tribes that they are small.

So, I think, this House rather than victimising small tribes should try as much as possible to protect them and accommodate them. We all belong to Uganda, Mr Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the amendment as moved by Mr Ongom that the provision should be made for the teaching of the local language of the area. (Interruption)  Order, order, hon. Members.  Hon. Ongom can you repeat the wording of your Amendment?

MR ONGOM:  I made an amendment on page 19, paragraph 36, there is 36(i) which is written recommendations 4-6, and there is a (b) to it where I said that the words ‘areas’ should be substituted with ‘schools’ and then I said that, at the end of that sentence, we add; ‘provided that the other local languages may be taught as subjects to such urban schools.’  In other words, I am saying, we should provide for urban schools also to teach other small languages when they find it suitable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Can you now read your Amendment as you want it?  Please read your Amendment as it should be worded in full.  

MR ONGOM:  So, the Amendment, therefore, as it should be worded says, ‘In urban schools the medium of instruction will be English throughout the primary cycle, provided that other local languages may be taught as subjects in such urban schools’.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 7.

Recommendation 8.

Recommendation 9.

Recommendation 10.

Recommendation 11.

Recommendation 12.


DR TIBERONDWA:  Recommendation 12.  This concerns the Community Service Scheme.  Mr Chairman, if you want to use the popular word, the Community Service really is close to the present mchakamchaka when you look at it in content.  It is not quite the same but it is very close.  I want to make an amendment on recommendation 12(d) at the bottom of page 23.  I have no quarrel with the rest of the programme but on (d) it says, ‘students will be evaluated on their participation and performance, and a certificate will be issued at each stage.’  I have no quarrel with that.  Where I have a problem is the rest of that recommendation.  The result of evaluation will be included in their certificates at the end of each level. For example, PLE, UCE, UACE) and some weightage given to it in admission to the next stage of education. No student will be admitted to the next higher level of education without having satisfactorily participated in the Community Service Scheme.  

I agree that this course should be evaluated as it has been done and they have been giving certificates of attendance, if they need they could even give them grades but when you want to include this one in the final certificates in examination to make it almost examinable, I find it difficult for one simple reason that it is difficult to evaluate objectively.  I would rather we state something like -you know under (g) and (h) to combine them so that we say, ‘the content and duration of the scheme will be reviewed by the Minister from time to time and that we stop at giving certificates rather than making it a school examinable subject because it is difficult to examine, it is difficult to evaluate objectively.’  

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose the amendment that there is nothing that cannot be examinable as long as a syllabus, as long as a programme is worked out and systematically given to a child it can be examinable.  There are many ways of examining including peer rating; when your friends or the community you work in or where you are working give you marks and say so and so has worked so well and he deserves being in this grade and I think it is important that if you want to give all round education, the most important thing is to make sure that somebody is able to live in his own community so that we do not have children who are foreigners in their own community and they get marks as having been educated.  I oppose the Amendment.

MRS MPANGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman that Amendment is not called for because nobody says that we are going to examine this.  We only say there will be a weighting.  When you are counting points like you count point when you are entering Makerere and they say a subsidiary takes one point.  When you are weighting for the purposes of going to the next stage of education, whatever you have done in the Community Service Scheme will be weighted but not examined.

MR PULKOL:  Mr Chairman, I would like to also oppose the amendment which is being proposed on the grounds that (i) this is not mchakamchaka, it is very clear, it is a Community Service Scheme and already the curriculum is being reformed to off load much of the basic skills which hitherto have been only the monopoly of the higher education to bring them to the lower primary as part of vocationalisation of our school curriculum.  In that respect, children today are being taught about immunisation.  

Now, what is wrong about in a holiday, a child finishing primary 7 or primary 8, or manning an immunisation centre, mobilising mothers like 300 mothers to come to bring their children for immunisation and making sure that these 300 Uganda children have been immunised?  You can evaluate that.  Already scouts are doing it, and they are getting proficiency badges for that and it is clear that you have also learnt about immunisation, you did not only pass the examination in theory but you have also helped 300 Uganda children to survive much as you go to the next class.  Soil erosion is claiming topsoil in the very schools where it is being taught.  It is a shame.  Even in the adjacent communities topsoil is going.  Now, for how long shall we have theories like this?  If there are children who have learnt about soil erosion, why not have them apply this skill in the community and help the community to solve the problem?  

Now, recommendation 13 as amended by the Government on page 25, definitely says; (a), the proposed inter-ministerial committee will be set up under the Ministry of Education and Sports in view of the focus on community service at all levels of education and its inclusion in the school curriculum which I have hinted -(Interruption)- The Ministries of Women in Development, Youth Culture and Local Government and NRM Secretariat will be dully represented on this Committee.  They will work out the details.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, hon. Minister.  Please do not take us further than what we are on.   

MR PULKOL:  In supporting, therefore, and opposing the amendment being brought up, I am using what is up-front to give reasons why we should keep it as it is in this book.  It can be objectively assessed.  Let us not be hoodwinked, really to say it is impossible.  If hon. Member may not be able to objectively but others in Uganda can work out modalities and technicalities of doing it objectively.  Thank you.

(Question on the Amendment put and negatived.)

MR ONGOM:  Mr Chairman, I have an Amendment in (g), that is R.12 (g) and I have circularised the Amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, hon. Members.  

MR ONGOM:  I have circulated an amendment on recommendation 12 (g) on page 24, the government recommendation says; military training will become part of this scheme at an appropriate time in future.  I would like to suggest an Amendment to continue that sentence after a comma and say, ‘provided that no student shall be forced against his will to under go military training.’ I know that we are being militarised but I think -(Interjection)- protect me, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order; yes please proceed.

MR ONGOM:  I have given a very small reason at the end of that this could be an issue of quotient in my view, whereas it may be necessary for all of us to under for military training, some of us feel that this is a matter which an individual should have a choice for.  There are some of us who -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the reasons why people have negative attitude about military training and even fear it is because it was not given to everybody, it was not provided to everybody to test it and know whether it is bad or wrong if you only saw the bad side of the few who had that training instead of fearing it, why not give it to everybody?

MRS SSEKITOLEKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the reason women support military training is that there is a feeling that, that is one of the sure ways to be liberated.  Thank you.

MR ONGOM:  Mr Chairman, I am -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.

MR ONGOM:  Mr Chairman, I would like not to be understood to be saying that there should not be military training for the population, what I am saying is that there should be a major of voluntarism in that.  Because there is a question where I, for instance, would not like to get involved in military training, I do not like to be taught how to kill, it is another fashion.  Mr Chairman, it is a matter of quotient and I think people should be given the freedom to say no or yes and -(Interruption)

MRS WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Point of information.  Thank you for allowing me to give this information.  Mr Chairman, those of us who through culture have been bred to instill discipline in people have seen that one way to institutionalise it, is to have military training.  The reason why some Members oppose it, is because they have not had opportunity to have them really grilled into discipline because their mothers were to busy either digging or being pregnant or fetching firewood.  I want to further concretise the information to the hon. Member that one way we shall liberate this country, is to have all of us really disciplined and the best way to do this is to have military training not to kill but to kill in discipline not human beings.  Thank you.  

MR ONGOM:  Mr Chairman, I would like to repeat that, I did not say that people should not be taught military science, I am saying that this is a matter where some people may have objection and these people who will object must be given the right to object.  This can only be democratic and I must also inform you that although personally I was not put under military training, I am very disciplined and you note how I obey your orders here and that is not because that I have been to any military training.  I still think that, it is better that people are given the choice in this particular area where quotient is involved.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Thank you Mr Chairman, we are objecting to the amendment as my brother hon. Pulkol has put it, here they are not training, there is a difference between military training and going to war, you just train and when the war comes, that is when the question of quotient turns up.  So, we would like our people to be disciplined and -(Applause)- Thank you.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KALULE SENGO:  Under recommendation 13, Item A and B, I want to express my fear to so many sub-committees and so many departments being set up under this review.  Because one way of making sure that you fail is by set up too many sub-committees and departments, for example, this department of student’s Community Service which the Minister is proposing is I think not called for, we can very easily have this activity of community service incorporated in one of the directorates that have been proposed.  

So, may I request that the Minister fix this community service somewhere else instead of creating the whole department because one of the reasons we are raising is the problem of money but if you are going to create so many departments elsewhere there also other departments which we shall be talking later on for example the department of - he talks of a directorate of high education then again he talks of a National Council for Higher Education, now these are some of the things which I feel should be combined.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, can you be specific which of those do you want to be deleted?

MR KALULE SENGO:  This department of Community Service should not exist the activity should be put somewhere else.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, hon. Members one of the best ways of killing something, is to create and assign it to nobody so that it keeps hanging, that is the shortest cut to have a still birth.  Community Service will be such a major issue in the orientation and I wish so many Members while they recommend this, so many things going up without anybody. 

So, there is need for somebody to concentrate on it - have a department concentrate on it and that is the only way to make it successfully.  I hope, I have explained the reasons why you think there is this department is to make somebody responsible so that when he does not work, we know whom to ask, it is a major department which you cannot pocket under some department, I do not know about, I have to explain to you so that you can sit down and we proceed calmly.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I now adjourn the House until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 June 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)
