Tuesday 8th June, 1999

(Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair).

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to welcome you back from the long recess.  Let me hope that despite your commitment and obligations to your constituencies, you did find time to rest and relax so that you are invigorated and are now here,  as usual,  to be innovative and ensure that we have a speedy dispatch of business.

I would like to remind you that during the last session we had a lot of problems in meeting our commitment to the business of the House.  This in some cases was due to matters beyond the control of Parliament.  In others it was because you Members drew us away from the designed programme,  particularly when new issues came up.  Of course in some cases, we as Members of Parliament had ourselves to blame because of the manner in which we presented our contributions in this House.  I am hoping that after this long recess, many or some of us,  have at least learnt new tactics for making our presentations without necessarily causing problems to ourselves as individual Members of Parliament,  and as an institution.  For this reason I would like to highlight a few titbits which I thought might assist some of you in your presentations,  to ensure that Parliament dispatches its business with speed.  

The first one is that Bills reported on by Sessional Committees should not attract fresh debate in the plenary.  Members should try as much as possible to go to the Committee,  that is if they have burning issues which they would like to draw the attention of the Committee to.  We think that when you do that, the Committee will be able to internalise your points,  and then make comments or recommendations to the plenary.  This will help us  - when we are in here - to really stick to our programme,  and not engage in some kind of dilatory debate which in many cases  makes it impossible for us to dispatch business with speed.

This is addressed to Members of various Committees.  After being party to a Committee's report, unless you have expressed yourselves in a minority report, there is no reason why you should come here and attempt to debate a matter which you contributed to in the Committee.  I recall that during the last Session we had a situation where even the secretary of a Committee was trying to reopen debate after the presentation of a report of which he was a secretary and a signatory.  I think that unless you have some other motives, you should not do that.  There is really no point in it, and you really do not make a new point, and in some cases you may not even impress anybody.

For this reason hon. Members,  in order for us to achieve the maximum out of the limited time we shall have, contributions will be limited.  And this time I shall be very strict on the timing.  I am calling upon our technicians to ensure that the machinery for controlling and checking on the time is up todate,  for I do not expect it to be subjected to the problems we had last time.  

Bills should not remain in the Committee for more than three months.  I think that is even, in my opinion, too long.  When a Bill is referred to a Committee, you should - under rule 104, ensure that the time limit within which you are required to dispatch business is followed.

I would like to particularly direct this to the hon. Ministers;  this is for your attention.  Under rule 27 of our rules of procedure,  you are given a limited time within which to respond to questions requiring oral answers.  This time we shall be very strict and if we do not hear from you - having given you the due time - we will put this item on the Order Paper and call it out.  It will be up to you or your colleagues in the Ministry to explain your absence.  And hon. Members, I am sure you will pass the appropriate judgement.

I do not expect the general debate on the President's address on the state of the nation and the debate on the budget speech to take more than two weeks each.  Therefore I will direct the proceedings in such a way that the debates on these items will be completed within two weeks of their commencement.  

Also the Committee reports:  when Committees present their reports in the House, again we do not expect that the debate should exceed one week.  That means that when the report has been submitted and the matter opened for the debate, we will debate it in such a way that it will not exceed one week.  

On the issue of quorum,  we are still consulting extensively with my advisors and some of the chairpersons of the Committees as to how this persistent problem of lack of quorum - which again contributed to the slow dispatch of business last session - will be addressed and solved permanently.

Finally, I would like to remind Members who have not yet registered for the Sessional Committees on which they wish to serve to do so, so that the process of electing them can be completed and they start business next week.  Thank you.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your advice to the House,  it is very much appreciated.  But I am not sure how we would proceed with your advice number one which was that when the Committee makes its report, we do not again expect extensive debate on the Bill - after the Committee report - and you advise Members to as much as possible go to the Committees.  

But very often we have Committees sitting concurrently and Members do not have much time to switch from one to the other.  Members of the respective Committees may not have time to also give views on other Committees' subjects when they are dealing with their own.  Apart from that, we have now adopted a system of when a Bill is read for the first time,  it goes straight to the Committee without the general debate first.  So, is it not going to cause a lot of discontent in that Members may not express what they want to,  if they are very much restricted after the Committee has reported back,  bearing in mind that we shall not have debated it in the first place before it goes to the Committee?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker,  I am particularly interested in being advised on oral questions.  If a Member of Parliament submits a question of a general nature directed to a specific Ministry, I suppose it goes to the Clerk's office.   I also suppose that when it reaches the Clerk's office, there should be a mechanism which can appropriately direct it to a proper Ministry.  

On a number occasions, questions have been brought up in the House, read out,  and the Ministers disassociate themselves from the specific questions directed to them.  What advice do you give in the circumstances where nobody knows where a question, after being directed to the Clerk's office,  should go?  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Speaker,  I would like to thank you for your advice particularly with regard to the manner of debating Bills and reports from Committees.  Nevertheless,  I have noted one issue raised with regard to attending Committee meetings,  and contributing.  

As hon. Ongom has stated, it may not be possible that every one will attend.  But what I noted in the last session, which is very frustrating,  is when certain mistakes are so obvious and need to be pointed out.  This is in most cases frustrated.  I am appealing to the House, Mr. Speaker, that when certain issues of principle are raised, they should be addressed because the Committee Members may not all have paid the same attention to these issues.  I know in particular, issues of the Committee on Finance and Economic Planning.  

Also when Bills are at the Committee stage, there are certain mistakes which are so obvious.  I am praying, Mr. Speaker, that when such matters are raised, they should be looked at because they either fundamentally change the law or they make it irrelevant.  We have had to come back to this House to amend certain laws partly because we have rushed issues which are being raised,   yet they are of fundamental nature in legislation.  I thank you.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Speaker,  I am also seeking clarification on your point number one.  We have about ten Sessional Committees and sometimes we have as many as five or even more Committees meeting at the same time.  It may not be possible for Members to attend all the Committee meetings as they would have wished,  according to your advice.  I therefore wonder,  if we are to restrict debate in this House,  where else can Parliament debate the Bills and the issues that should be debated by Parliament.  I thank you. 

MR. WAMBEDE:  Besides having a number of Committees where one may not have time to attend,  Mr. Speaker,  there is a situation where some Bills are debated during the recess.  There have been cases where certain Committees are called to consider certain Bills when actually the House is in recess.  In such a situation, Members are not given chance to have an input.  I do not know how we shall treat such cases.  Thank you.  

MR. PINTO:  Mine is very close to what my Colleagues are putting forward.  But it concerns the physical facilities.  Earlier on,  the present Minister of State for Defence had been given an assignment as a Member of Parliament, to negotiate with Government in order for some room  - which rightly belongs to Parliament.  Government was to vacate the building,  such that Parliament may become more efficient.  We are talking of the President's office,  we are talking of the entire parliamentary facilities.  These have been encroached upon for so long and we do not seem to get an answer to this.  

You are aware that due to our request for improvements, the Conference halls have been turned into research centres,  all intended to facilitate Parliament.  How do you expect Parliament to work without room,  which room rightly belongs to Parliament?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  One of the reasons why sometimes Committees do not expedite their work is that some Ministers do not submit their policy statements to this House  in time.  I am also aware that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has issued a circular to all ministries to abide by this.  Can I therefore request, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of Government Business assures this House that the ministerial policy statements will be submitted in time?  Thank you.  

MR. NYAI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mine is a very,  very small matter.  I am aware that all hon. Members are in receipt of a letter from the Clerk to Parliament dated 7th June.  It exhaustively says, "Business for the First Meeting of the 4th Session of the 6th Parliament,"  and listed therein 13 different items for consideration.  
You will recall that at the end of the last session, under rule 10, we did save reports from certain Committees and one of those reports was on the Political Organisations Bill.  I believe the Political Organisations Bill, the Referendum Bill and the Movement Acts go in tandem towards a successful referendum in this country.  Could you, Mr. Speaker, or the Leader of Government Business,  elaborate as to why we now think that the Political Organisations Bill cannot be tabled?  Parliament has spent so much time, the Committee has worked so much on the report, the report is ready, why?   I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were seeking clarification on my address,  the communication from the Chair.  But you are now introducing issues of your own which are not - in my opinion - relevant to the communication from the Chair.  If that is to be the case,  each one of us is going to sit here and make his or her own presentation.  So, I will limit.

MR. BITAHWA:  Mr. Speaker,  mine is a very burning one.  Before we left, the restaurant upstairs was still functioning.  But since we went on recess, there have been some repairs going on.  I want to know for how long these repairs are going to continue,  because sometimes it is inconveniencing to go out after Committee meetings in the mornings and then come back in the afternoon.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let me start with a point arising out of my advice. I think three hon. Members raised the same issue.  I said that it is advice,  it is not that I have prescribed the rules.  In my opinion,  it is a good way of presentation,  if we use the Committees as much as possible.  I am not saying that you should not,  or there will be no debate in the plenary, no.  I cannot say that because quite rightly,  someone has pointed out,  this is the only way.  I think it was hon. Okello-Okello.  Where else is he going to debate issues for which he was elected by his people to present?  

Two: this is where we are supposed to discuss and finally take decisions. But my advice is based on the fact that there may be issues which, if brought to the attention of the relevant Committee, can be attended to, answers provided,  and recommendations made.  So that when they come here,  we do not have to spend so much time debating the particular issues on which the Committee has reported.  This is really the basis of my advice.

I had also said that I think it is really unjustified for a Member of a Committee which has made a report to the House,  to come and open up debate,  when he could have done so in the Committee.  I think this is really unfair to your time hon. Members,  particularly those of you who are not Members of those Committees,  and have not had the opportunity - on the basis of my advice - to go and address the Committee.  My advice is that time should as much as possible be given to Members of Parliament who have not had the opportunity to be present and discuss issues at the Committee session.  

I am not in any way implying that when you are a Member of the presenting Committee you should keep quiet when you are here;  you should speak provided you come in to make clarifications.  But to come up and open the debate,  or go through the scenario of your presentation at the Committee,  is very unfair.  This is the basis of my advice;  and I think that will answer the issues raised by hon. Ongom, hon. Okumu-Ringa, hon. Okello-Okello and hon. Wambede.

Hon. Lukyamuzi, yes,  I agree with you that the routing of the question originated by a Member for purposes of an oral answer,  should be done expeditiously and to the right Minister.  When that is not done,  it will delay response.  In fact when it goes to the wrong Minister and he does not reply to for example say, 'look, I am not concerned with that.  Why do you not try such and such a Minister,' we get into serious problems.  I agree with you, and if this is a failure in my office, I assure you that it will be rectified.

MISS. KADAGA:  I would like to inform the House that we have devised a new system to handling questions.  Hence forth the questions will be addressed to the relevant Ministry,  with a copy to the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs.  The Clerk has been requested to set aside a register for these questions so that they are signed for,  to avoid a situation where a Minister says, 'I did not see this question.'  And then,  it will be our responsibility to ensure that they are answered -(Applause).

THE SPEAKER:  You have heard it from the horse's mouth.  

Hon. Chebet Maikut, you raised an issue of the late presentation of policy statements by Ministers,  particularly the budgetary issues.  I agree with you that that delay is responsible for the delay in debate.  This matter is also being taken care of, and I think the same answer would be forthcoming from the Minister.  I do not intend to ask her to do that again,  because she has already given an answer.

Hon. Pinto,  yes, the old problem.  I would like to assure that the Parliamentary Commission has done its very best in interacting with the Executive to ensure that the office premises which belong to Parliamentarians are vacated as quickly as possible,  to facilitate your acquisition of offices.  But I cannot hide the factor that this exercise has been very difficult, although that is not to say that we have given up.  If anything, as a result of the push from the Parliamentary Commission - before the recess - His Excellency the President was convinced and he did give a directive to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice and the Police to vacate these office premises so that you Parliamentarians can occupy them.  But because of known problems,  again this exercise is not something which can be done within one day,  one week, one month, or even more.  But we have made a start.  

I am reliably informed that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is currently relocating to the, is it Embassy house?  Either Embassy house or Development house.  I Understand they have had some financial constraints because it is something they had not budgeted for, but they are doing their very best to relocate.  And as soon as that is done, we shall move in.  I wish to assure you that the Parliamentary commission has budgeted for that,  and as soon as that happens we will do some semblance of renovation and furnishing so that Parliamentarians can occupy them.  

At the beginning it may not be possible for each and every one of you to get an office, but I think if four, five, ten people can share an office,  that is a start, and we can call ourselves happy.  So, something is happening hon. Pinto.  

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to supplement my question.  What you are saying right now is music to our ears, and I think you deserve congratulations,  so does the Parliamentary Commission.  In this effort of acquiring offices, do you include the facility of the Uganda Club which also belongs to Parliament but is currently occupied by the Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces?  Does that also follow in your campaign for recovery of what is lost?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, my advice on this is that let us get something first. When we get there, and we fell a bit of discomfort, then we can go for the next one. I think that is how we should proceed.  But the point is noted.  

Finally, the hon. Dick Nyai's question.  I do not know whether this question has been directed to the right person, but I would like to remind him that he is a Member of the Business Committee.  This issue was raised at the Business Committee, which was advised on the Government's programming of the Bills which are to come to Parliament. 

The only thing I can say for the benefit of the hon. Members here is that the Committee did express its concern regarding the Political Organisations' Bill, and requested the Executive -  through the Minister for General Duties in the office of the Prime Minister - to convey that concern to the Executive.  But I would like to say that the Political Organisations' Bill,  like some of these Bills which have been tabled and others which are yet to be tabled, are Government Bills;  we will wait until the Government is ready with the second reading,  and we take it from there.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE CHAIRPERSON, THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr. Augustine Ruzindana):  Mr. Speaker, may I lay on the Table the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the year ended 30th June, 1998.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS BILL, 1999

MINISTER IN THE PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE IN CHARGE OF GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera):  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much indeed. I hope it is not out of order for me to welcome my Colleagues back from the recess, and to thank them for the support they have given me in the past.  

I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The Parliamentary Elections Bill, 1999' be read for the first time.  I beg to move.

MR. NYAI:  Point of order.  The hon. Minister is laying before us for first reading a Bill for elections, 1999.  Mr. Speaker, where is that Bill?

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Mr. Speaker, the Bill was previously circulated.  The only thing we are doing is to amend 8 to read 9;  that is all.  But the Bill was distributed.

THE SPEAKER:  No, I think the procedures should have been for you to read the Bill as it is,  and when we get to considering it at Committee stage then we can amend it.  For as far as I am concerned, on the order paper it is the Parliamentary Elections Bill,  1998.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, whereas the order paper is reading '1998', the Minister responsible is saying '1999'. What goes down in our Hansard as a record of this Parliament? What Bill does he want us to consider, Mr. Speaker?  I think we must get that clear.

THE SPEAKER:  I have already made a ruling hon. Member.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILLIATION BILL, 1999

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1999' be read for the first time.  I beg to move.  Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE COMMON MARKET FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA TREATY(IMPLEMENTATION) BILL,1997.

THE 2ND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ MINISTER FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Brig. Moses Ali):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The Common Markets for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty Implementation Bill, 1997' be read for the first time.  I beg to move.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL BILL, 1998.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera):   Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The National Security Council Bill, 1998' be read for the first time.  I beg to move.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE COMMUNITY SERVICE BILL, 1998.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Miss Sarah Namusoke):  (Applause) Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank the House for that applause.  I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The Community Services Bill, 1998' be read for the first time.  I beg to move.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE WORKERS' COMPENSATION BILL, 1998.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr. Mateke Philemon): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the 'Workers' Compensation Bill, 1998' be read for the first time. I beg to move.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES (SPECIFIED OFFICERS) BILL, 1999.

THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Amanya Mushega): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled 'The Salaries and Allowances (Specified Officers) Bill, 1999' be read the first time.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS BILL, 1999

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled 'The Universities and other Tertiary Institution's Bill, 1999' be read for the first time.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999

DR. SAM LYOMOKI (Workers Representative): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 1998' be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that brings us to the end of today's Business.  I will adjourn the House to Thursday 2.00 pm for the Budget Speech at the International Conference Centre.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 3.05 p.m and adjourned to Thursday 10th June 1999 at 2.00 p.m).
