Tuesday, 8 June 2010

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. I also take this opportunity to formally welcome you back from the recess. Although it was a short recess of about ten or so days, I hope you were able to see your people, interact with them, recoup and come back with the necessary energy to transact business as usual. 

During the recess we were able to fill up a vacancy. A new Member was sworn in before recess ended. I want to welcome hon. Nambooze. Although she sat here last time, she is not here; I do not know what has happened. But I wish her a successful tenure of office as a Member of Parliament for Mukono North. During the time I swore her in, I advised her that she was representing all people in Mukono North and she had become a national leader who should not only talk about local issues, but Ugandan and even international issues. I advised her to stop using the language she was using during the campaigns because she has to unify all those people. I believe you also welcome her in her absence. 

Hon. Members, as I said last Wednesday, this is the last session of the Eighth Parliament. I want to thank you for what you have been able to do in the last four sessions. I hope you will continue to be diligent workers as Members of Parliament so that even in the last Session, we have tangible work to show the people. 

Yesterday the Business Committee met to consider the work we have and how we are going to do it. We realised that there will be many distractions because this is a year when we have elections and you are likely to be distracted because you will be in your constituencies. At the same time, the country expects us to do our work and clear the pending work. We have a lot of pending work, which was saved when we ended the Fourth Session. This is in form of Bills, committee reports and many other things that we have to do. 

It may be wishful thinking for me to think that there will be no change and you are going to attend as usual. Therefore, the Business Committee decided that due to the uniqueness of the Session, we may have to adjust the way we shall be carrying out business. Maybe from next week, we may have to sit in the morning starting at 10.00 a.m., get a break at 1.00 p.m. and come back at 02.30 p.m. That is the only way we can cope with the business before us. 

You know very well that this session has to handle the budget in accordance with the Budget Act. What we produce from the Budget is the blood for the system to operate. It is true the Budget Act says the Budget should be passed by 31st August; but if we take that - my view is that we should try to utilise this time when things are not yet hot -(Laughter)- so that if possible we complete the Budget process and pass the Budget by end of June or very early in July. So when we relax, I will not be worried because we will have supplied the blood. This is what we have decided and I appeal to you to bear with us so that we carry out work in the morning and afternoon.

There was a suggestion that we also include Mondays and Fridays; but having considered other circumstances, we said, “No, let us leave the Fridays and the Mondays for the Members and start on Tuesday at 10.00 a.m., Wednesday, then break off on Thursday.” That is how we are going to operate. 

The details of business, which is ready, will be given to you. But now we have two items on the Order Paper, namely the address by the President of South Africa, H.E Jacob Zuma and another motion, which may be brought for a resolution of Parliament. On the Order Paper, we had indicated that we constitute the committees. I do not know whether the leaders - the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Chief Whip - have looked into this so that committees are properly constituted so we could move as we normally do. 

That is the position hon. Members. Thank you very much.

3.02
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to welcome hon. Betty Nambooze in absentia. There are a few things, which I feel should be brought to the attention of this House. As it says in the Bible, it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of Heaven. To win a by-election in this country is as difficult as a rich man entering the Kingdom of Heaven. Yes, we have tasted this, time and again. 

The other time we were in Nebbi, Mbale Municipality, then in hon. Kakuru’s constituency in Rukiga and lately we were in Mukono North. In all this, the scene seems to have a lot of commonalities. The commonalities that were seen and which were more evident in Mukono North constituency is what we have been complaining about, which is the over militarisation of campaigns in this country. 

Many of us who were here in Kampala and many who watched pictorial presentations on TV were shocked to learn that Kalangala Action Plan under the command of Maj. Ronald Kakooza Mutale was in full gear and by the way, this was not far away from the capital. This was the militarisation of the campaign trail under the watchful eyes of the Commander-in-Chief and here is a situation where we are saying the Electoral Commission is not doing enough. I do not think the Electoral Commission offices on Kampala-Jinja Road are so far away from Mukono that they could not intervene.

If such trends are left unchecked and the powers that be cannot even come up openly to condemn it, then we are really in for a real shock in 2011. That, to us, is already a worry and my humble appeal to Government is please, let there be a semblance of democracy and of free and fair elections in this country.

My colleague hon. Daudi Migereko, I know we shall share a lot in common at an appropriate time but this is really an appeal that I am making to Government.

Secondly, if you also followed what was on the various TV stations, there were a lot of threats given to the electorate that, “If you vote for DP, be rest assured that there will be no development in Mukono North. This was said by none other than the Head of State, H.E President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Surely the Constitution is very clear in terms of responsibilities and development in this country. If you knew very well that development issues are going to be so polarised, why did you allow this country to go into multi-partism? You should have allowed us to remain in the Movement System because the fact that Ugandans were able to open up political space, the Constitution is to be respected. Once you are voted a president, it is your duty and responsibility to ensure that all parts of this country develop across the board whether they have voted for you or not because you are executing the duties on their behalf as guaranteed by the Constitution.

Thirdly, there was the issue of widespread disfranchisement of voters under the watchful eyes, again of the Electoral Commission. Now if in a by-election where the Electoral Commission should have focused its attention to have all machineries in place so that every eligible person has his card and name on the voters’ register had these same people disappointed when they went there and found that their names were not on the voters’ register, how prepared are we for 2011 where we are going to conduct elections throughout the country? That is a sign of worry for those of us who still want to be in the political playground that if some of these things are not corrected, we may run into trouble.

My last concern is the issue of ballot box stuffing. There was one polling station in Mukono North constituency called Kalagala, which had a total of 300 or so voters but at the end of the day even after the polling agents had signed the declaration forms, we were surprised in the tally room when the same polling station was reflected as having over 500 voters. Where did those voters come from and more so when the polling agent representatives had their duly signed declaration forms? How can this happen if these elections were only in one constituency? What will the situation be when we now go for an overall election in this country? 

My appeal is to Government and those offices that are concerned with election exercises to ensure that there is transparency and to make us have confidence in them. Because if in one constituency you cannot do a clean job, how prepared are you for campaigns and elections, which are going to cover the entire country? I say this in sincerity and my hope is that the leadership of Government that is here in this House - I can see my professor is warming up to probably make a response. Please let us mature and organise free and fair elections. I thank you.

3.09
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I wish to welcome hon. Nambooze to Parliament in her absence. I wish to advise her as follows; whatever she says or does must be to enhance national integration. 

With regard to what hon. Dr Wadri Wadri - I gave him a doctorate for one year –(Laughter)– remember I was a Chancellor at Makerere University. I wish to point out that the Police took charge of the security in Mukono North to ensure that there are peaceful elections, which were won by hon. Nambooze and the Opposition. The presence of Kakooza Mutale, in my view, does not necessarily mean militarisation. 

I also want to point out that H.E the President has never punished areas, which did not vote him in power. On the contrary, in his State of the Nation Address when he was mentioning the roads to be built and repaired, he was fair to all groups. Indeed, as you know in Northern Uganda, we won in a few areas but there have been many projects including PRDP and I am in charge of those projects. We are irrigating Northern Uganda and other parts that did not give us votes. We have restored law and order. Having flushed out Kony, we want to ensure that Uganda develops economically. All parts of Uganda must enjoy security. The President is fair to all of us, remember he even referred to Nakawuki’s constituency several times.
 
With regard to the Electoral Commission, it has the capacity to supervise elections but you are determined to deny it the chance. Mistakes take place. Recently, when elections were taking place in Britain, some people did not vote. This is a developed country! If these problems can take place in an advanced country, surely in a country like ours where the degree of illiteracy is still high, problems are bound to take place here and there. It is our duty to help each other and to help people.

THE SPEAKER: Are you making this a formal motion, because I merely made a communication and did not expect a debate on the issue of elections in Mukono North.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: The Speaker is encouraging me not to disallow you to speak. I am always accessible and we can discuss that matter.

THE SPEAKER: No, we are ending because it was my communication, I only expected a comment here and there but you are formally making it a motion.

3.16
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate that Parliament has a big backlog to clear and therefore the proposal to have amendment to our sittings for us to sit in the morning and afternoon could be one way out. After looking at the Order Paper and notice of business to follow, I saliently note that we have an accountability issue, which requires to be disposed of. It would be prudent for us before budget.

THE SPEAKER: You are talking about the CHOGM report?

DR EPETAIT: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: It will be coming very soon.

DR EPETAIT: Secondly, we have just been having voter registration updates throughout the country. For Mukono North, however, the process was suspended during the campaign period. As we speak there is a lot of congestion in Mukono North and indeed in the whole country. It is my opinion that if we are to avoid disenfranchisement of voters, the Electoral Commission should consider extending the exercise for the whole country and perhaps even have a special consideration for Mukono North where the exercise was suspended during the time of campaigns. The deadline of 14th June will really leave thousands of Ugandans out of the register. 

It is my appeal to Government to appeal to the Electoral Commission to adjust the date upwards by another two weeks.

MOTION TO RECORD THANKS OF PARLIAMENT FOR THE CLEAR AND HISTORIC SPEECH MADE BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, DR JACOB ZUMA, TO THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA ON THURSDAY, 25 MARCH 2010

3.19
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): I beg to move a motion for Parliament to record thanks for the clear and historic speech made by His Excellency the President of the Republic of South Africa Dr Jacob Zuma to the Parliament of Uganda on Thursday, 25 March 2010. 

Dr Zuma was in the company of His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the first lady of South Africa Mama Khumalo Zuma.

I would like to commend the leadership of our country for having invited President Zuma to Uganda. I thank Government and the leadership of Parliament for creating the opportunity for Members of Parliament to listen to this distinguished son of Africa.

President Zuma addressed us on key issues that relate to relationship between the people’s of Uganda and South Africa, Africa’s liberation and Uganda’s role in the same, strategic investments and Pan Africanism.

His Excellency Zuma acknowledged with gratitude the pivotal role the NRM Government played in the final stages of the struggle against the apartheid regimes, most especially in Namibia and South Africa.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Migereko, I want to be assisted here; where is the motion?
 
MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I will move this motion at the end. I beg to move the motion that Parliament do record thanks for the clear and historic speech made by His Excellency the President of South Africa, Dr Jacob Zuma, to this Parliament on 25 March 2010. 

Hon. Members, we were informed that the NRM Government decided to support, accommodate and train Umkhonto we Sizwe – the freedom fighters from South Africa in Uganda, despite the high security risks involved. The apartheid regime, as you may all recall, had the capacity to carry out military and air strikes against Uganda, the long distance between South Africa and Uganda notwithstanding.  

The NRM Government took this position because it is a revolutionary movement, which has always believed in the total liberation and emancipation of the people of Africa. This is in line with what other Pan Africanists like Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, Nyerere of Tanzania, Abdul Gamal Nasser of Egypt and others had started on. In that regard, President Museveni and our country became the natural heir to this noble Pan African mission started by those great Pan Africanists. Hon. Members, this is the message that President Zuma delivered to our Parliament, Africa and the whole world.

The training that the South African freedom fighters received from the now Leadership Centre at Kaweweta here in Uganda enabled them to successfully liberate their country. They have subsequently provided remarkable leadership to their people in addition to providing democratic governance, courtesy of the training received from Uganda. This was a true testimony made by President Zuma here in our Parliament.  

President Mbeki had offered to construct the Kaweweta Leadership Centre in 2005. President Zuma came here to open this centre. We must thank the South African Government for meeting this commitment.

What is also true is that many Ugandan professionals at the time of the struggle against apartheid went and provided requisite capacity to the marginalised Blacks in South Africa mainly in the sectors of business, education, health and African traditional medicine which helped to accelerate the collapse of the apartheid regime.

Today we have many Ugandans working in South Africa, most of whom are professionals. They are contributing to the development of our country in several ways, that is, technology transfer, repatriation of foreign exchange, construction of hospitals, education institutions, factories and many other areas of development.

Many Ugandans have also married South African men and women hence making a firm, vivid and most natural contribution to African integration and Pan Africanism.

South Africans had their first truly democratic government on 26 April 1994. South Africa is now the strongest economy on the African continent with a GDP of US $227 billion. The post-apartheid governments led by that of President Mandela have laid a lot of emphasis on economic co-operation with other African countries as an approach to integration in Africa. It is in that regard that South Africa signed a joint permanent Economic Commission Agreement with Uganda in 2005.  

As you are all aware, South Africa is the leader in power generation on the African continent with a capacity to generate over 38,000 megawatts. They have had a role to play in the revitalisation of the power sector in our country. Recently, agreements were signed for construction of power transmission infrastructure from South Africa, Zambia, Tanzania, Kenya and eventually Uganda.

This is to ensure the stability and security of power supply in any of the countries mentioned above. It will also augment our Pan African programme, which now recognises the importance of economic projects in African integration. The road, railway, pipeline networks plus telecommunications infrastructure are receiving similar attention and are being pursued under the NEPAD programme.

President Zuma spent a bit of time discussing South Africa-Uganda trade, which now stands at US $169 million in favour of South Africa as opposed to US $12.7 million in favour of Uganda. While it is good that we have a steady exchange of goods and services, the imbalance is a source of concern to us and needs to be worked on. The biggest challenge we face is to understand what we in Government must do to assist and facilitate the private sector to take advantage of the available opportunities in South Africa. This will help to correct this imbalance amongst other things. It is my hope that those who will come up to contribute to this debate will address this matter for the benefit of both the private sector, and Government. 

Obviously, I am aware of the success of the different affirmative programmes the South African Government has put in place to boost investments particularly those intended to benefit previously marginalised groups. What is it that we must do for our own affirmative programme to have the desired level of impact especially for the youth, women and formally destabilised areas? We need to get a briefing from South Africa in this area.

His Excellency President Zuma reported that close to 50 South African multinational companies are competitively operating in Uganda and are leading taxpayers. This is a positive response to the sound investment climate in the country but also a sign of approval of the economic policies being pursued by the NRM Government –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I get to understand that there is a motion on the Floor and that the NRM Chief Whip is speaking to that motion. But what I am listening to is a statement on the roles South Africa has played in unifying Africa in economic advancement and so on but which document we are not privileged to get a copy of. I want to understand whether the Minister wants to make a ministerial statement on the role that South Africa has played or he wants to speak to a motion, which motion we do not even have a copy of. I am surprised that the Opposition Chief Whip has seconded the motion and yet we do not even have it. 

What is that motion seeking or what are we actually finally seeking? Because what the minister is doing is to speak in generality praising South Africa for what she has done – facts which we already know, contribution in the development, which we already know, contribution in the liberation struggle, which we already know. Now, can we be guided? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. The motion is not mine; it is moved by hon. Migereko and hon. Wadri. They are the ones to back up their motion. So, I cannot guide him on what to say. But what you should know is that I was not here – President Zuma visited Uganda and, therefore, in reciprocating that, he is praising South Africa. Let him complete and you pick up what you want and leave out what you do not want.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you for that guidance, Mr Speaker. It is our firm belief that this investment will give rise to partnerships that will lead to emergence of a formidable middle class that is critical for the sustenance of our economy. 

Hon. Members, we need to attract more of such investments both locally and internationally in order to be able to support our budget development programmes but also to solve unemployment which is our single biggest problem in the country. This explains our President’s close relations with leaders such as President Zuma as well as investors. 

Success on the investment and Pan African front will be realised much faster if all of us could share and support President Museveni’s vision and the message delivered to us by President Zuma.

The Pan African Parliament, to which Uganda is ably represented and we hold the position of Vice President through hon. Mugyenyi, has been greatly supported by South Africa and has taken on board the issues that were brought out by President Zuma and President Museveni in order to ensure the future of Africa.  

“NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that Parliament: 

1.	Thanks His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni for inviting President Jacob Zuma to visit Uganda. 
2.	Thanks President Jacob Zuma for accepting the invitation and for particularly sparing time to come and address this august House and for his clear and encouraging message on investment and Pan Africanism.
3.	Thanks the Government of Uganda, the Speaker, for the excellent arrangements made to enable His Excellency President Zuma address this august House.”

I beg to move. I thank you.

3.35
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I rise to second the motion moved by hon. Daudi Migereko, the Government Chief Whip. 

Before I go into the debate, I want to make the following observations:

In the first place, when His Excellency President Jacob Zuma came to address Parliament, I was not around. Therefore, when I was approached by the Clerk yesterday, I first of all said I was not privy to the audience that was accorded to President Jacob Zuma; and asked if I could have a look at the statement he made. I was downloaded a three-page document from the Internet, which I gladly accepted to come and talk about.

Before I proceed further, I would like to inform my colleagues that when you look at the three-page statement by His Excellency Dr Jacob Zuma, President of South Africa, it only had one theme. It only underscored the issue of co-operation between the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of Uganda. So when you hear my colleague, the Government Chief Whip, only dwell on those areas of co-operation, it is because that was the context of the statement that was issued by President Zuma.

Having said that, I want to make the following observations: 

President Jacob Zuma underscored the importance of the close co-operation between the two sister countries. And he has further emphasised the areas in which these two countries need to further enhance and progress positively with their spirit of co-operation, the issue of economic cooperation. 

We note that in Uganda, there are many South African companies that are immensely contributing to our GDP. We have companies like Eskom, which is responsible for generation of electricity in this country; we have big business ventures like Shoprite which is a South African firm; we have got the Nile Breweries, located in Jinja, which is a South African company, giving us all that we need for our leisure. 

However, when we talk about this, there is one shortfall that I see with the level of co-operation that we have in this country. Here is a co-operation where expertise, business empires come from South Africa, we provide them with the good economic environment, they are able to make enormous profits, hence add to our GDP but there is very little in terms of entrepreneurship building on our part as a country. 

I will beg and engage us, so that we borrow a leaf from the Republic of Rwanda whereby if you are a foreigner and you want to go into a business venture in Rwanda, it is a matter of policy that you, a foreigner, cannot single-handedly be allowed to pursue a business venture but you must team up with a national so that at the end of the day, if the business winds up, the entrepreneurial skill is left for that country to benefit from. I wish we could do that with all these numerous investments that South African companies have had in this country, we would go a step further.

There is also the commonality as has been identified by His Excellency Dr Zuma, that is, the economic and especially agricultural advantages that we as a country have in the whole of Africa but when you look at the terms of trade between South Africa and Uganda, the whole thing is polarised. How can we take advantage of our conducive climatic situation so that we can be able to harness the wider market in South Africa? 

At the same time we should also challenge ourselves. Today, many serious countries are taking advantage of the World Cup that is being hosted in South Africa. Many countries and companies are now looking at this as a one-stop market situation, where they are advertising their countries, their projects and their produce among others. 

You remember a few years back, when we hosted CHOGM, it cost us a huge amount of money for firms to positively project the image of this country abroad so that the Pearl of Africa is known to everybody. What are we doing as a country to take advantage of the wider market that exists now in South Africa with the World Cup being there? Are we taking advantage of that? Have we advertised Uganda in South Africa where we know the whole world is now focusing? This was a golden chance which I believe if we had harnessed, we would have been able to have a meaningful outcome.

At the same time, when His Excellency Dr Zuma underscored the importance of close working relationships between Uganda and South Africa, he talked at a the level of liberation movements and activities and support that Uganda gave to South Africa especially the ANC fighting group. I would have expected His Excellency not to be selfish with his wisdom and his wise counsel to our country at the political front. Because all these liberation efforts were efforts that were made in order to capture political leadership. His Excellency came and talked about co-operation but he fell short of explaining to us how South Africa stands politically and what we, as a country, could benefit from South Africa. We are all aware that South Africa is one of those promising democracies in the continent of Africa. We all know for a fact that even the predecessor of President Zuma, His Excellency Thabo Mbeki, cut short his term of office when there were problems emanating from his own party. He took the honourable decision and stepped down so as to give way to his party and clean leadership to continue with the battle. I thought that for us that would have been an area where we would have very much wanted to know how South Africa has gone about its political dynamics. How else could we as Uganda have borrowed from them in this area where we are now co-operating? 

Then I also remember His Excellency Zuma at one time came here and gave political counsel to this country. That was at the time he came to pay tribute to the late Brig. Noble Mayombo. He told the UPDF, and I am happy my brother, General Oketa is there seated on the other side which is not in accordance with the Constitution -(Laughter)- he told the   UPDF to keep off -(Interjections)- yes, he told the UPDF - the Army to steer clear of active politics. Since President Zuma was emphasising these collaborative efforts, I wish we could also follow that. How best can we advise those like my brother Gen. Oketa and group to steer clear so that they are on the right side of history? You know the way it is in South Africa where all these liberators who were accorded training by our brothers and sisters here in the UPDF have known their role and they are there only to serve the regime that comes and I thought that that would be another very good area from which we would be able to borrow a leaf from the experiences of South Africa. 

I would at the same time like to commend the Republic of South Africa through His Excellency Jacob Zuma for having taken the leadership in Africa as a continent to host the Pan-African Parliament; it is not a small job that a country can accept to host a multi-national Parliament of that nature. I strongly second the motion and pray that we give it all the credit that it deserves amidst a few of these observations that I have made because they were not expressly contained in His Excellency Zuma’s statement. 

3.45
MS BETI KAMYA (Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to use the same occasion to congratulate my namesake, hon. Betty Nambooze, for joining this House which she should have done a long time ago.
 
I am rising to support the motion moved by hon. Migereko and I would like to make a few comments. When one hears of names like that of His Excellency Jacob Zuma, we always recall and cherish the struggles of political independence of the African nation for which the Zumas of this world will always take a very special place in the history of Africa. So it is right to remember the nostalgia of all those not so good old days. 

But we cannot forget that a lot of those freedom fighters became heads of their governments and after which they formed almost a club of oppressors of their own people for which they had to be forcefully thrown out. Political independence per se could not have been the purpose and objective of the struggle. So freedom fighters needed to move on from talking about mere political independence and look beyond to the real independence. 

During the struggle for independence, people talked about exploitation. In Uganda, it has been 48 years and we talk about exploitation because during those days, all our wealth used to be siphoned and taken to London as the wealth in South Africa used to be siphoned to London. And when it got to London, Mr Speaker, you remember the Queen’s Government used to send back a grant to us. The same things are happening today. 

After independence, the President occupied the place of the Queen and the RDCs of this world occupied the places of the Governor and wealth still comes from the districts to the centre in Kampala and the government still sends a grant – the word, “grant” is still used. In my understanding of the English word, “grant” is a gift. So for the districts of Uganda to continue receiving grants after working hard, we break our backs, we sweat, we pay taxes, even a child who is born in Karamoja – the razorblade, which is used to cut the umbilical cord pays a tax and when it comes here in Kampala, the people of Karamoja get a grant from the Central Government. And we talk about independence when our taxes - our shares are still called grants just like they used to be called in the colonial days! We have not moved on, Mr Speaker. 

So the system of colonialism that used to exploit the people of Africa and the people of Uganda - the mentality and the orientation is still the same. Africans still get exploited by their leaders who form a small club of exploiters around the centre while the rest of the Africans work to exploit their backs for taxes and when they get to the centre, African Governments like the NRM Government still send to the districts a grant. And we call ourselves independent and yet we are working for a grant!

While we must cherish all those political independence sentiments, people like His Excellency Zuma and His Excellency Museveni and all the other Excellencies of this world in Africa must lead us to the real purpose of the struggle for independence. This is because the people of Africa did not struggle so that they create a club of elites to enjoy the sweat of their country. 
 
In South Africa, it has been 16 years and while South Africa can pose of very big and impressive GDP and per capita figures, and Uganda also has impressive gross figures, the ordinary person who does most of the sweating is still the same ordinary person that used to look to the Mzungu or the colonialist as a class of people up there while the rest of us are down here.

In Uganda, it has been 48 years and 48 years down the road, eight regimes, nine heads of state, two referenda, two liberation wars, a military coup, an incredible amount of resources in this country, endowment and billions of dollar donors. Later we still receive a grant from Government. And in the last year’s budget or in any year’s budget, 75 percent of the budget remains in the centre while only 25 percent goes to the districts through the local governments. 

As I wind up, these are the issues which I would like to challenge the new breed of African leaders to move on from celebrating mere political independence to having strategies to draw this country into equitable distribution of resources because if we do not do that, we shall just stand here in this Parliament and praise each other and the government while the people are mere observers of the people who are really enjoying the benefits of independence. 

Finally, the NRM Government –

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before you end, you seem to be complaining about the use of the term, “grant”, that is the money which we send to the local governments – we call it a grant. What is your complaint and what is your remedy?

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My understanding of the English word “grant” is that it is a gift. But there is no way you can call my contribution a gift. What we need is a share. We are stakeholders in this country. We are not beggars. If we pay taxes and collect money in a common pool, we should call what we get back a share, which should be equitable. What we are getting is a grant, which means in the orientation of our leaders since independence, we are still carrying on the Queen’s system of when things come to the centre and belong to the person in the centre and it is that person, at his or her discretion, to give a grant. I am totally objecting to the use of the word “grant” in relation to my sweat and my share. I am calling upon the leaders of this –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you very much, hon. Member holding the Floor. I would like to be informed – because I have listened and now am having a hard time relating the issue of grants to the districts, with the speech by H.E the President of South Africa when he visited Uganda. What is the relationship between the two? We are speaking to the motion in relation to the speech by His Excellency the President of South Africa, but I think there is a lot of emphasis on the grants.

MS KAMYA: Thank you my sister, the hon. Member for Nyabushozi County. We are responding to the speech by His Excellency Dr Jacob Zuma and the motion as presented by hon. Daudi Migereko. In those two, there is a lot of talk about independence struggles and what happened thereafter, which is about the expectations after independence for the people of both Uganda and South Africa. What I am saying is that the people of Uganda are still getting grants. I am calling upon the Jacob Zumas and Yoweri Musevenis of this world to move Africa from the grant mentality to the ownership mentality. Africans and Ugandans in particular need to know that they own their resources not that they have to wait at the end of the year for a kind grant from the centre. I thank you.

3.56
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad to be in this House as we appreciate the change that has occurred on the African Continent, where in spite of what hon. Kamya has said, we can have people like her engage in secondary struggles like federalism. I am saying this because to get to the level of searching for federalism, you needed to have a certain amount of peace, quietness and confidence to seek those secondary achievements. I would like to commend hon. Kamya for participating, as fully as she can, in this changed Africa.

I would like to look at the visit of President Zuma to Uganda in a more fundamental way of looking at Africa, which was divided according to whims of the colonisers; which was controlled at the whims of people like John Vorster, with a system like apartheid; and a change that has now occurred that President Zuma can visit Uganda and address us in Parliament and equally that President Museveni can visit South Africa and address South Africans in a free and independent country.

I had the privilege to visit South Africa soon after Mandela had been released from jail. We had a meeting in Soweto. I would like to point out that it was such an experience to meet these liberated South Africans. By that time independence had not been achieved, but we were being guarded and protected by the ANC armed group in the heart of South Africa where you had Soweto, a place where Africans lived below the average of a human being. 

While there, there were Africans singing in local languages, which gave me the impression that here was the music of change. I remember when I came back I wrote an article, which appeared in the first Sunday Vision issue – I gave the impression as I had seen it in South Africa – if you hold the cape as the mouthpiece of a bugle – that here was South Africa sending vibrations of change to the whole African Continent. And if now you can have an image of the map of Africa with the people of South Africa - if you look at the horn and West Africa, that map will actually look like a bugle. The message of change has since come and that is how we came to have so many South African companies operating in Uganda, but also with many of us going to South Africa for business at leisure.

So it is a change that is manifested in President Zuma; a change that is irreversible whether you have former President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela and so many other presidents after him, the change can never be repeated. South Africa has changed for ever. There are still problems, but where aren’t they? Everywhere in the world there are problems. So, the change of moving from apartheid to independence, to the freedom of everybody to participate in a South Africa is a change that is irreversible. And thank Heavens that we are here to appreciate the visit of South African President, which would not have been possible if apartheid was still with us.

On Sunday, I was coming from Addis Ababa, but the plane delayed for about an hour. And while I waited in the VIP Lounge, I happened to watch some BCC programme on Oliver Thambo. I do not know how many of us had the chance to watch it. The history of South Africa was spearheaded by Oliver Thambo. True President Zuma came here, but it needed a lot of architecture. Oliver Thambo had to leave his home and his family and live in Europe mobilising people and organisations including the churches. The change came in the heart of the churches when bishops were preaching that Africans were created to be below average. They were not good enough quoting Deuteronomy and so on and so forth. Oliver Thambo mobilised the “All Africa Conference of Churches” and indeed the global churches to the extent that that attitude was removed from the church teaching of some of the South African leaders. So, really the coming here of Zuma must be linked with other people who participated in the change that now produces Zuma who comes here as a visiting president.

The relationship between Uganda and South Africa must be stronger than it is currently. I think not only are we going to get business, not only are we exchanging scholarships but we must also exchange culture. I think Zuma himself is such a representative of an African culture that I hope hon. Betty Kamya would appreciate as a contribution that President Zuma is making in the continuation of the African culture. (Laughter)

I do not want to speak for too long but I would like to end and I wish hon. Kassiano was here. I would wish to end by pointing out one thing. The presence of soldiers in the Uganda Parliament is not an accident [Mr Kibazanga: “Is it history?”] just as you are an accident of history by having been born. There are conditions which produced a decision of Uganda leaders at a particular point in history that it was believed to create a political alloy where civilian politicians should sit together with the soldiers but who also have a political sense.

When we came back from exile in 1979, it was a very clear concern of Ugandans that never should we have a president of a quality of Amin. If you are going to have a soldier president, at least do not have Amin. Nigeria has had soldier presidents but they were not the quality of an Amin. So, we said and I was part of that adventure and part of that path that we are going to educate our citizens both civilian and soldiers to be concerned about the universal values of our country. That if you are a soldier, you are a Ugandan soldier –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way -

THE SPEAKER: I am receiving a number of complaints that we are making long contributions. I think I may have to limit you so that others can also make contributions. But say what you want to say.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister for giving way. Most of us are familiar with the history of Uganda and the reasons that brought the soldiers to this Parliament 24 years ago. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is one: is he aware that the soldiers in this Parliament are largely absentee MPs in this Parliament? And, therefore, should we be held hostage by our history even when you claim that there is peace in this country? I need clarification on whether we should always be held hostage by our history.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, the hon. Member has used the word hostage. Are they hostages? Why do you want this kind of language in this House? These honourable members of Parliament are here as participants in history, they are not hostages. They are here - for example, hon. Oketta - I want to inform you hon. Betty Kamya that hon. Oketta was a fighter in 1979 under the “Save Uganda Movement”. He knows the politics of this country probably more than those of us who were elected yesterday. (Laughter) He is not a hostage, he is simply a liberator. In fact, what you describe and many others like him who have been Members of this House –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: This is a question of English I think. Hostage in the sense that the country -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I appeal to you that we do not make statements that embarrass our fellow Members of Parliament. I was in the Constituent Assembly with hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who else -(Ms Winnie Matsiko rose_)- yes, we were there. We deliberated over this matter; you invite somebody to partake of some food with you then when he is there, you say things that embarrass him. I think it is not good. I want to alert you that the provisions of the Constitution allow you to periodically review the representation of different categories of our members of Parliament. I think when time comes, if you want to review and cut out certain categories, you will do it rather than embarrassing our colleagues when that time has not come. They get embarrassed. Please, stop it.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I want to conclude, Mr Speaker, by saying that what a great thing that we are here sharing in changing Africa. We may disagree, we may want to be federalists, some people may want to be democrats of a variety that is green or yellow but at least we are here in a continent where we are making things happen. And let me tell you; we are not only making things happen but they are happening in a very big way and be assured that 2011 is going to tell who has had a contribution to make and who has made it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Alaso. Let me ask you to speak for five minutes –(Interjections)- three? Okay, three.

4.12
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the movers of this motion. To me, the beauty of this motion is indeed the beauty of the presence of President Jacob Zuma in the Ugandan Parliament and in the political scene of Africa.

If it were Uganda, 16 years ago, nobody would think of another player other than Nelson Mandela. The fact that South Africa can produce a Jacob Zuma out of a serious struggle against apartheid and he can come here while President Nelson Mandela who spent 27 years in jail – and if you read the Long Walk to Freedom by Nelson Mandela, he would have had any reason to cling to power. He would have been the one addressing the Ugandan Parliament the other day. Really, but because people in South Africa have allowed institutions to outgrow individuals – it is the reason why my honourable colleague, Daudi Migereko, can stand up here and move a motion appreciating President Jacob Zuma not President Nelson Mandela. Even if he were on a wheel chair, President Nelson Mandela had every reason to cling to power and address the Ugandan Parliament. How I wish that as Ugandans we would learn!

In his speech, President Jacob Zuma –(Interjections)- paid tribute to all his predecessors. He talked about Nelson Mandela; he talked about efforts of Thabo Mbeki and he talked about his own efforts in this bi-lateral relationship. How I wish, in Uganda, we learnt the courtesy of paying tribute to our institutional memory and applauded our leaders even when we do not believe they are as good as you, yourselves. 

I see the spirit of this motion - if you look at it, it is just about thanks to President Museveni; Uganda was here before President Museveni and will be here after President Museveni.

I also want to encourage Parliament to stop doing some cosmetic work on these motions. There are crucial issues to do with our bi-lateral relations. In Uganda, we produce the best fruits in Africa. You think about our Bogoya, think about our oranges; but you go here and find that as a country, we are importing oranges from South Africa, you have Hamlin from Soroti, you have Washington from Serere and as a country, you are importing oranges. Are those the bi-lateral trade issues we are applauding? I think Ugandans should lift themselves up and trade at an equal footing with their bi-lateral partners.

Lastly, Uganda needs help from South Africa. We helped South Africa fight apartheid. Apartheid was in the legal framework; it existed legally. Today, the bondage Uganda is suffering is in our legal framework. We have institutionalised a one-man rule; we cannot hold free and fair elections. We should ask our brothers from South Africa whom we helped in 1989 and the early 90s to get freedom to come here and help us regain our freedom -(Member timed out_)

4.16
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On page 2 of the motion, the second-last paragraph; whereas it is true Ugandan professionals went to boost the capacity of the marginalised Blacks during that time of the struggle and the mover of the motion cited sectors in business, medicine, education, health, African traditional medicine and others, which, in his statement says helped to accelerate the collapse of the Apartheid regime, one thing that I know, for sure, is that the factors that attract Ugandan professionals to go elsewhere are basically pay.

Even as we speak today, there is an exodus of our professionals to other countries. We need to rectify the driving factors back home that send our professionals to other countries. I appreciate that it is good to have a liberalised job economy; but really, the job market should be balanced off. We need to rectify the imbalances within our home.

Now you say African traditional medicine helped accelerate the collapse of the Apartheid regime; I did not get the exact detail of what my hon. colleague from Butembe meant. 

Because of time, let me turn to page 4. My honourable colleague, Alaso, has already alluded to it - the imbalance in trade. There are disturbing figures that whereas imports of Uganda from South Africa constitute 18 percent of the Ugandan imports, South Africa imports nothing from Uganda. That is a very disturbing statistic. You can even see from the figures of the mover of the motion that there is a very big imbalance in business. Yet when you look at the prayers of the motion at the end, there is nothing that has been specifically cited to help correct that imbalance. 

I propose that we add on prayer number four that Government considers boosting the capacity of the private sector in order to correct this imbalance in trade. Our private sector which is engaged in business in South Africa is facing very stiff competition down there. What is Government injecting in to boost trade between Uganda and South Africa? Otherwise, I -(Member timed out_)

4.20
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I support the motion thanking His Excellency, Jacob Zuma, for his visit to the Ugandan Parliament and for a good speech that carried a lot of meaning to this Parliament and this nation.

I happened to have been to His Excellency, Jacob Zuma’s country in South Africa where he hosts the Pan African Parliament and indeed, the Leader of the Opposition has pre-empted what I was going to say.

I want to congratulate South Africa for being truly African and after liberation, for sharing what they have with the rest of Africa. This can only be shown very well by hosting an important organ of the African Union in the name of the Pan-African Parliament where the country has put out its resources to provide so much comfort and an environment that facilitates African parliamentarians to speak with one voice as the motto of the Pan-African Parliament says, “One Africa, One Voice.”

We should never take it for granted that when African countries support the liberation of a country, particularly with the kind of wealth South Africa has, in turn that country would share what it has with the rest of Africa. 

I want to congratulate South Africa and I hope South Africa will continue to make us proud in terms of their form of democracy, which has already been said in terms of sustaining the status of the country, the wealth, the organisation, the democracy so that the former colonialist does not look back and say, “Look what the Africans have done in terms of destroying the infrastructure that had been put.”

In the same breath, I would like to congratulate the President of the Republic of Uganda for these bi-lateral arrangements that he puts in place, especially for the support and the Pan-African spirit that he shows in supporting other African countries. As I speak, our sons and daughters are dying in Somalia and to me, for a good cause. If no other African died for the cause of South Africa, it would not be liberated today. 

So, I congratulate all African leaders that speak about Pan Africanism and live to what they have said because we know that at different AU summits, African leaders commit themselves to doing certain things in support of the continent and of the people of this continent. But when it comes to actual doing, like supporting the Somalia cause right now, it is a few countries that have sent their men and women to go and fight alongside their African brothers and sisters -(Member timed out-_)

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I stand to support the motion and I want to say the following. One, the fact that His Excellency Zuma agreed to the request to address you, hon. Members of Parliament, in Parliament, is a manifestation of his appreciation of our democracy and the effective good governance that is obtaining in Uganda today. It is our collective quest as Africa and with South Africa in the leadership position that this kind of democracy does prevail on the whole continent of Africa.

Two; the coming of President Zuma to Uganda is an indication that Ugandans are equally welcome to go to South Africa to trade, tour and visit. This is further testimony that we enjoy very good relations with the government and the people of South Africa. Please, Ugandans, you are requested to build on to this; go to South Africa and get business opportunities.

Three; his address also confirmed that the people of Uganda will always go down in history as a people who have made their contribution to the emancipation of dispossessed peoples; such was the case in South Africa and Somalia and this point has been made. We thank President Zuma for this recognition.

Four; regional integration is the only way we are able to survive as a continent. Africa is the only continent with the highest fragmentation of states. There is no other continent like this one that makes trade amongst us as a continent difficult, as well as movement of goods and people even more difficult. Therefore, when he comes here and reiterates on regional integration; and goes further to ensure that the East African Community is discussing with SADC to ensure that we have this regional block into an integration; so that trade, infrastructure and movement of humans is made easier on the continent; we would like to pay tribute to President Zuma and thank him. 

We all look forward to the day when one will be able to drive from Kampala to Cape Town or from Kampala to Alexandria without being stopped at a border point in the whole of Africa.

Finally, South Africa has brought additional glory to Africa. We cannot tire, but make the point that by South Africa hosting the World Cup, the whole of Africa has been honoured and also challenged to be able to take up this beautiful challenge in other parts of the continent.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I want us to reiterate our collective appreciation of what has been happening between Uganda and South Africa. Let us not underestimate the value of investment that has been made; investing in a bank that has afforded a lot of opportunity for people to borrow money and carry on business. These are things that we should not underplay. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.28
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the movers of this motion, even if the presentation leaves a lot to be desired. I am praying that the Chief Whip will employ experts in his office to make better presentations. I would also want to remind those who may be rubbishing the statement I am making that rule 63 talks about Members not reading their contributions on motions. I think that is important. I watched the mover of the motion read from the first paragraph to the last.

I want to congratulate our President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni for being aggressive in mobilising investors -(Prof. Nsibambi rose_)- you don’t want me to congratulate the President? I want to congratulate him. This is coming from my heart. So, Mr Speaker, can you order him to sit down? 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, as you know, you have the right to allow hon. Members of Parliament to read their speeches. You have that right. You should know your rules. I put it to you that you have the right to allow Members to read their speech. Is the hon. Member in order to suggest that it was wrong for hon. Migereko to read his speech when you have the right to either allow or not to allow him? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think what she intimated was that she saw hon. Migereko reading from the first page. It depends on the subject matter; sometimes you may have to read, but normally you don’t read.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister is my very good friend and that is why I provided him with rule 63 to read in his private time. I didn’t want to read it here because it would take a lot of my time. 

I want to further congratulate the President for being aggressive in mobilising investors to come to Uganda. Indeed, we have benefited a lot from his mobilisation. However, while being aggressive, he should be conscious of the interests of Ugandans, because looking at the trade figure, which is given in this report and which was read to us by the Movement Chief Whip, it clearly shows that we import from South Africa goods worth 1.3 billion Rand, and South Africa imports from Uganda 98. This is a gross imbalance of trade, which has to be addressed by the government before we congratulate ourselves.

The third point I would like to make is lack of appreciation. It is really unfair for the mover of the motion to congratulate those who are mentioned in the same speech that in the final stages in the struggle, the role of the Movement was acknowledged. Who played a role in the initial stages? It is important for the pride of Uganda; it important for us to put on record that our late President, late Milton Obote, played a very crucial role in the liberation of South Africa. When I was a youth, I used to travel to South Africa without travel documents.

We should acknowledge leaders in South Africa who died; they are now silent listeners. I want to stop by commenting on the statement the mover made, that we must improve the lives of the poor. I want to intimate that South Africans are constructing low cost Housing to house urban poor. For me and you, Mr Speaker, to see our poor people being hurled on the streets from Naguru and Nakawa when this Government has been in power for 25 years! I think this Government should have a human face; it must care for the poor and it must look at its budgetary allotment.

4.35
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): I wish to thank the movers of the motion for bringing this motion on the Floor. But as my colleague has mentioned, we have not tackled it holistically as Ugandans. Uganda was the first to provide South Africans with passports. This provided leaders of the revolution to go abroad and to get further studies.

Uganda was one of the original frontline states; we remained a committed member for the total liberation of Africa. The honourable Minister for Disaster Preparedness raised an issue which has put a scar in the politics of Uganda, and that is the rule of Gen. Idi Amin. At that material time when the government was overthrown, the President of the Republic of Uganda was in Singapore attending the CHOGM campaigning against the supply of arms to South Africa by the British Government then.

It was a struggle which continued over a long period of time and as the Chief Whip mentioned, NRM played its role in the final stages. But as Uganda, we owned the whole process. It was a great honour to me to be present in this House for hon. Zuma from a free South Africa to address us. He gave the reasons for the struggle; in all they are doing is for the improvement of the lives of the citizens.  Education is to equip citizens to participate in the development of the country effectively.

In South Africa, you find that medical professionals are treated with respect and dignity. We have many Ugandan doctors who have gone there to be treated with dignity. Our contribution to the medical profession in South Africa may be greater than what we are doing for Uganda. I think a lesson needs to be learnt on how we need to treat our professionals. We must thank President Zuma for raising those matters and for reminding us that our struggle should not be put in form of figures, but it must be seen in the lives of the citizens of Uganda.

4.39
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): I stand here to support the motion, but we need to add flesh on the speech of His Excellency Jacob Zuma. When he was here, I kept on asking myself how a young country like South Africa has attained respect on the continent and beyond. I discovered that South Africa is a beacon of hope. On this note, I would like to thank the Government of South Africa led by Mbeki by then, for hosting the president of my party, Dr Kiiza Besigye, when he could not have freedom in his own country.

What has made South Africa a super power on the African continent? I have realised that the three presidents after the Apartheid regime have conducted themselves as symbols of unity, peace, love, reconciliation and co-existence.

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, when did South Africa get independence; can you call it a young country on the continent?

MR KIBANZANGA: I am talking about post-apartheid period. Mr Speaker, you have reminded me that what makes South Africa a strong country is that they did not fight for independence but they fought for interdependence. Interdependence means racial integration in South Africa, which makes South Africa a strong country. I shudder and wonder when the people of Uganda feel that they cannot work together simply because others are Banyala or Baganda or simply because others come from the North and the South. The only leaf we can borrow from the people of South Africa is integration. I thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: I thank you hon. Kibanzanga. But don’t you think that we should really end?

4.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I stand here to support the motion. We must learn two lessons from South Africa. 

The first lesson is to forgive wrongdoers –(Laughter)- those people were oppressed in terms of racism and there was also economic dominance. But when they acquired political power, they were not vindictive; they forgave wrongdoers. Hon. Members, we must learn to forgive each other. That is a major lesson we must learn from those people. 

The second lesson is that we must learn not to take anything for granted. If you are assisted, you must appreciate. President Zuma came here to appreciate –(Applause)- our role in liberation.

Finally, because I am a man of few words –(Laughter)– and I am aware of rule 63(2). Members were wondering what rule I used to defend hon. Migereko –(Laughter)– but the final thing was that he came to Parliament to make that important speech. Parliament is a very significant arm of the state. So, when a Head of State comes here to appreciate what was done, he is endorsing the importance of the legislature whose functions are clearly stated especially under Article 79 of the Constitution. I beg to support the motion. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have other business. I will give you the opportunity to make contributions. The motion was to accord thanks for the clear and historical speech made by President Jacob Zuma on 25 March 2010 here in Parliament. I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE BAN ON FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION TO BE PRESENTED AT THE 65TH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Member.

4.48
MR HERBERT SABILA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the copies are being circulated. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the UN member states to support a motion banning Female Genital Mutilation at the UN 65th session of the General Assembly. I am doing this under rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS Article 24 of the Constitution provides that no person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and Article 32 of our Constitution provides that laws, cultures, customs and traditions which are against the dignity, welfare or interest of women which undermine their status, are prohibited;
 
REAFFIRMING THAT Female Genital Mutilation is a blatant violation of the human rights of women and girls which is committed in Uganda, African countries and worldwide;

AWARE THAT a Bill entitled, “Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation” was unanimously passed by the Parliament of Uganda and passed into an Act on the 10 December 2009 and assented to by H.E. the President of Uganda on the 17 March 2010;

CONGRATULATING African Heads of State on their adoption in 2003 of the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women (Maputo Protocol), which in its Article 5 binds State Parties to prohibit and condemn all forms of Female Genital Mutilation and in particular to prohibit, through legislative measures backed by sanctions, all forms of Female Genital Mutilation, in order to eliminate the vice;

AWARE THAT the law is an essential element of the prevention and elimination of Female Genital Mutilation;

AND AWARE THAT African countries where Female Genital Mutilation is committed have not yet all domesticated the Article 5 of the Maputo Protocol to prohibit Female Genital Mutilation;

AND ALSO AWARE THAT of those countries which have domesticated Article 5 only few of them have implemented the provisions of laws prohibiting Female Genital Mutilation;

CONSIDERING THAT Female Genital Mutilation is a challenge to the international community as a whole, which needs to be addressed by the United Nations;

RECOGNISING THAT in the most recent Inter-Parliamentary conference held in Dakar, Senegal, on the 3 and 4 May 2010, it was resolved that each representative state presents and ensures the adoption of a resolution at the next session of the UN General Assembly for a worldwide ban on Female Genital Mutilation; 

COGNISANT THAT the UN Resolution banning Female Genital Mutilation will consolidate the measures that countries have agreed to take in order to facilitate the common goal on the fight against Female Genital Mutilation and reaffirm the principles so clearly stated by the African Union in 2003;

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby resolved by Members of this Parliament that:

1.	 The Government of Uganda takes a lead role in sponsoring and soliciting support from African countries to adopt a resolution banning FGM globally during the forthcoming AU summit on reproductive and maternal health due in July 2010 at Kampala.

2.	Requests the Head of State, as well as the East African Community and the African Union, to present a Resolution banning Female Genital Mutilation worldwide at the forthcoming 65th Session of the UN General Assembly in September this year.

3.	 It registers its appeal to the UN General Assembly to adopt a resolution banning FGM globally at the 65th session of their meeting.”

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Seconded. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, maybe before we proceed you should recollect that recently in this House, this was a subject of debate and eventually we passed a law spearheaded by hon. Dr Baryomunsi. You know what is being done here is to say that let it be a universal thing; that is the purpose. The merits were discussed but we are trying to market it internationally. So, maybe I will ask the Members to justify and then we have some kind of debate. What do you want to say – contribute? 

4.47
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, you have rightly observed that there was an extensive debate on this subject that culminated into a passing of the anti-FGM Act here. It is my appeal, therefore, that this is such a clear-cut motion that ought not to attract much debate. And I thank my colleague for moving that motion. (Applause)

4.48
MR HERBERT SABILA (MRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I also thank you, hon. Epetait, for that submission. It is clear that last year we unanimously passed a Bill, which is now an Act, banning FGM in Uganda, and I want to take this opportunity to congratulate you for supporting that motion. 

Last year on the 1st of July, His Excellency the President launched a pronouncement in Amudat banning Female Genital Mutilation in this country. Present at this occasion were the Deputy Speaker, the First Lady and Members of Parliament, including leaders from the neighbouring countries. 

It has been said that we have had support to have this practice banned in Africa and we now want to look at a total ban where it is resolved at the UN. We have a security session of the UN meeting in September this year and we want to urge African heads of state, when they meet here in Kampala, to have a resolution and thereafter move with that resolution to the UN. I want to propose that our Government and our leadership take the lead in this. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, you know Uganda is very well known for championing women’s rights and the gender agenda. I want us as a government to ensure that we take the lead in this. That is my request.  

THE SPEAKER: I think the purpose is very clear. I want to put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

CONSTITUTION OF SESSIONAL COMMITTEES

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Government Chief Whip? Is this business ready?

4.56
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To the best of my understanding, the Government Chief Whip did inform me that, that business is not ready. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but it should be ready as soon as possible because we want to transact business and we cannot transact business unless the committees are fully constituted. I grant him time to do this and be ready by next week.

4.57
MR WADRI KASSIANO (The Opposition Chief Whip): Mr Speaker, at the beginning of last week hon. Daudi Migereko and I had consultations taking into account the fact that this is the last lap of the Eighth Parliament, and most importantly, the first experience that we are going through, that of subjecting Members of Parliament to primaries. 

We were cognisant of the fact that quorum may be a problem in this last lap. Consequently, we agreed that we were not going to make fundamental changes if any. We are going to continue with the same sessional committees in the interest of the service because there are certain important businesses that Parliament must be able to get through by around July or latest mid of August so that by the time Members run to clear their backyards in their constituencies, Parliament is not bogged down in terms of important decisions.

So, my committees are as they were in the last session. If there are one or two changes that I am going to make, I will let you know about it, Mr Speaker, and as per our rules you will make those announcements on the Floor of the House. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, we shall finalise this matter maybe early on Tuesday because on Thursday we shall have the Budget and then we shall adjourn to Tuesday of the other week. I think that time will be sufficient to iron out whatever requires to be ironed out. Therefore, we may not deal with this item today. 

I thank you for turning up this afternoon. We have exhausted what we had planned for today. As you are aware, we shall have the Budget on Thursday, 10 June 2010. This is the Budget day for all the East African countries and this Budget will be read at Serena International Conference Centre. 

I adjourn the House until Thursday at 2.00 p.m. at the Serena International Conference Centre. I wish you a good Heroes’ Day tomorrow, which I understand will take place in Luweero. With this the House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 June 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)

