Thursday, 08 June 2006

Parliament met at 10.55 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members it is my pleasure to welcome you to this sitting. As you may appreciate, since 12th May when a new Parliament came into existence, the 8th Parliament has not been able to function properly because certain structures of a normal parliament were not in place. But now it seems that we are completing setting up these structures of a normal parliament.  

Last Friday, His Excellency, the President swore in the new ministers who will form the Cabinet and the Cabinet was necessary for us to function. Today as you see, we see fully-fledged ministers who have been sworn-in occupying their proper seats on the frontbench. Among them, are other people who are not Members of Parliament but who were appointed ministers and, therefore, will be ex-officio Members of Parliament who will be participating in all proceedings of this House, save the voting. Therefore, for them to occupy their right seats here, it is necessary that they be sworn in as Members of Parliament otherwise they will be strangers.

As you know, this afternoon we have an important programme when the President will be giving the State of the Nation Address, which is a constitutional address he makes annually.  Therefore, we thought it was proper that before we receive that State of the Nation Address, the entire Cabinet can be in position to attend as ministers. Therefore, it was necessary to have this session, apart from the one we shall have in the afternoon, to welcome the ministers so that they cease to be strangers, because they are people who are permitted to enter the Chamber. That is the function, which we are going to witness today. Thank you.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

1.	Prof. Apolo Nsibambi
2.	Dr Ruhakana Rugunda
3.	Mr Henry Kajura
4.	Dr Ezra Suruma
5.	Prof. Matiya Semakula Kiwanuka
6.	Maj. Gen. Caleb Salim Saleh Akandwanaho
7.	Mr Henry Oryem Okello
8.	Dr Kasirivu Atwooki
9.	Major James Kinobe 
10.	Mr Ham Mulira 
11.	Mr Kagimu Kiwanuka
12.	Mrs Mbaguta Sezi

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, permit me on your behalf to welcome the ex-officio Members who are ministers. On your behalf, I want to assure them that you will give them all the necessary collaboration but they expect constructive criticism in good spirit as well. I thank you.

THE CHIEF OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the opposition in this Parliament, we would like to warmly welcome the Rt hon. Prime Minister, Prof. Apollo Nsibambi, to the House and to once again congratulate him on retaining his position as Prime Minister. (Applause)

When the Rt hon. Prime Minister was coming into the House, we sent an official delegation to escort him in -(Applause) The purpose of that was first of all, to recognize the qualities of the person of the Prime Minister, but also to send a very clear message that we in the opposition will be a constructive opposition. That, however, is not a concession of our right to firmly criticise so as to offer alternatives.

Mr Prime Minister, as the Leader of Opposition and the person with whom you will deal with on matters of Parliament, and a fellow professor, I would like to give you my assurance that all matters that you think are important to the well-being of this Parliament and the country will be discussed as honestly and as frankly as the status conferred upon us demands - we shall work together.  

I would like also to take this opportunity to welcome the Rt Deputy Prime Minister and all the ministers who have joined us by virtue of their appointments. We appreciate the fact that you were appointed and we do hope that you will meet the expectations of all Ugandans. Once again, we also say to all the ministers that our responsibility in the opposition is to ensure that the affairs of the state are well managed, and in that regard, we can assure the ministers that have joined us that where we think their activities and responsibilities do not meet the expectations of Uganda, expect very strong criticism from us. Yet it will not be about the person, but about the responsibility.

We are sorry that the First Deputy Prime Minister is not here. We, on this side, had planned to formally hand him over to the government. (Laughter) We now await the day that he will come and we will escort him in and formally hand him over. 

I also know that the country is now waiting to know who will constitute the front bench on the opposition side. We would like to assure the country that the process of putting in place a shadow cabinet is almost complete, and our shadow cabinet will be announced at an appropriate time.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, honourable members of Parliament, I wish to thank the Leader of Opposition for those kind words he has made. Indeed, I was doubly delighted when I was escorted by the opposition –(Applause)- and my colleagues on this side. It was a very important indicator that we shall work together to solve the problems afflicting this country. There is no other way. We have to work together to solve them and enhance good governance. So, this was a good beginning and we should always negotiate before we come to the microphone so that we have a negotiated statement. 

Of course, there will be issues, which will arise on the floor of Parliament; some can be solved immediately while others require more research and negotiation and that is how we should move this country so that we institutionalise multi-partism.  Institutionalisation concerns giving value to systems. They must be valued and respected. That is the meaning of “institutionalisation” and things cannot happen by themselves. They require good leadership.

May I finally say that I thank God who has given me life and energy to serve Uganda. I thank His Excellency, President Museveni, who showed me a lot of trust by reappointing me Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament, a major assignment that has enabled me and my colleagues to shape the destiny of Uganda. I have always said that whereas I am a Professor of Political Science, I am a student of practical politics. So, I am always learning from you and I intend to learn more. At the end of the day, I hope to write a book, which will have a lot of meaning for Ugandans and others. 

Tribute must be paid to honourable members of Parliament who endorsed my appointment. Parliament was diligently chaired by the Rt hon. Speaker to whom we are grateful. You are extremely diligent, Mr Speaker!  

I was touched by the generous remarks, which honourable members of Parliament made about me even when I am alive. Normally, these are made when one is dead. But when I get these statements when I am alive, it is a major challenge.

I was particularly pleased by the overwhelming support I received from all political shades of Parliament, including hon. Otto, hon. Mafabi and others. (Laughter) I pledge to serve all of you and the entire country diligently. I thank you! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I think this brings us to the end of this sitting’s business. But I want to remind you that last time we sat here, we were considering our rules. I think we advanced about 95 per cent; there is five per cent, which remained. We stood over certain provisions. I urge those concerned to talk over these matters so that the next time we meet, we finalise our Rules of Procedure. It is important that we do so because we must set up these committees, which will help to assist Parliament to function properly. 

Next week on Thursday, we shall have the budget and as you know, those who have been here, once the budget is read, we have a lot of work to be done by the committees. So, the sooner we set up the committees the better. Please, expedite the process so that when we meet sometime, we conclude this and the committees are set. We come to the end of today’s sitting business. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. in the Conference Hall. Thank you.

(The House rose at 11.05 a.m. and adjourned until 2.36 p.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall)

NATIONAL ANTHEM

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, and the First Lady; Your Excellency, the Vice-President, Rt hon. Deputy Speaker, Rt hon. Prime Minister, Your Lordship, the Chief Justice, the Vice-Chairman of NRM, the former President, Your Excellencies, the ambassadors and the high commissioners, honourable members of Parliament, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is my great pleasure and honour to welcome you to the Eighth Parliament for the first time.  

Your Excellency, most of the Members of Parliament assembled here were elected on 23 February 2006 in the general parliamentary elections that were held on the same day as the presidential elections in a multi-party political system. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate Your Excellency, for having been elected President of Uganda and upon assuming the highest office in the land on 12 May 2006. (Applause) In the same vein, I also want to congratulate the Members of the Seventh Parliament who made it back to the Eighth Parliament and also congratulate and welcome those who have come in for the first time! (Applause)

Your Excellency, at the moment the Eighth Parliament has a total membership of 322, although one seat is vacant because the Member elected for Dodoth County passed away before he could assume his seat. The composition is as follows:

•	Constituency Representatives are 215;
•	District Women Representatives are 69;
•	Uganda People’s Defence Forces are 10
•	Workers’ Representatives are 5;
•	Representatives for Persons With Disabilities are 5;
•	Representatives of the Youth are 5;
•	Ex-officio Members - these are the ministers - are 13. This gives a total of 322 Members

The country has embarked on yet another attempt at a multi-party system of governance. The composition of this Parliament is, therefore, a reflection of this type of multi-party parliamentary democracy. The distribution of seats by political party affiliation is as follows: 

•	NRM, 205;
•	FDC, 37;
•	UPC, 9; 
•	DP, 8; 
•	CP, 1; 
•	Jeema, 1; 
•	Independents, 38.

From the gender perspective, the following is the scenario: the total number of women is 89. 

•	District Women representatives, 69;
•	Women Constituency representatives, 14;
•	Special Interest Groups representation is broken down as follows: UPDF, 2; Workers, 2; Persons with Disabilities, 1; National Youth Female representative, 1.  

The organisation and management of party affairs and interest in Parliament is carried out and taken care of as follows: 

•	For the party in Government, the government Chief Whip is hon. Princess Kabakumba Labwoni Masiko; 
•	For the majority party in opposition, the Leader of Opposition is hon. Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo; and the whip of the majority party in opposition, hon. Kassiano Wadri.
•	The other political parties in opposition have their own whips namely, hon. Kikungwe Issa for DP; hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello for UPC; the two parties with only one Member of Parliament each do not have or need a whip. These are the Conservative Party and Jeema. 

Your Excellency, such is the nature or composition of the Eighth Parliament whose Members are before you today.

Lastly, I want to put on record my sincere thanks to the Members of the Seventh Parliament for the tremendous work they did. But, with specific reference to affecting the legislation pertaining to the transition from a Movement system to a political party dispensation. This was in addition to other pieces of legislation in the economic, social and political spheres. The Seventh Parliament created and passed a total of 103 Bills and numerous resolutions during its five-year term. (Applause)  

I look forward to a similar if not better performance by the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda in which the people of Uganda have a lot of expectations in addressing issues that are dear to their hearts. 

Your Excellency, clause (1) of Article 101 of the Constitution stipulates that, “The President shall, at the beginning of each session of Parliament, deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation.” Parliament has so far sat to elect its Speaker, Deputy Speaker, approve the appointments of His Excellency, the Vice-President, and the Prime Minister and ministers and to adopt its Rules of Procedure. It is yet to embark on substantive business. 

Therefore, this being the beginning of the first session of the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, it is my pleasure and singular honour to invite your Excellency, to discharge your constitutional duty of delivering to Parliament an Address on the State of the Nation. (Applause)

ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

2.50
HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency, the Vice-President of Uganda, the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, Rt hon. Prime Minister, Rt hon. Deputy Speaker to Parliament, Vice-Chairman of the National Resistance Movement, the honourable leaders of the opposition, honourable members of Parliament, diplomats, ladies and gentlemen. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to heartily congratulate you and your deputy and all the honourable Members of Parliament upon your success in the general elections, which we held in February this year under the new political dispensation. This is the first time that we have had both the presidential and parliamentary elections held on the same day. Elections have also been held for the local governments at the various levels and the exercises have been well conducted. 

In a special way, I congratulate you, Mr Speaker and your deputy, upon your re-election to your respective offices. (Applause) This is a testimony that you have done a good job and I have no doubt that you will continue to do so. 

This year ushered in yet another important landmark in the political history of our country, which is the transition from a movement political system, which was broad-based and all embracing to a multi-party system. Now, those who did not understand the plans of the Movement should now know we always do things at the right time. Uganda is our country; we know it very well, better than anybody. We know when to do what and fortunately we are supported in these endeavours by our population. 

Those who said we shun opposition, here we are now. (Applause) We could not commit suicide; we knew what Uganda had gone through. If there are those who did not know, for us we knew we could not, therefore, agree to a reckless, unrefined form of so-called politicking. We brought our people together first to stop fearing each other and when the time came, we have now gone for the multi-party system and the multi-party system will work very well here. 

A number of political parties competed for political power through the presentation of their respective political manifestos as opposed to the previous concept of individual merit. The people of Uganda overwhelmingly gave their mandate to the National Resistance Movement to lead them in this phase. 

Mr Speaker, those who are conscious and take trouble to reflect on the history of our country, will agree with me that given the situation we inherited when the National Resistance Movement took power in 1986, as a country we have come a long way. With the support of the people, the National Resistance Movement Government has systematically and steadily created the peaceful environment that has enabled us to score successes, which we are proud of as a country. 

If this was not the case, the numerous anti-Government and mostly mendacious statements that are made on a daily basis in the print media and through the FM radios by both individuals and groups would not have been possible. The abuses, which are heaped daily on me and on the NRM are themselves the proof of transformation. One young person sometime ago in the newspapers said that freedom is like oxygen; it is so abundant that people take it for granted. However, when you behave so recklessly and you abuse it, the consequences to you can be very disastrous if you put yourself in a situation where you do not have oxygen, then you will know how important oxygen is.

Mr Speaker, on 02 June 2006 the new Cabinet was sworn in at an occasion to which both you and the Chief Justice were witnesses. The three arms of Government are, therefore, now effectively in place. 

With those introductory remarks, I now address myself specifically to the following areas regarding the state of the nation in 2006. 

On 28 July 2005, through a referendum, Uganda’s political dispensation changed from the all inclusive, all embracing Movement System based on individual merit, to the Multi-party System. I remember some people were saying that we should simply change this system without going through a referendum. We refused; we would not do that. That would have been sacrilege. In Runyankore, what they call sacrilege in the Catholic Church - they translated it as “sacrilego”. Although they had a Runyankore word, I do not know why they did not use it. We could not engage in “sacrilego” to change the Movement System without the people themselves changing it. That would have been a sacrilege. We cannot do it. 

To whom does the country belong? The country does not belong to Parliament; it does not belong to any small group of people; it belongs to all the people. After Ugandans had voted for the Multi-party System with our encouragement - we had to encourage them to do so - they did not want to vote for the Multi-party System but the Movement begged them to vote in the referendum for the Multi-party System because we thought the time was ripe to differentiate the political forces in Uganda. 

After the people listened to us in that referendum and voted “yes”, political parties registered themselves and went out to seek the people’s mandate through the presentation of their respective manifestos. However, it had not been envisaged that a sizeable number of individuals would stand on their own as independents. While some people argue that it is a constitutional right for anybody to stand for elections, others stressed that for one to stand as an independent, especially after losing in the primaries of his or her party, is indiscipline which would even undermine multi-party democracy. Since the phenomenon of independent candidates under the new political dispensation in our country is new, we need to identify the challenges it causes and address those challenges. 

It may also be useful to identify reasons why there was a sizeable number of persons standing as independents in the first place. If there are genuine reasons, which draw persons from their parties to go and stand as independent candidates, then those reasons should be addressed for the good of the political pluralism, which we are trying to nurture now. 

In other words, while there may be no serious problem with individual merit under the Movement System, under the Multi-party System, it would be good to respect and adhere to the provisions of the party constitution. At the same time the political parties must also be very democratic within themselves. They must expunge manipulation, use of money and other forms of unfairness so that their results are respected. That is why in the case of the Movement, I pushed and I am glad the Movement accepted to treat the independents leniently. (Applause) Because I was not convinced either that the independents were entirely wrong and I could also see that the Movement had also its own weaknesses, which it must cure before it becomes harsh on the people who did not agree entirely with the outcome of the primaries. (Applause)

Now that the arms of Government are all in place, it is time for all of us to settle down and work for the good of our country. It is not useful to continue operating as if we are going for another election tomorrow or next week. I do not know why people do not learn from God. God, according to the book of Genesis, created the world and beings therein and things therein in six days and then on Sunday He declared a holiday for Himself. God arranged for a holiday every week and now some people think that we should have no holiday from politics; we should be in politicking for five years? That is not possible. So, I would advise the people of Uganda who are listening to me, if the politicians do not send themselves on holiday, you ignore them and listen to God because God arranged it that work is for six days and resting is on Sunday. 

Some people say, “No holiday for politics”. That is against the law of God. So, the people of Uganda should ignore those who waste their time all the time politicking. In the book of Ecclesiastes, it says that there is time for everything: time for crying, time for laughing, time for dancing and all those. 

Our people need unity and good leadership to help them realise the economic and social aspirations. If we continue to try and divide and manipulate them for selfish interests, history will judge us harshly. Of course the Movement will not accept it. We shall always struggle against such tendencies politically also because we know how to do it. 

Mr Speaker, I am happy that Parliament has already considered the status and entitlements of the Leader of the Opposition. (Applause)  Now that the country is under the Multi-party System, the legally placed opposition shall maintain a healthy balance in our politics. We shall welcome constructive and principled criticism from them. 

As we transited from the Movement politics to Multi-partism, arrangements were made to wind up the Movement Secretariat. Currently, there is only skeleton staff to ensure that the exercise is concluded smoothly and according to the law. Nevertheless, the government decided to retain the National Leadership Institute at Kyankwanzi. This was a good decision because in addition to training leaders at various levels, it can also be used to operationalise the provisions of Article 17, clause 2 of the Constitution. 

The institute will be appropriately restructured and in due course a decision will be taken on a particular ministry under which it would fall. I am happy to note that the opposition is beginning to realise the usefulness and importance of this institution. Recently the publicity secretary of one of the opposition parties was quoted in the media as saying that her party was going to apply for the youth to be trained at that institute. The institute will welcome these trainees. 

Constitutionalism and the rule of law:

The Movement Government will continue to adhere to this. Before I leave this question of training, it was interesting for me to notice that many of the people who are active in the opposition were cadres who had been trained by the Movement initially. I do not know what that one proves. It proves that we are right to train cadres and if they do not learn from that, these political groups should not grow. You cannot have a religion without priests. Each religion must have different levels of priests; the archbishop, the bishop and the priest. If one thinks that politics is like influenza, that you can just catch it - you must know what you are talking about. Politics is the science of managing society. You need to learn it just like you learn Medicine. 

The Movement Government will continue to adhere to the constitutional order and the rule of law. This explains why when we agreed to open up the political space, the transition from the Movement System to the Multi-party System was handled according to the provisions of the Constitution and other attendant laws, instead of taking shortcuts here and there as it was being advocated for by some individuals and groups, especially those who were saying that they were from the opposition. 

The justification advanced by those who were saying that we should take some shortcuts was that some shillings would be saved and applied to some social programmes for the benefit of the people. What they forgot or did not appreciate is the fact that democracy is expensive and it is better to nurture our young democracy to maturity instead of spending what could allegedly be saved to other programmes at the risk of undermining democracy and plunging the country into anarchy in the not too distant future.

The NRM Government will continue to adhere to constitutionalism and the rule of law in the management of all the public affairs. I urge you honourable members to fully support this noble cause as you represent the people. We must recommit ourselves to building democracy for both the present and the future generations and be prepared to meet the moderate sacrifices for this noble cause. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, the Sempebwa Commission on the review of the operation of the 1995 Constitution came out with a number of recommendations, which were carefully considered by Government that subsequently submitted a well considered Bill to Parliament for necessary debate and action. As it may be recalled, given the time constraint then, the Seventh Parliament decided to handle the proposed constitutional amendments that had a direct bearing on the management of the transition and leave the rest to the Eighth Parliament. The hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs who is also the Attorney-General will look at the proposed constitutional amendments that were deferred and have them presented to the Eighth Parliament for debate at an appropriate time. 

The challenge to all of us in the different positions of leadership is to mobilise the population and make them conscious of the need to cherish and adhere to constitutionalism and the rule of law at all times. Although Government may take lead in this endeavour to sensitise our people about the need to adhere to the rule of law and constitutionalism at the various levels of our society, it is incumbent on each leader to make a personal contribution to educate the people about democracy and the rule of law.    

The NRM takes serious exception to those who engage in extra constitutional activities. I have told you in the past that since we came to power, we have executed 23 soldiers for killing people and 123 are under sentence of death, although it has not been carried out. This is because we do not accept anybody to behave outside the Constitution. If you do not do that, you will never have peace.

Security is a major pillar to our continued stability as well as a conducive environment for the development of our country. As I have stated at different fora in the recent past, I would like to reiterate that mistakes of the past, which tended to compromise the security of our country, will not be repeated. We shall never under-spend on defence. Never! It was a mistake, it will never be repeated. Consequently, although we may exchange experience with our development partners, we shall not accept a line we know will be fatal for our country. 

The insecurity in the northern part of our country as a result of the insurgency by the Kony group remains a concern to all peace loving Ugandans. This is because apart from the unjustified killings by the terrorists, people who were displaced from their homes cannot participate effectively in the various programmes put in place for their economic and social development. It is a fact that sizeable sums of money have been put into programmes for the North but the terrorism has negatively impacted on those programmes. 

If you go to the North, I always hear people claiming that the North is neglected; many of those people who talk about the North do not know it because they do not even go there. I know all the parts of Uganda like the back of my hand, there are so many schools in Acholi and Lango, brand new schools, which for the past number of years have been abandoned in the bush; brand new schools not being used. Balijobi - there is a school called Balijobi, which is brand new but abandoned in the bush - in Okwang. There are many schools. So, the problem in the North has not been development programmes but it has been terrorism, which stops the use of the brand new institutions that the Movement has built.  

Equally important, resources spent on the necessary military operations to dislodge the rebels means that cuts must be made for other programmes. All this is a sacrifice for the good of our country. It is, therefore, an insult to hear some leaders assert that it is Government’s policy to keep the conflict going because it is benefiting from it. I am sure you have heard such statements. Of course if we had time I would give you the history of this. Those making such statements should come out openly and demonstrate for everybody to see how Government is benefiting from the conflict in the North. 

The conflict in the North was imposed on us by the criminal elements linked to the past history of Uganda and the Sudan Government, which had certain ambitions in the region. We firmly stood against both; our firm stand has finally produced positive results. On the one hand a balanced peace has been arrived at within Sudan, and on the other, Kony terrorists have been defeated. That is why they have fled to Garamba National Park in Congo. 

For nine months we have been asking the government of Congo and the United Nations Forces in Congo to either take action against them or allow us to do so. The Congo Government and the United Nations are now solely responsible for the preservation of the remnants of Kony elements in Congo. Recently I was approached by His Excellency Salva Kiir, Vice-President of Sudan and President of Southern Sudan with a proposal for the renewal of talks with the Kony terrorists who are now hiding in Garamba National Park. Although their ringleaders are indicted by the International Criminal Court, and our view is that these criminals should be hunted to the bitter end in order to provide a lesson for the people who may be inclined to behave in a similar way in future. I agreed with His Excellency Salva Kiir’s proposal for two reasons, which I am going to mention hereunder:

First of all, it is clear that we have no reliable partners, as far as fighting terrorism is concerned, in the Democratic Republic of Congo Government and the United Nations who are now in charge of Eastern Congo; those two parties are not serious. The UN always excels in superficiality, their protestation to the contrary notwithstanding. If you want superficiality the best place to go is the United Nations.

Secondly, the UPDF has defeated Kony in both Northern Uganda and Southern Sudan. Kony did not go to Garamba for tourism - he has not become a tourist all of a sudden - we defeated Kony. Kony is now in the part of Congo that has no borders with Uganda. We are making contingent plans to react vigorously in case Kony comes to the part of Congo that has got a border with Uganda such as Obonkoro opposite West Nile or Kpandroma, opposite Nebbi. If Kony comes to that part of Congo, I would really expect the Congo Government and the United Nations to deal with him promptly. If they do not, I will come to this Parliament and we decide what to do -(Applause)- but we are ready for that. 

I hope the United Nations and the Congo Government will not allow Kony to come to Obonkoro, Kpandroma, to come to those parts of Congo, which have got a border with Uganda, I hope not. I am saying this today in broad daylight; it is not night. I hope Kony will not be allowed by the Congo Government and the UN Forces to come to any part of Congo. If they want to host him as their guest in Garamba National Park - he is after all eating their animals - but for him to come to Obonkoro or Kpandroma or to these parts opposite Nebbi and threaten our peaceful population of Western Nile; that will be pushing their luck too far.

Under international law we are ready to defend our sovereignty if that happens. As of now, however, where Kony is located is more a problem of Southern Sudan and Congo than ours. Our forces are in Southern Sudan just to help our brothers the SPLA but Kony as of now is not our problem. The remnants who are here, even yesterday we killed seven in Latanya hills. We are finishing those and others are coming out. Kony himself is now the problem of Congo, the United Nations and Southern Sudan because he is not threatening our population anymore. That is why we are sending people home. The remnants, which are still there, we are picking them. Even today we were hunting the group of Lasco Lukwiya near Juba–Tolit road, and I am sure we shall get that group, which was trying to join Kony in Congo.  

Some people were asking hon. Mbabazi Amama and hon. Kutesa Sam, they were saying, “Has Museveni become a softie? Why is it that he is willing to talk with Kony again?” Even my allies, the International Criminal Court, were doubting my credentials; they thought that I had become a softie. My answer is this, it is here, I am now answering those people: it is rational that since Kony now is not in Northern Uganda, he is not in the part of Southern Sudan where we were allowed to operate, he is in Congo, which is under the control of the United Nations and the Congo Government who are not allowing us to go there and he is in the part of Congo, which has no border with Uganda, it is rational that we follow the leadership of the government of Southern Sudan, they should be the ones to lead us. If they say we negotiate, we negotiate because it is their problem now, it is not ours. 

I, therefore, agreed with His Excellency, Salva Kiir that he goes ahead and supports new talks with Kony as long as they are time bound, that is, with a given and limited timeframe. It should not go on and on, and His Excellency, Salva Kiir, agreed to this. So, here I am answering those who have been asking what has happened to Museveni, “Has be become a softie?” No, I am not a softie but I am dealing with the issues of our region and the main problem is the United Nations and the Congo Government. So we do not want to put our brothers and sisters – because these criminals when we attack them they flee from Southern Sudan, they flee to Garamba National Park and we are not allowed to go there, then they come back at night. We cannot be everywhere in Southern Sudan. We cannot be in Yei then from Yei we go to Meridi, then from Meridi we go to Yambyo, we cannot do that. The Southern Sudan Government is busy with their own settling in. So, the main problem is the United Nations and the Congo Government and that is why I agreed with His Excellency, Salva Kiir that since we have no reliable partners in the Congo Government and in the United Nations then let us listen to the leadership of Southern Sudan Government.

The NRM Government will continue to welcome those who are willing to take advantage of the Amnesty Act and give up rebellion and join other Ugandans in the rebuilding of that part of our country. So those who are not willing to come out peacefully, my message is that the government will continue to pursue them using all the means at its disposal, if they dare to re-enter Uganda again. We are under duty to defend the people and their property. This is a duty from which we cannot abdicate.  

I can, however, reassure Ugandans that the UPDF posses now the capacity to promptly destroy any terrorist group that dares to enter Ugandan territory. If we had this capacity in 2002 when the Konys re-entered Uganda following Operation Iron Fist we would have destroyed them promptly and our people would not have suffered. There has been a small gap in the surveillance capacity, which we shall close this coming financial year. The UPDF will have an all weather capacity to guard our sovereignty and peace, and do so quickly. Therefore, those days of turning Uganda into a field of adventurers and lawless elements are finished. We should settle down and just blow our voices and speak, loka, loka as we say in Acholi. That is what we should do: talk, talk, but any game to use guns illegally is finished. We made a mistake in the past; we listened to wrong advice. It will never happen again.  

The same goes for the Karimojong cattle rustlers, those thieves of cattle we are now dealing with them. Actually that is a simple problem. It is not all that difficult to deal with and we are dealing with it. The Karimojong will bring the guns and they are bringing them and they have no capacity to resist the disarmament. Anybody who tries it will have created his own problem. We are already court martialling those whom we catch. I saw the other day in the papers that 86 had been court-martialed so the other court-martial law is very useful. We are not going to give up that law. If any civilian voluntarily picks up a gun, which is reserved for the Army then you are a voluntary soldier, so you qualify for court-martial and it is helping us with the Karimojong. Those Karimojong when you catch them, court-martial. You do not have to shoot him but he goes to jail straight in Moroto. Because civilian justice was not working in Karamoja, that is why there was impunity. Impunity is very dangerous. I do not know why some people argue for impunity!  

Mr Speaker, at the end of last year we embarked on an exercise to assist our brothers and sisters living in the internally displaced peoples’ camps to return to their villages. While in some cases people have really returned to their homes, in others areas we have so far managed a decongestion of those camps, which can be described as transit places for the eventual return to the villages. I must, however, express my disappointment that while the people directly affected have been eager to return to their villages, some of those who are supposed to be their leaders have openly de-campaigned the exercise yet is it the same leaders who all along have vehemently talked against the existence of those camps. When Kony was killing people, we advised people to go to the IDP camps because Kony was targeting - any civilian he saw he killed. We advised people, “Please, instead of dying, go to the trading centers, which were turned into IDP camps so that you save your life.”

When Amin was killing people here, my wife and I fled to Tanzania. Fleeing is common sense. If there is a killer, how can you tell people, “You stay and be killed”? I fled! I was not internally displaced; I was externally displaced. I was an EDP; I am here, you see me now. Because we had killers, somebody kills you, what do you do now? Your friend will say, “Please, run away.”  That is what we told the people in the North. These killers would come to a village like – there is that village there -(Interjections)- Atiak, yes, but there is another one in –(Interjections)- Mucwin, yes, something like 40 people were killed in the other one - Barlonyo. So what advice would you give? Of course the Army could not be everywhere. That is why we said that, “Since we could not be everywhere and these people are not targeting soldiers, they are targeting civilians, you go to where we can protect you,” and these are the IDP camps. Some people did not want that. We wanted the people to be in the IDP camps so that we could get time to defeat the insurgency and also fight Sudan, because these were being sponsored by Sudan, by another country.

We told the people, “Since these people have turned your area into a battleground, you go from the village to the IDP camps so that we can fight Sudan and these agents of Sudan.” But other people were opposing that. So it was the same as telling me that I should not run to Tanzania, I should stay here and be killed! But when I was in Tanzania I even got married -(Laughter)- because when I ran away I was not married but while I was an EDP I got married. I not only got married but also had children. By the time I came back - there was a disruption in my life but I was not stagnant; I was moving. So, how could anybody oppose the IDP camps given the type of situation we were dealing with? 

And having opposed them in the past, now that we have defeated the cause of the IDP camps, we are saying, “Let people go home now.” And the same people are saying, “No, do not go home.” So we know what the problem was and I do not want to say it because this is a celebration.

Nevertheless, the government will not be discouraged but will ensure that the return of the people to their villages is carried out as smoothly as possible with the necessary security provisions in the villages they are returning to. Honourable members should give us all the support. I would like to warn those handling the exercise not to misappropriate the items, which are supposed to be for the people as they return to their villages. (Applause) Anybody caught doing so will be dealt with sternly -(Laughter)  

The NRM will not only assist the people of Northern Uganda to go back to their home villages but shall also help them to build permanent houses. (Applause) During the campaigns I told the people that we would help them because when I went to the North there was “luum” everywhere - these people do not know our language. You know when I speak in our language these MPs do not understand. “Luum” means grass; it is Acholi. You go everywhere and there is “luum”, even in areas like Nebbi, which are peaceful, the people are still staying in “luum”.

The other time when I went to Paidha some years ago there was an outbreak of the Bubonic Plague. Can you imagine! The Bubonic Plague is a disease, which was in Europe in 1500 and here in 2000 or 1999 - I do not remember when it was when I went to Paidha - I found there was the Bubonic Plague. What causes the Bubonic Plague is a flea, which is found on rats. So I said, “What is the problem here?”  They said, “Because people are still staying in grass thatched huts and grass harbors rats”. So I want to finish these grass thatched houses in the North. (Applause)

You remember one of our big supporters, one of the big Movement supporters, the hon. Ben Etonu, told me why he joined the Movement bus. This was because his primary school where he studied was grass thatched when he was a student. Later on he worked in the general service unit under the first Government of the late Obote and that school was still grass thatched. During Amin’s time it remained grass thatched. When he joined Obote II and he was a minister the school remained grass thatched - and he was the Minister for Housing -(Laughter) But when the Movement came it built Mr Etonu’s primary school with permanent materials, with bricks and cement and a mabaati roof. That is why the hon. Ben Etonu jumped on the bus and he said, “I will never leave. Why should I leave?” 

Now that we have dealt with the schools and the health centers in the North, we must also deal with the houses. The mabaati I promised them have already arrived in the area. With the new Minister for the North we shall draw up plans to give out these mabaati. (Applause) Any official who diverts those mabaati for any other purpose will go to jail. 

I have heard that some people want to kill this project in Teso –(Interjection)- we shall find out - I heard that some people who wanted to kill this project were suggesting that they give each family one baati for making the door -(Laughter)- these people are really criminally minded, I will not accept that. We shall work out the plans. These mabaati must be given to the one who has already gone back home and maybe we should put some conditions in place. Maybe they should make bricks or something like that and put up the walls and then – we shall work out the details. Meanwhile all the mabaati, as I instructed, should be stored by the RDC. If anybody has given them out, Luzira is waiting for him.  

The post-conflict programme for the rehabilitation of the North is nearing completion. Since we held the general elections in February there are individuals who have been issuing statements in different fora, painting a picture as if there is a state of war in Uganda. As I have always done, I would like to advise that we should play principled politics instead of issuing statements, which cause anxiety and panic in the minds of the people. I call upon everybody never to indulge in anything that may compromise the security of our country. 

What is important is that finally we have built the capacity for stability and that is the Army, because the governments in the past did not have enough time to build a reliable army and although some people are not happy that this Government has stayed around for some years, actually it is very good for the country. One of the benefits is building an army at last, because we have never had time before. Whatever problems the other governments had, one of them is that they never had time to build an army, and the British had not built an army. They left one battalion here of the Uganda Rifles - that is what they were called – imagine one battalion for a country! The First Battalion KAR here in Jinja. How could they manage? 

If we had an army – some countries like Nigeria have had dictatorships and so on, but the country never collapses completely. You can have a dictatorship – Abacha and so on – and you lock up people and so on, but the country remains. But in the case of Uganda, total collapse! Why? Because there was no army and no time to build it. Finally we have built an army and we can be sure that all these games, which have been going on, will never happen again. (Applause)

I am going on to the economy now. When I last presented the State of the Nation Address, our economy was doing quite well. However, the energy challenge we are facing now is likely to put some check to the country’s economic growth this year and the next. As I have stated in different fora, the energy crisis we are facing is the result of some mistakes that were made by the Sixth Parliament and also the external actors. It was further compounded by the unprecedented prolonged drought, which struck the East and Southern regions of Africa. Our three countries will take some time to recover from the effects of that drought on our hydroelectric supplies. 

The Government has already taken measures to increase our energy supplies using machines powered by diesel. This is a costly alternative; the long-term solution lies in the construction of both Bujagali and Karuma stations in the next 44 months or so. I had predicted 42 months but the people who are building Bujagali have requested for an extra two months to study the designs because we are the ones who designed that dam. So they have requested for an extra two months to study the designs and I have no problem with that because that is reasonable. You cannot tell them to build without studying the designs thoroughly, so that one is reasonable as far as I am concerned. But the two dams will be built and you will hear in the next budget the question of building dams will be directly under our control. 

We have met in the Cabinet, we even had a retreat, and we are never going to make this mistake again: having a shortage of power. How do you build a modern society without power? We are listening to this and that, Uganda becomes everybody’s business. What is amazing, recently Gen. Obasanjo passed here, some people thought that he had come here for some advice on -(Laughter)- but he told me something amazing. By the time he came to power, which was about seven years ago, Nigeria, a country of 130 million people, was generating 1,000 megawatts of electricity. A much smaller country like United Kingdom generates 55,000 megawatts. A small country like Norway with 3,000,000 people, generates 26,000 megawatts.  Okay, it is true that they use half of their power to warm themselves because they are always freezing. I hear they use about 50 per cent of that for warming themselves during winter. Even if you discount that, even if you remove 13,000 megawatts for keeping themselves warm in winter, they will still have 13,000 megawatts. 

How can a country like Nigeria live on 1,000 mega watts and here we try to build the dam and somebody interferes with us, with all sorts of funny arguments? At that time I was forced to keep quiet because we had so many challenges. We could not fight so many wars. But this must end. Uganda shall have all the power we need. (Applause) Anybody who is a friend of Uganda should not even whisper, let alone say that we should delay building of dams. No way! We are going to build dams. If there is any problem with the private sector, we shall build them ourselves. After all, what is the problem of having surplus capacity? If it is surplus capacity, we close the turbines. What is the problem?  

Dr Kwame Nkrumah in 1961 built Akosombo dam, with a capacity of 900 megawatts and the Western countries attacked him. They said he was squandering Ghana money; he was building white elephants. But now it is that Akosombo Dam, 40 years afterwards, that has helped Ghana to recover, because the power was there. So that is how Ghana has recovered.

The Portuguese in their madness wanted to settle one million Portuguese in Mozambique. When FRELIMO started their war of liberation, the Portuguese conceived of an idea to settle one million Portuguese in the Zambezi Valley. In order to do that, they built the big Kaborabossa dam. Kaborabossa dam generates about 1,200 mega watts, I hear. Of course the Portuguese never came because FRELIMO defeated them. They defeated not only the ones who were supposed to come but even the ones who were there. So the power remained unused for a long time because Mozambique was in a war. As soon as peace was restored, Mozambique’s economy is now growing at a very fast rate. Why? It is because there is already power, which was not used for almost 30 years, but it was there. Here we are talking of 300 megawatts and that is a big issue; 300 megawatts! Uganda has 28 million people and we are talking of 300 megawatts, and we go on years, years debating just 300 megawatts. This is not acceptable. I do not want to be part of that circus.  

I did not know that actors in the West were treated as very important people, until in 1962, when I acted in a play entitled, “Murder in the Cathedral” by T.S. Eliot. Our English teacher, Mr Reeves, was very excited. He was laughing, and he said, “You are a good actor”. I thought he was insulting me because I thought an actor was somebody who had nothing else useful to do.  Now I do not want to be in the circus to act. This is a circus- to talk of 300 megawatts for Uganda, a country like this one and we go on and on; this should stop.  

Some tax relief has also been given to those dealing with solar equipment, as well as those importing generators for industrial use. Details of the measures we have taken so far and what we intend to do are elaborated in the Budget Speech 2006/2007, which will be delivered next week. I implore all leaders to mobilise our people to embrace and use the energy saving devices which are being promoted currently. Although we shall continue to welcome assistance from our development partners, we have resolved to guard, jealously, our sovereignty over decision-making. As you can see, reneging on this can be very costly for the country.  

The NRM slogan that was used to seek the people’s mandate, “Prosperity for All (Bonna bagaggawale)” will not be realised unless our people are helped to access reasonable micro-finance, identify and grow crops of high value to which value addition must be made, and get national, regional and international markets for all that is produced.  

During the Cabinet retreat, we talked about this issue of getting rid of poverty from the countryside. It is part of our priorities to ensure that the 67 percent of the homesteads, which are still in subsistence farming come out and engage in production for money in addition to production for food; and they must do so by relying on economically viable crops and other farming or fishing activities.  

The Social Sector-Labour :

In the formal sector, one of the major outstanding issues was the out-dated labour legislations, which were undermining the harmonious industrial peace, which is crucial for stable increased production of goods and services. Mr Speaker and honourable Members, the following labour legislations were debated and passed by the seventh Parliament: the Employment Act, the Labour Unions Act, the Labour Disputes, Arbitration and Settlement Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act. (Applause)

Now that the long awaited legal framework has been fixed, I expect to strengthen industrial harmony in work places for improved productivity for the prosperity of our country. (Applause) Trade Unions and Employers should work together to strengthen industrial peace and harmony in all work places. Safety at all work places must be given the due attention it deserves.
 
Education:

Government within the available resources continues to provide allocations in the budget for improvement of the infrastructure for Universal Primary Education (UPE). Government’s undertaking to have primary school teachers in Government aided schools paid Ugshs 200,000 per month is still on track. Government’s plan to embark on the Universal Secondary Education without over stretching the budget has been finalised. I appeal to all leaders at various levels to support this effort instead of criticising it as a non-starter. 

During the campaigns I used some words, which some people did not like. But the reason I did so was because some of the people who speak violate African customs so fundamentally that I must say something about them.  When a child is beginning to walk, he walks and falls down; he walks and falls down. In Luganda here, we say, “tengerera,” to encourage the child to continue walking. I have never seen an African who says. “Aah, this child will never walk because he has fallen down the first time he has tried to walk.” Now, that is why during the campaigns, I described those who do so - I used a certain word, which I do not want to repeat here –(Laughter)- because I do not want the Speaker to rule me out of order that I am using non-parliamentary language.UPE has worked, USE will work -(Applause)- the Movement will liberate the people of Uganda through UPE and through USE. 

Our emphasis on the teaching of the science subjects is a good strategy, which should be supported because it is aimed at helping our country to move away from a pre-industrial society at a much faster pace. 

You remember this one was also attacked. “How can you start a science bias in universities when you do not have laboratories?” They asked. Now, it is working; the enrolment in universities now is 53 percent science and 47 percent Arts. We are ‘there’ already in a short time, defeating the false arguments about laboratories. “How can you promote the teaching of science in the universities when there are no laboratories - the problem is not laboratories, it is teachers; because even if you have a laboratory when you do not have a teacher, who will teach there? By starting at the university level to bias towards sciences, we are solving the first problem, which is to make the teachers available so that when the laboratories are built there is somebody to teach, to use those laboratories. We were again correct. NRM is always getting a first –(Applause)- I really enjoy this and especially when you are in a free atmosphere like this and you speak and what you say is captured on tape. 

Now, you must be careful about what you say because when you say something, which is wrong, you condemn yourself because what you have said will be used against you. I really enjoy this situation. In the past we had controversies but they were always hidden there when we were still fighting and saying, “Who would know what you have said”. But here it is good; everybody is accountable for what he says. So, I stand for UPE, for USE, for science-biased education and I am saying it here on tape; it is being recorded in the Hansard. That is even better.  

The health sector:

In the health sector, Government has continued to focus on primary healthcare and the fight against malaria. A protracted debate has been going on over the use of DDT to spray the mosquitoes; the environmental assessment studied by our experts on the use of DDT has been completed. Government is to study the findings carefully and take an appropriate decision. This study has been made under the leadership of Dr Bimenya- It is very interesting, but we shall talk about it when the time comes. 

Government has continued to support the not- for- profit hospitals because they supplement Government efforts to deliver good health services to the population. These are hospitals like Morulem and others, which were about to close because the donors outside were no longer sending the money, but I told the government to assist those hospitals because they are helping our people, although they are private hospitals. 

Given the vulnerability of most of our people and the difficulties they face when it comes to various forms of treatment, Government through the Ministry of Health is working on the introduction of a health insurance scheme. The technical studies are complete and are awaiting Cabinet discussion.  Through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Government is already working on a broader policy on social protection.

Corruption:

This is an evil, which must be fought by all of us because it can undermine a lot of our development programmes. I must stress that Government does not encourage corruption as some people have tried to insinuate in the newspapers. It is also unfair to say that the NRM Government lacks the political will to fight corruption. It is worth noting the following: We have never lacked political will; what has been lacking has been actually technical capacity to investigate and catch the culprits. I know what I am talking about - what has been lacking is technical capacity to investigate conclusively and present a file to the DPP to prosecute. That is what has been the problem and not political will. If you think politically, there is nothing we cannot handle if there is a case; but you cannot just look at somebody and say, “You look corrupt.”  

It is worth noting the following: 

i) Our stand on the elimination of corruption and misuse of office is well-documented in the Movement 15 point programme.

ii) 	The Inspectorate of Government, which is a brainchild of the National Resistance Movement, has been given more powers to prosecute its own cases to their logical conclusions. We have legislated through the previous Parliament that the IGG can prosecute. She does not have to go through the DPP. 

iii) 	Within the limited resources available, Government has supported and will continue to support the institutions that are directly involved in the fight against corruption, namely, Inspectorate of Government, Office of the Auditor General, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Courts and the Directorate of Criminal Investigation.

iv) 	The Anti Corruption Agencies Forum coordinated by the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity continues to lay good strategies in the fight against corruption. 

v) 	Whenever the Public Accounts Committee made recommendations, having gone through various commissions of inquiries, there is evidence to show that the government has taken action on all these reports. What Government has not done is to sensationalise those actions because we are not theatre actors seeking publicity. 

	The DPP is the one who always has the last word on any commission of inquiry report. In fact, I have checked those reports myself, especially those, which involved Saleh. Before I appointed him a minister, I asked for all the three files on Saleh. There were three fat files with CID. With my own eyes, with my spectacles, I read the DPP’s comments. That is why Saleh was not – otherwise if there was a case to answer, he would have gone to jail- (Laughter)- On this floor, I invite the Rt hon. Leader of Opposition to come and study these files. I will give him copies of these files -(Applause)- so that I christianise the Opposition from the scepticism. (Laughter) I had to read those files on Saleh myself. This is because they keep talking about Saleh; he is a brother of Museveni. 

	Therefore in order to guide the debate on the commissions of inquiry, the proper person to talk to is the DPP. He is the one who could say, “There is evidence here to prosecute or there is none.” That became the end of the story -(Interjection)- I will give you copies of these files on Saleh. I want to use the one of Saleh as a test case. 

vi)	The NRM Manifesto of 2006 clearly outlines strategies for a continued fight against corruption. In the war against corruption, Government will soon bring to Parliament a Bill to repeal the outdated 1970 Anti-Corruption Act and have a new one enacted with stiff punishments for those who will be found guilty of corruption. (Applause) 

	Government is also coming up with a Bill to be enacted into law for the protection of whistle blowers -(Applause)- In order to strengthen accountability in local governments, the appointment and disciple of Chief Administrative Officers, their deputies and town clerks has been brought back to the centre through an amendment to the Constitution. (Applause) 

	The challenge I would like to put to all of us leaders at the different levels is to mobilise the entire population and sensitise them about the dangers and evils of corruption. We should help them to build the courage and confidence to report those whom they believe to be engaged in acts of corruption.

	The media has a significant role to play by not only exposing the culprits, but also educating the masses about the evils of corruption. In my view, this would be a better contribution than concentrating on speculative reporting, like it was done all the time before the cabinet was announced last week. You know these newspapers are funny. We have got shortage of paper, which I thought they should be economising. They really waste a lot of paper speculating, just writing fiction. 

	The press should do a better job, using the law on access to information. The struggle against corruption may be long and arduous, but at the end of it all, the fruits will be good for our country.

Regional Cooperation:

Uganda is fully committed to living in peace with our neighbours on all sides. For the East African Community, that is Kenya and Tanzania, I have appointed a minister to be in charge of the affairs of East Africa. (Applause)

Recently, the authority of the community also appointed Ms Beatrice Kiraso to be in charge of the fast tracking of the East African Federation -(Applause)- While Ambassador Julius Oneni who until recently was our Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, was appointed Deputy Secretary General of the East African Community for Finance and Administration. (Applause) The appointment of a minister for East African Community Affairs will help to streamline the handling of matters relating to the customs union as well as the political federation of our three countries. 

We shall also continue to play an active role in ensuring that there is total peace in the Great Lakes Region to which we are part. We need to cooperate fully to make the region secure for everybody. The NRM Government is committed to having any differences that may crop up in the region settled amicably through peaceful means. We shall intensify our engagement with the government of Kenya and the government of Southern Sudan to put an end the menace of cross border raids by cattle rustlers. The Topotha of Sudan, the Didinga, the Turkana, the Pokot of Kenya, the Karimojong and even my peaceful people, the Sabiny were also beginning to learn the bad habit.  I am told they went and stole some Friesian cows, which later died.  Everybody was becoming a cattle thief.  However, we are working with Kenya and Southern Sudan to see that this stops.

The Public Service:

Recently, my attention was drawn to a newspaper report that a list of some permanent secretaries had been drawn up for removal from the Service, allegedly because they support the opposition.  Although I totally agree that under a multiparty system all those who opt to remain working in the Public Service be politically neutral and serve the government of the day, I am not aware of any list that has been drawn up.  

In any case, Article 173 of the Constitution protects those employed in the Public Service against victimisation, discrimination, removal or dismissal from office when they have performed their duties faithfully in accordance with the Constitution.  Consequently, removal of any public officer must follow the law and regulations in place.  Let me also add that if any cadre is identified for recruitment into any public office, the laid down procedures must be followed.

Pensions:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the question of pensions became an issue during the campaigns and even after the elections some individuals have continued to misrepresent the situation.  I would like to take this opportunity to correct the record and to request all of you to explain the position to your constituents.  Whereas it is true that there are pension arrears to be cleared, it is not true that Government has ever stopped paying pensions. On the contrary, positive decisions by Government resulted into the creation of pension arrears as follows:

i) Following the currency reforms of the late 1980s, pensions became so small that in many cases the beneficiaries stopped collecting their cheques.  In order to alleviate this pathetic situation, Government on its own in 1994, decided to revise all the pension payments to make them more meaningful.  The only mistake made if at all it may be called a mistake, was that the revision was backdated to 1988, instead of making it effective from 1994.  This positive gesture created arrears of Ugshs 110 billion.  That was one of the reasons, because we wanted to help our people.

ii) 	For many years, local governments defaulted on their obligation to pay pensions to their employees.  When the pressure on them became unbearable, they appealed to the Central Government to rescue them.  The Central Government accepted to take up the burden, which brought in a liability of Ugshs 17.5 billion.

iii) 	When the East African Community collapsed in 1977, no Uganda Government ever took up the responsibility to pay pensions to Ugandans who were formerly employees of the Community.  It is only the National Resistance Movement Government, which picked up this matter and started addressing it in 1992.  So far, 9,283 beneficiaries have received a total payment of Ugshs 69.4 billion.

iv) 	Two years ago, Government decided to transfer the UPDF Pensions functions from the Ministry of Defence to that of Public Service.  This added another Ugshs 127 billion to the arrears already in the Ministry of Public Service as indicated above.  The arrears from Defence comprise Shs 107 billion for retired defence personnel, while Ugshs 20 billion is for defence widows and orphans. 
 
	Government has been paying the arrears, but the pace is quite slow.  We are committed to having those arrears cleared and the challenge we have is to find ways and means through which payment and clearance of those arrears can be expedited.  Studies are also in advance stages to introduce a contributory pension scheme because the present non-contributory scheme is no longer sustainable.

Commendation to the Seventh Parliament:

After my State of the Nation Address on 7 June 2005, the Seventh Parliament continued its work and by the time its lifespan came to an end, it had been able to handle and pass a total of 33 Bills, which were enacted into law. (Applause) Among those bills were the necessary amendments to the Constitution as well as those -(Laughter)- those members who were malicious are imputing some improper motives.  Among those Bills were the necessary amendments to the Constitution as well as those Bills from the Presidential and Parliamentary elections for our transition from Movement system to the multiparty system.  

Since, Mr Speaker and your Deputy presided over all those proceedings, I reiterate my congratulations both to you and to the Seventh Parliament, though retrospectively for work well done. (Applause)
  
Mr Speaker, as we open the Eighth Parliament, we may be having challenges, which we did not have when the Movement system was in place.  Let us build on the success instead of fearing to move forward because of the challenges we may be facing.  Although we have in place the three Arms of Government, Uganda as a country is one and the people we are required to serve are one.  You should build the necessary team spirit for the good of our motherland.  Let our respective roles compliment each other for the good and prosperity for all.  Thank you.  For God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, on behalf of the Eighth Parliament, I sincerely thank you for discharging your constitutional duty under Article 101 by making a State of the Nation Address.  In this address, you have given us a documented account of what you have been able to do since you last addressed us in the Seventh Parliament and given us an insight of what you intend to do in the coming year.  I have no doubt that the Eighth Parliament will collaborate with your Government to ensure positive results and to address those areas that had problems like IDPs in the North and other matters that you have detailed in your address.  

This account, which you have given, will be subjected to scrutiny by the Parliament. It will be subjected to the Committee on Public Accounts of Parliament and audited. You will know the assessment this Parliament will give to this address. 

Your Excellency, before we end, permit me to welcome political leaders for the first time under a multiparty setting on this occasion. We have the President General of the Democratic Party Mr Sebaana Kizito -(Applause)- Maama Miria Obote of the Uganda People’s Congress –(Applause)- and I believe there are other political leaders whom I cannot see. I see the Secretary General of Democratic Party. The Deputy Chief Justice and the Principal Judge are also in attendance. 

Your Excellency, on a number of occasions you have found it convenient to visit Parliament and to work here in Parliament. I am sure you have taken note of its environment. The venue should not be this because this limits even our guests. The ideal venue is the old Parliament, where we have a problem. However, I think I will have an occasion, with your permission, to brief you about the problem we have in that Parliament with 322 members of Parliament. I have no doubt that I will get positive results from you. 

Your Excellency today is a great day in our calendar when the President makes a State of Nation Address and because it is a great day, we prepare a menu for the occasion. We have had the main course, which is your address. This will be followed by other courses, which will not be taken in this venue but in the Parliamentary gardens.

Whereas I am going to adjourn the activities here, the other activities will be adjourned in the Parliamentary gardens. I take this opportunity your Excellency to invite you and the others to continue with our menu until we finish the courses that we had prepared for the occasion.  

With this, again I thank your Excellency and all our guests for coming on a short notice. With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until next week. You will be given the details.

NATIONAL ANTHEM

(The House rose at 4.33 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 June 2006.)





