Thursday, 19 June 2008

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and I thank you for being on time. Yesterday, we agreed that because of the kind of work we have, we have to start a bit earlier than the usual time. We have a lot to do which I would like us to complete because of the programme of next week, which I told you about. There are certain items which are here and other items that may come up. So, that is why we have to start early.

You remember yesterday the Minister of Internal Affairs made a statement and instead of immediately debating it, I wanted you to internalise the statement so that when you come you are prepared or have done research to be able to back up your contributions. So, I am giving this item an hour in which we will debate it. 

I had expected hon. Nabilah to be here because she had indicated to me that she wanted to make a statement and I said that she could use this opportunity to make her statement while debating the statement. But unfortunately, I do not know. I was with her some 20 minutes ago but I do not see her. Anyway, we can start the debate. It is unfortunate that also the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here but, as we are waiting for others to come, I understand the Minister of State for Health has a statement to make, to make certain things clear. Honourable minister, you can make your statement now.

2.05
PERSONAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a statement of personal explanation made under Rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, when yesterday afternoon I reported that the Minister of Health, hon. Stephen Mallinga, had left for Eastern Uganda to assess the situation of the reported Cholera outbreak and he later appeared in the House, I was perceived as a liar. At the time of reporting I did not know that the minister had postponed his departure to this morning. I now wish to confirm that the minister has travelled to the affected districts. When I talked to him today at 10.45 a.m. he was already in Butaleja with hon. Dombo. This statement, I hope, will clear any doubts about my good intentions and our determination as a ministry to serve our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.06
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity. Yesterday, I went to your Office and my motion for the immediate supply and distribution of cotton seeds to our farmers is actually extremely urgent because the planting season ends at the end of this month. So, I would think you would give me opportunity to raise this matter so that we, as Parliament, resolve this urgent matter. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member. You remember yesterday, I had said there was supposed to be a report on cotton policy and other related matters including yours but only this afternoon, the chairperson of the committee which is supposed to make a statement came to me - because I said we are going to use this same opportunity to deal with your matter - to say that the committee is not ready with the report. But having contacted a number of people who are interested in this particular subject matter, I find it is an important and serious matter which has to be considered promptly. 

Now, if possible, I was suggesting that maybe through the Leader of Government Business here, we convene a meeting maybe tomorrow with the stakeholders, including the Ministry of Agriculture, the minister in charge of the Cotton Development Authority and leaders from the cotton-growing areas, that is from Acholi, Lango and Teso and other leaders of these two sides so that we seriously discuss this matter to find a solution, including your concern that the season is about to end. I think this might be a better solution. We can have a motion, yes, but I think sitting with the stakeholders is likely to address your matter promptly and effectively. That is my suggestion. 

So, I am asking the Leader of Government Business to arrange for that meeting; Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Trade, the leaders from the North especially Acholi, Lango and Teso – [Hon. Members: “Kasese”] - and Kasese? [Hon. Members: “West Nile”] And West Nile? Okay. I think we can even call the officials of the Cotton Development Authority to be present in that meeting. That will solve your problem better than the motion. That is in lieu of the fact that the parliamentary committee is not ready which would have covered the issue. 

2.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take your guidance and for the information of the House, Government is aware of the challenges that are facing the cotton sector and has been holding consultative meetings, including with some of the Members of this House. But we shall immediately undertake maybe tomorrow for those who are around Kampala and convene a meeting as guided by you, Mr Speaker.

MR OKOT OGONG: I am most obliged. I agree with that method of work because that is when we are going to have all the stakeholders together and I think that method will actually find an everlasting solution. But I want to appeal to Government that let it be tomorrow not later than that.

THE SPEAKER: I would prefer it tomorrow.

MR OKOT OGONG: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Here in Parliament. What is the convenient time? Is it 10.00a.m. or 11.00a.m.? 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, 11.00 a.m. would be more convenient.

THE SPEAKER: Okay; 11.00 am. So, let the leadership of the various caucuses identify people who will be in that meeting. It will be in the South Committee Room.  

2.11
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I raised a matter to the Minister of Health in regard to spraying DDT, the High Court commercial division having stopped the exercise. I am asking this because there is tension among people in Kanungu. The minister promised to give a response today.  So, I wonder whether he is ready.

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am ready. I have the statement with me. So, with your leave, I will make the statement. 

THE SPEAKER:  Read it.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health received an order from the High Court of Uganda, commercial division referenced as Miscellaneous Cause No.131 of 2008 dated 30 May 2008 in the Matter of an application for Judicial Review for Orders of Certiorari and Prohibition by a number of private organisations in relation to indoor residual spraying using DDT in Northern Uganda.  

The judicial order granted the applicants their request to suspend the spraying of DDT based on allegation that the Ministry of Health did not fulfil all the measures and conditions that are supposed to be in place before applying DDT. 

Following receipt of this order on 2 June 2008, the Minister of Health is pursuing the matter with Solicitor General’s Office. The Ministry of Health had implemented indoor residual spraying programme in compliance with all the conditions set by the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and as required by international regulations such as the Stockholm Convention, the Rotterdam Convention, the United Nations Environmental Protection Agency, and the World Health Organisation guidelines.  

As of May 24 2008, the Ministry of Health had successfully completed implementation of indoor residual spraying using DDT in the districts of Oyam and Apac. This activity covered more than 90 percent of the households in the two districts thereby offering protection against Malaria to the population. 

The Ministry of Health feels that this application to suspend indoor residual spraying activities using DDT is, among other factors, detrimental to the health and well being of the people in Northern Uganda.

The Ministry of Health was preparing to spray Kitgum, Pader, Kanungu, Kabale, and Rukungiri districts in a period running from June to August 2008 using ICON as the ministry evaluates the DDT use in Apac and Oyam. However, due to propaganda spread by the detractors of development that government was targeting to kill people in the North with DDT, the Ministry of Health, in partnership with a funding agency, Presidential Malaria Initiative, has halted the preparations to use ICON in the south west, that is, Kanungu Rukungiri and Kabale, this June. A decision has been taken to use DDT in the three districts beginning August 2008.  

The Ministry of Health had made decision to start indoor residual spraying using DDT in Northern Uganda based on the fact that Malaria is heavily endemic in the region. As I talk, there is an upsurge of Malaria in Lira District. Malaria remains number one cause of death of our people especially in the North. Honourable members may wish to know that Lango and Acholi regions have the highest Malaria prevalence not only in Uganda but in the whole world.  

Let me take this opportunity to thank the Leader of the Opposition who supported the programme of indoor residual spraying. He was joined by others like hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Reagan Okumu, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Lagada, hon. Atim Betty and hon. Professor Anokbonggo. 

I also wish to thank the district local government leaders in all the districts of Acholi and Lango and the people in particular who willingly opened their doors for indoor residual spray. I appeal to all the other political leaders in this House hailing from Acholi and Lango sub regions, who have not joined us yet, to do so in mobilising our people to support the life saving interventions. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

2.18
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East, Kanungu): Thank you much, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the minister for his quick response to the issues, which I raised yesterday. I would not want to contest the grounds court used to stop the spraying, but talking as a professional - I really do not know what grounds they used because DDT is being used in many countries for public health interventions. So, our hope and prayer is that the Ministry of Health and the Solicitor General pursue the issue expeditiously so that DDT can be used in August like you are saying you will be in Kanungu.  

Maybe, the clarification I want from the minister is whether the ministry has enough resources to purchase DDT for all the 80 districts in Uganda because we know Malaria is killer number one. For us in Kanungu we have already made a resolution to accept DDT and even if you said you wanted to start today, we are more than ready.  But I thank you very much for your quick response to the question, which I put yesterday.  Thank you very much.

2.19
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for this explanation but my interest is drawn on the second last paragraph of page 1 where the Minister of Health is preparing to spray in Kitgum, Pader, Kanungu, Kabale and Rukungiri districts from June to August 2008 using ICON as the ministry evaluates the DDT use in Apac and Oyam.

I recall that when the Minister of Health appeared here he explained to the House that application of ICON was in two areas in this country: south western Uganda and part of Acholi and DDT was used in Apac and Oyam. I would want to know exactly the difference between ICON and DDT and their effects. 

Two, there is fear in Lira that the ministry is quickly rolling out to them and the literal explanation is that, application of DDT in Oyam has chased away the mosquitoes that carry Malaria from those two districts of Apac and Oyam to Lira and now the Ministry of Health wants to follow the mosquitoes to Lira. This is coming from professional medical workers. I do not know whether this is going to be a strategy or the ministry can also be able to try ICON in Lira instead of DDT.

Finally, why was there no evaluation of the effect of ICON in areas where it had been applied previously? Thank you very much. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. But I am constrained to have a debate on this statement. We have been informed that the matter is under litigation in the Commercial Court. The minister has come up with other plans to use DDT in other districts in the month of August. I thought that it would not be procedurally proper for us to debate for or against the use of DDT or ICON until this matter of litigation is accomplished; it could be subjudice. I do not know whether it is proper for us to continue agitating for DDT.

THE SPEAKER: You mean the debate will prejudice the court proceedings? (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: That is what I thought. 

2.23
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the minister for appreciating the little role I played in the fight against Malaria. I want to give this House very brief information. 

When the Minister of Health went to Oyam to launch the campaign of DDT spray, we visited health centre IV which is situated at the headquarters of Oyam, and we noted the number of patients who were there, especially in the women’s ward. I paid a similar visit to the same health centre, and noticed the tremendous reduction in the number of in-patients. I was struck, so I asked the medical officer who was around, “What has happened, it looks as if the only patients who are here have come to give birth?” He told me that that the many patients that we saw when we went there with the minister were because they were infected with Malaria. I am quoting him, “Since the spray of DDT in this area, the number of patients with Malaria in this area has drastically reduced.”

I want also to give you information connected to my self. Every time I travel home, and I do that almost twice every month, I would come back with Malaria and whenever I went to see my doctor, all she would say is, “When did you come back from home” because of that strain of Malaria. 

But since the spraying of DDT in my place, I have been there now three times: I was there last week, the other time was when I went to receive my colleague, Mrs Museveni, the hon. Member for Ruhama, and tomorrow I am going back, but I have not come back with Malaria.

I think there is something that has happened there which fails my understanding as a layman, but maybe which can be explained scientifically. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am faced with an issue from hon. Epetait. He thinks that our debate may prejudice the court proceedings. Well, I have to examine this. If they are going to prejudice, then we shouldn’t. I do not know the territory to which the order was supposed to operate; was it restricted to the district or it covered the entire country?

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This order to stay the use of DDT in Northern Uganda was just to allow the applicants to file their application. But the initial application was to stay or suspend the application until the applicants have filed. That is exactly what the order says; and it is specific to Northern Uganda. 

So, we should not debate as if the court order is about stopping the use of DDT for indoor residual spraying in Uganda. This matter should be understood very clearly. That is my clarification.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are treading a very dangerous ground. If there is a court order about spraying of DDT in Northern Uganda – [Dr Nduhuura: “It is for Northern Uganda.”] – Yes, but it is still part of Uganda. The outcome of that court case will in essence affect the whole country and not only that particular region. For example, if court comes up with a verdict that it is disastrous and dangerous to human life to spray DDT in Northern Uganda, would it be okay to spray it in western Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, these are court proceedings that will depend on the prayer you make in your proceedings. It could be that DDT is being sprayed on a village and I go to court and I talk about my house. Definitely, if the court agrees with my prayer, the order will be restricted to my house; it will not be for the entire village. 

So, what we have to do is to examine the prayer in this particular case and be able to rule one way or the other. So, what I can say is that we suspend this debate until the documents are examined. Yes, hon. Okello-Okello.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, there are two chemicals here; there is ICON and DDT, for me I want to talk about the ICON which is not imported.  

THE SPEAKER: So, you need information as to the difference?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Yes, I want to say something about the ICON because it is not in court so I am not restricted.

THE SPEAKER: But, it will mean we will be repeating the debate but can you, honourable minister, tell us the difference.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, honourable member. Before I talk about the difference very briefly, the court order is very specific. In fact, I think the applicants are blaming the Minister of Health for not following the guidelines and for us we are saying we followed the guidelines. They are saying that, for example, there was not enough mobilization but the contention is definitely not about the use of DDT for indoor residual spraying. So, that should be put to rest. Let us not be confused by the court order, the court order is not saying that we should not use DDT but rather that we should follow the guidelines which the applicants feel we did not follow and which we feel we did.  

Now, the difference between ICON and DDT - now this is a very wide subject. I do not know whether the difference you want to note is in terms of the chemistry. But, suffice to say that both ICON and DDT kill mosquitoes; the difference is that the residual effect for DDT is much longer. So, when you apply DDT and ICON you are going to apply again DDT after about nine months to a year. In the case of ICON, the residual effect is only three to four months. So, this means with ICON you would have to apply a number of times every year but with DDT you apply once and with regard to cost DDT is much cheaper that ICON. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Then, in view of what has been raised by honourable Epetait, I would request the Attorney General to study the relevant paper and advise us on Tuesday whether it is of a general application or a restricted application. That will determine the decision to proceed with the debate or not. The subject is closed until Tuesday if it is on DDT. We shall revert to it again on Tuesday.


MOTION SEEKING LEAVE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

2.33
MR DENIS OBUA: (Youth Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill moved under Rule 105 and 106 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance; 

AND WHEREAS the same Constitution under Article 94(4) (b) provides that a Member of Parliament has a right to move a Private Member’s Bill; 

AND WHEREAS Parliament has enacted the Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 of the Constitution which also empowers Members of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill under Rule 105;

ALSO WHEREAS Section 13 of the National Youth Council (Amendment) Act, 2003 amends the principal enactment by inserting section 28A which gives every youth council and youth committee a four years lifespan from the date of inception. Section 28(1) further provides that upon the expiry of the said four years the existing youth councils and committees shall automatically lapse and dissolve;

NOTING THAT the tenure of office of youth councils and committees is deemed to have expired on the 31st day of May, 2006 and also noting that the youth councils and committees are still in existence when they are legally supposed to have lapsed and no law has been enacted to ratify this anomaly;
FURTHER NOTING THAT Uganda has been transformed from a single party system to a multi-party democratic system and there is need to wholly transform the electoral systems to fit into the multi-party democratic state; 

CONSIDERING THAT of recent Parliament passed the Local Governments (Amendment) Act, 2008 to regulate the elections of local councils, singling out the elections of youth councils and committees;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this honourable House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.

Mr Speaker, and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: This does not move the Bill, but it is just for leave that he moves the Bill in terms he has said.  

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Obua who is trying to seek leave of this Parliament to move a motion for him to present the Private Member’s Bill. I want to put on record that following a court ruling, Government is aware that an amendment is supposed to be moved on both Youth Councils and Women Councils Act. The process has already been initiated in the Ministry of Gender and it is one of the things we are supposed to consider as government. I see no contradiction of government working with hon. Obua to come up with these amendments. 

THE SPEAKER: You are opposing application for leave? If it is to work together then work together.

2.39
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Obua for really being proactive and working for the interest of his constituency.  But as the Chief Whip did mention, following the Constitutional Court ruling, a number of sections both in the Local Governments Act and the Youth Councils Act were nullified and Women Councils Act. So, Cabinet has been working on a comprehensive amendment of the Youth Councils Act.  In fact, the sections to be amended are not just confined to what hon. Obua is proposing, but there will be more than what he is proposing.

So, if he agrees, he can work with the Minister responsible for the Youth so that the minister can introduce a more comprehensive amendment which will cover all the aspects that were in contention in the Constitutional Court. This will not only be in his interest but also in the interest of the youth constituency which he represents. I just beg his indulgence in allowing the minister to come up with a more comprehensive amendment.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the question is, would guaranteeing him leave prejudice the arrangement you are suggesting?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: If it does not, you advise him that your office is open for him to come and discuss this and the other because he is not bringing the Bill yet. This is just for leave to study. I think that is what he is saying. Do we have to spend a lot of time on this? 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: What should be made clear is currently he is seeking leave to start the process.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: While he is taking the process, there is no prohibition for him to work together with the government so that at the end of the day they bring something – Should we really spend time on this?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEBATE ON THE STATEMENT PRESENTED TO THE HOUSE BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE 18TH JUNE 2008

2.42
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to use this opportunity in response to the honourable minister’s statement of yesterday, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, to make my personal statement on the issue of Police and what transpired on 10th June. 

Mr Speaker, on 10 June 2008, after participating in a very hectic match by women organizations against gender based violence culminating into a petition handed over to the Deputy Speaker and also a farewell meeting by UWOPA with the outgoing Danish Ambassador to Uganda, I hastened to downtown Kampala to launch my suggestion boxes, which had been mounted in the five divisions of Kampala District the previous day. 

Alas! My work was jeopardized by the Police. My public address system was smashed and confiscated by the Police and they repeatedly said they were “acting from orders from above.” They had at this juncture told my driver to drive away or else they would smash the windows of the car. All this came from our officers who in a ruthless, humiliating and degrading brutal manner, pounced on me.

Mr Speaker, I was merely guiding the people of St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market on how to get their views and aspirations heard in Parliament through the suggestion boxes that I had provided throughout all markets in the city. Surprisingly, I was almost stripped naked by the uniformed Police officers led by OC New Taxi Park, a one AIP Babigamba. 

I was hit several times as the officers forced me to sit on the floor of the cramped Police post cell in Owino Market. It was at this moment that I was shoved forcefully and in the process a metallic case tore my blouse and cut me in the back. I could see the excited Police officers’ faces gleefully executing humiliating acts on my person as if they enjoyed every minute of the action.

After an hour of demeaning heckling from the Police officers, I was whisked off at the back of one of the Police pick-ups amidst protest from my constituents. I was later deposited at Old Kampala Police Station where I was ordered to remove my shoes by the same Police officers who later pushed me into a cell. It was only after my colleagues from Parliament and the Speaker had come to the station that I was allowed to record a statement to Police. By this time, I was shedding tears of shame for what was happening to the rule of law in my country and tears of disappointment to the institution of Police.

I am first of all a woman and the rights of women in this country are enshrined in our Constitution. Any practices and acts that do restrict my participation in politics within my constituency should be condemned by this august House. (Applause) The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, though acknowledged theoretically by our government needs at this moment in time a strong and outspoken leadership. My integrity, sanctity as a mother, wife, sister, daughter and a human being has been eroded by this demeaning act. As a Muslim woman, I will stop at that because the Moslem fraternity is enraged at this.

I am emotionally and physically still undergoing treatment, but alas, the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, has in his statement charged me and without proof or evidence found me guilty. I have here with me the entire recording, Mr Speaker, that I wish, if time allows, to project for Members to view and later on lay on Table.

I have hitherto had respect and held the honourable minister, Ruhakana Rugunda, in high esteem. However, I am shocked and perturbed that the minister has listened to lies, relayed them to this august House and now has instituted fresh charges against me that I assaulted an officer, which freshly concocted charges did not arise on that day at the Police station and in the statement that was taken from me at the station. I wonder where and when Police came up with that and how then the honourable minister did not bother to crosscheck facts as they are because I watched Police investigators go into NTV studios to look at the recording of the incident. Since then, they have retracted and toned down their earlier utterances. 

I wonder if the honourable minister bothered to look deeper and further into the available evidence, before committing himself to present such an imaginary scenario of myself hitting the Police officer with a microphone. I instead have a picture of the Police officer snatching the microphone from my hands which I lay on Table. 

May I also be privy to the honourable minister’s methods of work while still carrying out investigations as he has said and at the same time making conclusions about what happened not only to him but also to the whole nation? By the way, I can ably inform the honourable minister that it is not the OC Old Kampala, IP Kasangaki who ordered my arrest but OC Owino, Sgt Wakabi, under the order from OC New Taxi Park, AIP Babigamba who had repeatedly assaulted me even in this picture. 

Mr Speaker, my activities in my constituency were just in fulfilment of my constitutional mandate of representation. When Parliament is in recess, it is a constitutional directive to get people’s views, suggestions and observations. As the area Member of Parliament, I am entitled to have easy and quick access to my constituents and vice versa. Being representative means ensuring accessibilities of MPs to their constituencies, with different modes of public participation in pre-legislative scrutiny and a right of open consultation for all interested parties, in this case the people of Kampala District. 

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda Chapter Six Article 79 (1) stipulates Parliament and its functions. Parliament should be transparent and accountable to the public. The Access to Information Act, among other things, allows citizens to seek, obtain and provide information. Parliament should be acknowledged as the pivotal institution of democracy. However, the unprofessional conduct of the Police this fateful day brought to light how the institution of Police is being misused to undermine Parliament and democracy in the country. 

Democratic principles cannot be realised without appropriate institutions like Police. Where Police exist, their role can only be judged to be serving in so far as the officers of the law embody or serve to realise these principles. The term “democracy” rings hollow if it does not imply the full enjoyment of human rights. Our role as MPs has increasingly called for the delicate balancing act that we are required to perform in a country where the Police have become preoccupied and obsessed with banning assemblies and contact with our people. As a Member of Parliament, it is my duty to reassure my voters that this country and government hopefully still upholds the basics of human rights.

Mr Speaker, I am pleased that there are still genuine Police officers out there who have decried the abuse of the Police institution by a few over zealous individuals and have showed remorse at what happened. But I am equally aggrieved and saddened by some who are peddling lies that I resisted arrest and assaulted an officer. This is a blatant lie to the whole nation which saw the recorded version of the incident on NTV, the journalists who were present and were also assaulted plus my constituents who watched it live. 

I wish to thank at this juncture, all those who have stood by me emotionally and physically throughout this ordeal. My family, friends, the general public, fellow MPs, especially hon. Henry Banyenzaki and Hon. Winnie Kiiza who stood as sureties for me. I cannot downplay the role of the committee of the whole House for the support through the motion by hon. Emmanuel Dombo, seconded by hon. Theodore Sekikubo and UWOPA’s press briefing decrying the harassment.

Last but not least, hon. Katuntu, hon. Betty Kamya, hon. Kakooza, hon. Latif Sebaggala and most notably the Rt hon. Speaker, Hon. Edward Ssekandi who came to the Police station and finally secured my release. 

Our Constitution does not arbitrarily mandate the Police or the minister for that matter as the sole custodians of our nation’s laws and human rights. Police and the executive arm of government have to accept MPs as their allies in the fight to realise their ambitions. For God and my country! (Applause)

2.54
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take exception to the statement made by the Minister of Internal Affairs. With due respect, the minister did not take this House seriously. I am being constrained to say that it is full of lies and it is contemptuous of this House because what we really need is a full account of what actually transpired in all these incidents. 

I admire the courage of the honourable minister to stand on the floor here for that long to read a 17-paged document in defence of Police brutality. I admire the courage especially of Mzee Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda, who is one of the people who fought for restoration of rule of law, constitutionalism and good governance in this country.

Mr Speaker, allow me highlight a few issues here. One, there are blatant lies here, on page 5 of the statement, paragraph three where the minister says, “Although the rally at Clock Tower did not go ahead, the DP leaders resorted to addressing the public for most of the day in their offices at City House, along William Street….” Honestly, Mr Minister, I challenge you to specify one leader who locked him or herself in the DP headquarters and addressed a rally from there.

It is on record even in his statement that the Police raided the party headquarters; they broke the padlocks, entered and searched the whole DP headquarters. [Hon. Members: “They arrested people there.”] Whom did they arrest? I am one of the leaders of the party, I am here. All the party leaders are there. None has been arrested. So, I am wondering how mysteriously and what magic we the leaders used to escape from the wrath of the Police who invaded the party headquarters. 

And again, on the same page, the last paragraph that, “The business community had earlier on lodged a complaint about the noise levels…” – When you talk about the business community, honourable minister, I do not know whether you appreciate the full import of this concept “business community.” You are talking about Kampala city which is a commercial hub- we have vendors in markets, we have taxi commuters, we have traders, we have all sorts of business communities around. So, which business community are you talking about that complained to that Police post? And this SD reference you are giving, I challenge you to bring the particulars of the business community that complained.

I just wanted to highlight a few of these lies. On page 14, item 16, the minister said it is not true that the Police took over the DP offices at City House. Who is there now, Mr Minister? Are we in possession of the party headquarters when over 15 Police officers are still in occupation? I challenge you. Even if we moved there and Parliament took a fact-finding mission, you will find those people still there. They have pitched camp at the party headquarters and the minister has the audacity to come and tell this august House that, “No, we have never taken over the party headquarters”. Surely, I admire your courage. 

He continues to say, “When the Police entered the building and arrested the suspects, a record of what the Police took with them was made and signed by both parties.” I suppose you are talking of an inventory or a search certificate in this statement. Honourable minister, I challenge you to produce this and lay it on the Table. I challenge you to produce that record that you executed a search certificate and it was duly signed. We also need the particulars of the party official who signed on behalf of the party. I would not wish to take a lot of time on this. 

Allow me make observations on one issue, which is still of interest to us. It is still about the Police brutality. On the 18th day of September 2007, I happened to attend a workshop at Imperial Botanical Beach Hotel in Entebbe. It was organised under the auspices of Uganda Human Rights Commission. I presented a paper and Gen. Kale Kayihura was there to debate it. Surprisingly, Gen. Kayihura made a statement, which tells volumes on what is happening today and what is going to take place in future. He said, “You Lukwago and others, you are complaining about the excessive use of tear gas and eye irritants against you, but there are countries which are using more lethal methods of dealing with public order management.” He added that he was facing a lot of pressure from certain circles to use more lethal methods and one of the methods he mentioned was the use of snipers. He is on record. Those who attended can bear witness with me. He said the use of snipers in dealing with public management has proved to be more effective and he said he was facing a lot of pressure to apply it. He said if we push him to abandon this more lenient method of tear gas and eye irritants, he will go in for those lethal methods. What will happen then? 

Today we have credible information that there are snipers who disguise themselves as Police officers. They are clad in Police uniform and are being positioned at vantage points to eliminate us. There are plots for all these public rallies you see and this is worrying. We have information that some of us were supposed to be eliminated on Saturday 7th at the Clock Tower had we dared to go there. This cannot be rebutted because there are pictures we can produce to the effect that Gen. Kale Kayihura, the Inspector General of Police, enlisted the support of the Kiboko Squad - people who were wielding sticks and those who assisted the Police to invade the party headquarters wielding sticks. There are also those who were moving around who were being trained and others who were being paraded by so many other people. 

Finally, as area Member of Parliament, Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter; there is a proclamation in writing from the Inspector General of Police and it is dated 6 September 2006. He said there would be no more rallies, assemblies and processions in what they call the Central Business District (CBD). I challenged him to define what constitutes the central business district and he said that it is central Kampala. So now there is a ban on rallies, consultative meetings and the like in Kampala Central. There is a total ban and we are not supposed to interact with the people. So, it is a little surprise that hon. Nabilah was treated that way in Owino. Others who dare come to Kampala Central should come prepared for that.

I have here a picture with me to show members what happened to hon. Otto when he appeared in my constituency. That is how he was treated on the invitation of the Inspector General of Police who said, “Come to CPS and talk to the RPC about the possibility of holding a rally at the Constitutional Square.” They had in fact laid a trap. That is what happened to me as well. You can see; that is how I was treated. This is just a tip of the iceberg. We have people who are clad in NRM tee-shirts and they are wielding guns. They are here! This is not a picture from Congo or Somalia; this is a picture from within this country. You can see people with NRM flags and in NRM tee-shirts wielding guns. 

President Museveni was here addressing the nation and he said that those who come close to a weapon, which is ordinarily a monopoly of the UPDF, shall be court-martialled. He even told the Chief Justice here that, “Please, hands off; leave those ones to us. They are here and can be easily identified.” So what action has been taken against these people? This is the kind of situation that we have. Honourable minister, if you can defend this kind of conduct, I really shudder. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.05
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members and comrade hon. Nabilah, let me use the Swahili expression, pole sana because what has happened here cannot be accepted by anybody. If we could take it scientifically, for purposes of experiment, let us select one of the front bench members there and apply the same treatment on him or her. How would you feel, honourable Minister of Defence, if we got someone in uniform and manhandled you the way - (Interjection) - You would manhandle them also. You hear the answer. This is the direction that Uganda is taking, away from the rule of law to the rule of the muscle. The Minister of Defence has told us here that she would manhandle them also. 

Mr Speaker, we are here because of the rule of law and we would like to safeguard the rule of law and democracy. If we are to keep the rule of law, I propose that where such errors occur, Members of Parliament including the Cabinet should condemn them. Somebody who was held in the past with a lot of respect like Dr Ruhakana Rugunda comes and covers instead of condemning such acts of the Police is unfair. I hold hon. Ruhakana Rugunda in high esteem but this esteem seems to be escaping. I do not know how we will arrest it. It is running away from me because whenever there is confusion regarding Government and the maintenance of public order that it claims to have brought, the respect we give to Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is eroded when he comes and covers the rot in the Police.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to Dr Ruhakana Rugunda to remember where he came from. All of you try to remember where we came from so that we can keep to the path where we want to go, otherwise Uganda is at crossroads. The tendency we are seeing is a move away from democracy to the rule of the gun. That is why we see pictures like the ones displayed by hon. Lukwago where some people are selected to have the gun and they go free but when you see others tending to the same, you panic. What is this? I rest my case. Thank you very much.

3.08
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Unfortunately, I would like to differ from my colleagues –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Sorry. Since there are so many members who are interested in making contributions, I think we should restrict our contributions to not more than five minutes.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, unfortunately I would like to differ from my colleagues and thank hon. Rugunda. I really want to express my appreciation to hon. Rugunda for the boldness, honesty and forthrightness with which he has defended Police brutality. Nobody could have done it better. (Laughter) Hon. Rugunda has met my expectations of a regime that is running the country into a military state and political intolerance, and he fulfilled them. He also met my expectations because as regards whatever happens in this country, we have lost the moral conscience to apologise to anybody. So why would I not be grateful to hon. Rugunda; why? 

This is the truth and Ugandans should stop pretending that we are going to have a better country another day. We are in for chaos, for a military state and for political intolerance. Each one of us must understand that. I did not expect an apology and I am glad it did not come. Nobody is going to blame me for saying the government did not apologise but actually condoned these acts. In his statement, he said he does not condone but what he did was to actually condone the behaviour of the Police. Previously, they used to tell us, “We do not know those people; maybe they are thugs or the Kiboko squad”. Now we have the reality in our hands and we should face it as it is. 

Because hon. Rugunda has been honest, I would like to ask him two questions: What is the name of that Police officer who was beaten by hon. Nabilah? There is no way you could make such a statement without mentioning the name of the person who was beaten. Would you be kind to this nation and tell us who was actually beaten because that is the victim you want to defend. 

In the same statement on page 4, he says Kampala is a gazetted area and then in the next paragraph he says people should look for alternative areas outside the gazetted area. I would also like to ask hon. Rugunda, where are the non-gazetted areas out of Kampala? This should be told to politicians, Members of Parliament and everybody so they know which areas are not gazetted.

Mr Speaker, I would like to put it on the record and correct the impression created concerning the FDC meeting in Mbarara. What happened in Mbarara is that immediately we started the training in that hotel, Police came in and said it was illegal. They called the party administrator and said our gathering was illegal yet we told them that we were indoors. Unfortunately, they insisted that we go and make a statement. The course of action that was decided was to start off the workshop, leave our friends from the Westminster Foundation to run the workshop and the party administrator was to follow up. However, before we could do that, 35 armed men came into the meeting, dispersed it, grabbed files and chased some of the participants who were supposed to have gone to Kisoro towards Masaka. Because we like to distort information, I just wanted to keep mine for the record. 

The same applies to Naguru Community Centre. Ordinarily, there is no Police deployment at that community centre but why is it that the afternoon when the FDC was consulting, the Police just came by and the keys were lost? Why did it have to be that afternoon?

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to tell this country, the Government of Uganda and specifically the Minister of Internal Affairs that while you list challenges and say that your challenges are peoples’ attitudes to multiparty politics, let me tell you that your challenge is not going to be that; your challenge is going to be the number of guns you have put in illegal hands. Those men displayed by hon. Lukwago - those men dressed in yellow, wielding guns - those SPCs that are ill-trained in this country whom you have armed and are undressing people like hon. Nabilah; the many guns that we have failed to get back from the auxiliary forces whose payments we have not cleared, I want to tell you that that is going to be the major policing challenge in this country. I also want to promise you that you will never handle it if you approach it the way you are approaching it now. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.15
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start from the premise that what is happening is not only happening to Members of Parliament but also to the public. If you watched NTV, prior to this saga some farmers were demonstrating in Bundibugyo and they were brutally dispersed with their placards and messages as they were trying to access a district office to go and complain or to issue whatever it is they wanted. They were brutally and shamelessly dispersed by the Police. There are many incidences that have happened to the public and I think as Parliament, we must condemn not only what has happened to parliamentarians but also to the public. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I also want to tell this House that from 2000, I have diligently read the reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. Major complaints and recommendations from the Uganda Human Rights Commission have been related to how brutal the Police are, how the Police have been illegally holding people beyond 48 hours - some for one year - without bringing them to the courts. These reports have indicated how the Police have turned into the military, how the Police are abusing the rights of Ugandans and the government has refused and failed to take action, which takes me to my next important point. 

The two honourable ladies said that when Police came, all of them were saying “We are acting on orders from above”. Who gives these orders from above? Where are these orders coming from? - (Interjections) - It cannot be Rugunda; or can Rugunda confirm whether the orders from above are from him? (Laughter) My understanding is that if the state has failed to respond to the report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, it is now a directive from the President and the Executive that selective cases are dealt with in the manner that he and his cabinet and a few of his colleagues want them to be held or accounted for. It brings me to my next point on the regime. 

In Africa, when you see a regime that is about to collapse or is collapsing, you see the militarization of the Police -(Interjections)– Yes. When you see a state and a president or a political party holding grip on power, you see militarization of the Police, you see the creation of all these security agencies – how many security agencies do we have in Uganda? - (Interruption)

MR WACHA: Thank you, hon. Betty Amongi. Mr Speaker, there is talk going around and I would want either the minister or somebody knowledgeable from the Front Bench to allay my fears. There is talk that a newly recruited Police force is in operation in Kampala. This is an ill-trained force, equipped but directed to handle certain political forces. The move is not only going to be confined to Kampala; Kampala is an experimental ground. As time goes on, this type of force is going to be spread all over Uganda. There is talk that the old Police force has been removed from Kampala including some of the senior officers. I want my fears allayed because this is a very serious matter and as hon. Amongi is saying, it is indicative of Uganda moving towards a very dangerous area. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you for the information. Honourable members and Mr Speaker, I want, like hon. Alice Alaso has indicated, to note that what is happening is not about to stop. It is not going to stop because of the information hon. Ben Wacha has already indicated and what the member for Kampala Central Constituency said. He cannot access his constituency; he is the Member of Parliament for Kampala Central but he has said that he has been informed that the whole of his constituency is gazetted. He cannot move, he cannot consult and he cannot hold rallies. So, what is he doing in Parliament as a representative of the people? Is he just supposed to be enjoying the emoluments of Parliament or what? This is a worrying situation. 

I know that freedoms are fought for and we are going to fight for our freedom. We are ready to fight for our freedom. People of South Africa fought for their freedom, the people of Zimbabwe are fighting for their freedom and they are being detained, Kenyans fought for their freedom and we are going to fight for our freedom. 

For the women who are in this House and the women who are politicians, you are not going to embarrass us with the aim of subduing us; you are not going to do it. We are going to start wearing trousers if you want to pull our skirts - (Applause) – yes! Now that we know that when we wear skirts and go to rallies you want to undress us to embarrass us so that we do not speak, we are now going to change to trousers. (Laughter)

Finally, Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has dwelt so much on Statutory Instrument No. 53 of 2007. I remember hon. Lukwago moved a motion, which was adopted in this House, on this statutory instrument which he referred to more than three times as a basis within which –(Interjection)- It is Statutory Instrument No. 53 of 2007. A motion was moved and the Prime Minister stood up and moved an amendment to accept that Government will review it because we thought that you cannot gazette the whole country. Now today you have come on the same basis when the Prime Minister assured this House, moved an amendment and even said that in the interim, as they try to review, they will try to see how they can incorporate the spirit of the motion to deal with this issue. Now, the honourable minister has contradicted his Leader of Government Business and has continued to refer to this instrument No. 53 to explain why he - (Member timed out) 

3.27
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): I will not be long, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I definitely also stand in disbelief about a man I have always held in high esteem who cannot be defined as the qualitative leader he should be. With a qualitative leader, certainly there has to be moral scrutiny. What you laid on the Table yesterday, honourable minister, would not give a definite definition of what an effective leader should be.

I have always dreamt, but dreamt narrowly, of being a man just like the man hon. Rugunda is. He is called Ndugu, a friend. You are not a friend to Members of Parliament -(Interjections)- Ndugu is not a friend anymore -(Interjections)- I expect hon. Ruhakana Rugunda to really be honourable –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not be personal. Let us discuss the minister’s statement.

MR BALIKUDDEMBE: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. You are left with a heart fallen conscience when you see people you believe to be exemplary living in such shadows. You live to see people who are supposed to come out with a clear conscience as honourable members, like hon. Ndugu. 

I believe we have a number of platforms; we can use this Parliament to solve such problems that are looming in the countryside under your ministry. I will tell you that a fortnight ago in a Police post in Ntinda, under your employed agents - the so-called Police officers - a young man was stripped naked and beaten thoroughly because they believed he had pick-pocketed. This is a man I have employed for the last five years and I know him for the qualitative character he has. However, in the hands of the Police, he was beaten, stripped and detained for over a week. I called the Inspector General of Police and told him, “Please, I want you to guide me on how Article 23 and 28 of the Constitution operate.” He was unable to do this. 

I went to the CID officers who you are trying to protect today. Whereas you can help them to ensure that we have a qualitative system under your ministry, I am a professional and a lawyer at that, I work with the Police and I know there is moral decadence in the Police. That is why you are seeing this. 

I was at home seated and did see hon. Nabilah almost being stripped. Young gentlemen, young boys, started patting her body. That is very wrong. You cannot stand here, honourable member, and start defending such acts. They are very visual. It has happened to her today, it will happen to you tomorrow, it will happen to your own daughter and it will happen to your own cousin. It happened to her. She has got minors as her daughters and sons, but that happened in their presence? It was visually seen. 

When they see a man of your calibre come to the Floor of Parliament and try to speak out, but in a low tone, most of us are crestfallen. I am left with very little, but I pray. In the political field, it is only contesting; it should not be bloodshed. It is merely a football field where we are supposed to go and play live in harmony. Let us highlight quality in the Eighth Parliament. Please -(Member timed out)

3.31
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for his statement but I wonder how a senior minister could be deceived to read such a statement. I wonder how a whole Minister of Internal Affairs could read such a false statement to this House. In fact, he should be investigated. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, it is true that I organised a function, which included a youth cycling tournament and launch of a development programme for my constituents. That was at Kitebi Primary School on 7th June this year. If you look at page 6, the honourable minister said “On Saturday, Nampijja organised a bike rally and a football match at Kitebi Primary School in Nateete.” Is Kitebi Primary School located in Nateete? That is a shame! (Laughter) It is a shame to this Government. It is a shame to the whole minister of Internal Affairs. It is a shame to even the people who gave you this information. 

Mr Speaker, it is also not true for the minister to state that I organised this function without informing the Police. I informed the Police of the area as I have always done – (Interjection) – Yes, I always inform the Police before I call people to every function or public meetings that I organise in my constituency. The Minister of Internal Affairs knows very well that the Police are not supposed to give us permission. We are supposed to inform the Police in order for them to provide security and not to seek permission from them. On many occasions, the Police have failed to acknowledge receipt of the letters that we send to them

Mr Speaker, at Kitebi Primary School - (Interjection) - in Nateete -(Laughter)– my function had been organised in an enclosure, but the Police forced their way in and opened tear sprays in my face –(Interruption)

MR KABUUSU: Mr Speaker, I attended the function which hon. Susan Nampijja had organised. It was in an enclosure, which was a primary school playground, with tents and people were seated on white chairs. (Laughter) Police came in and instead of looking for hon. Lukyamuzi, who was the organiser even though she had not come yet, they saw baskets of food and plates organised for the people, placed in a cool and calm way, and instead ordered people to quit. The anti-riot Police assembled in front of the people who were seated and ordered everybody to go away. 

The Member of Parliament for Entebbe Municipality, hon. Muhammad Kawuma, and I tried to talk to the officer who had led the team to attract his sympathy to at least let people eat the food – (Laughter) – that had been brought for them. However, I give witness that the Police officer could not allow that to happen. There were people armed with radio-calls seated in cars that did not have registration number plates, but commanding everything. I want to know, since when did the Police lose control and command occasions that they take charge of?

When hon. Nampijja arrived, as the organiser of the ceremony she walked, in a busuti, to talk to the Police officer who had two things (pips) on the shoulder –(Laughter)– and he was commanding the others. The Police officer instead opened a canister of teargas after he shook it and threw it to her. The helpless woman fell down and we carried her to a car that ferried her to her father’s home. The minister told a lie that Police helped hon. Nampijja get away from that place. The Police began throwing teargas canisters at everybody including members of the public who were just watching. You told a lie, honourable minister, to this Parliament. I beg to submit.

MS NAMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable colleague for that information. It is true that the anti-riot Police did not allow me to talk to them as the organiser of the function and area Member of Parliament. I was not given a chance to talk to those – let me reserve it. 

Mr Speaker, the commander of the anti-riot Police openly lied to the minister by saying that my father was ignored by the crowd. It is not true and that is an open lie. When my father was trying to disperse the crowd, the commander of the anti-riot Police switched off the public address system. So, he stopped everything before all the people walked away.

Mr Speaker, we all know that this is a ploy to weaken the Opposition. It is a ploy to assault, harass and torture the opposition in Uganda including the women.

It is an insult for the Police to confuse the two functions - the one by hon. Nampijja Susan, Member of Parliament for of Lubaga South, and the DP function at Clock Tower. The two were different functions because these are two different political institutions.

3.40
MS ROSE NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): I just want to remind this House that before I came here, I was the chairperson of the National Women’s Council and I believe I am still the chair because we have not had elections yet. So on behalf of the women in this Parliament, I want to say that the women in this House are very disappointed by the way they are being treated. (Applause)

First, I would like to remind you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that at the opening of the Eighth Parliament, a certain newspaper published our legs and faces as if we had come here to show legs. Instead of reporting on what we are doing and the good contribution that we make to this nation, in spite of all the challenges as mothers, wives, leaders and so on, the newspaper took it upon itself to only publish our legs and faces as if we came here for a beauty contest. It is very sad! It is a pity, but that is the negative attitude that society has towards women. 

I really want to dissociate myself from that and to say that as women, we feel disappointed that up to this time when we are talking about women’s emancipation, empowerment and rights, what some people can only see are women MPs’ legs and faces. I just wanted to start on that note to emphasise that it is not only the Police that portray us negatively but also the public, including some media houses, do that. I want to say that we are tired; please stop.

I was so shocked, Mr Speaker; on that fateful day, I was sick, suffering from Malaria, and I was in the house. On switching on TV, I do not remember which station it was, I saw my friend, hon. Nabilah Sempala, in a red blouse and a white skirt and she was being beaten and harassed. Some of them were policewomen and I was very disappointed that a woman Member of Parliament can be shouted at by a police – I do not even know whether to say officer because we call them officers but most of them are not yet at that level. 

I was very disappointed, I looked at the pictures, they told her to sit down, and they pulled her skirt. I think some of them wanted to pull her legs for the media to see what is above the legs; it is a big disappointment! I love my government, I love NRM, I love my President, but I hate the Police! (Laughter) I hate the Police. They harass us! Even when they stop you, they do not want to respect you as a Member of Parliament. Stop shouting at us, we are your leaders, your wives and your mothers! We as women need to have respect and dignity; we are tired! Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.44
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all I would like to urge the House to look at this issue not as an issue of Opposition and Government, but as an issue which affects all of us Members of Parliament and the entire citizenry of this country. 

On the day when hon. Nabilah Sempala was humiliated, my children asked me to leave this Parliament if that is the way Members of Parliament should be treated in public. But I said, “No, I will remain and fight for rule of law and order in this country.” 

Yesterday when I listened to my brother hon. Rugunda - we share features, we are both Bakiga, we are both doctors - I was taken aback. Both of us are original Bakiga but when I read through this statement –(Laughter)– I noted that it has a lot of errors and falsehood, which I thought we Members of Parliament should take special exception to and should not accept such a report to this Parliament. 

There has been a deliberate attempt to undermine the integrity of Members of Parliament and Parliament as an institution by many players, including the Police, and some members of the Executive. So, I believe that we as Members of Parliament should be able to stand our ground and change some of these issues. (Applause)

One; the message I wanted to give to the Minister of Internal Affairs is to re-look at the Police Act. It was enacted in 1994 before the promulgation of the Constitution. And when you look at a number of sections in that Act, they appear to be inconsistent with the spirit and letter of our Constitution. Therefore, I want to see the minister moving to repeal some of the sections and align them with our Constitution; they should not use repressive and draconian sections to harass the population and Members of Parliament. 

Just the other day we discussed the Police instrument, the statutory instrument, and we agreed that Government goes back and reviews it. We were taken aback when we saw and heard the Minister of Internal Affairs referring to the same instrument that we had guided the Executive on as Parliament of Uganda. That means you do not take seriously what we agree on in this Parliament. 

Briefly, to test the truthfulness of the statement, I tried to follow hon. Lyomoki’s mission since yesterday and tried to verify some of the facts. I found out that he started his move to interact with health workers and patients to study the conditions in our hospital settings. He began in Entebbe Hospital, went to Kawolo Hospital, to Jinja Hospital and then to Mbale Hospital where he was arrested. And most of the statements put in this document are false. 

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. I think it is typical of the honourable minister to bring false information to this House. If you remember very well on the invasion of the Judiciary, the honourable minister told us that there were no dogs at the court. And now he is telling us that Nabilah resisted arrest and that she was the one assaulting the police officers. So I think it is typical of the honourable minister to tell lies. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much for the information. I was still describing Dr Lyomoki’s mission. When he was in Mbale, Police got concerned and actually provided security for him because they thought that he could be man-handled or abducted by somebody. So a police officer protected him through the night. Masaba wing has a female side and a male side, and I got information that he actually spent the night outside on the male side of Masaba wing. So what is presented here that he slept in the female ward is apparently not correct. (Laughter)

In any case, hon. Dr Rugunda and I are medical doctors. I am sure he knows that as a medical doctor, I can access a female ward and a theatre to work on patients. So, what is wrong with a medical doctor and a Member of Parliament accessing a hospital? So at 1.30 p.m. police came and handcuffed him in a ward. 

It is also not true that the medical superintendent of Mbale Hospital refused his entry. I talked to him – Dr Wejome; he said that he welcomed the move by Dr Lyomoki. (Laughter) 

On the contrary, it is Mr Lwigale, who is the hospital administrator – he has not been paying health workers; he connived with the RDC to cause the arrest. But we also informed one of the ministers and I got information that it was the Minister of Health, Dr Mallinga, who ordered for the arrest of Lyomoki in Mbale.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. Just to add on to the mission of hon. Lyomoki vis-à-vis the falsehoods in the minister’s statement. Hon. Lyomoki did visit all wards: male, female and children’s wards. But this morning the hon. Minister of Health was on radio saying that hon. Lyomoki was in the labour suite; and yet hon. Lyomoki stopped at the labour ward, which everybody, including fathers, can access. 

The other information is that there is something being hidden that the administrators did not want to be unearthed. Whereas it was reported by patients that five children had died in one single day due to lack of blood, the official reports in the hospital were only talking of one child. So, I think the issue of denying Members access to information is something sinister. In fact, hon. Ministers for Internal Affairs and Health, you might have to consider apologising to this House.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. So, the key question I want to ask hon. Dr Rugunda is that must I seek permission from him to access Kambuga Hospital in Kinkiizi East constituency as a Member of Parliament? I want him to answer me as he responds.

As I wind up, I just want to request the minister to withdraw this statement from this House. (Applause) And I want to request you, Mr Speaker, that at an appropriate time you give me chance to move a motion that we reject this statement from the minister. (Applause)

3.54
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, in my culture there is a saying that when you see a frog jumping up and down in broad daylight, you should definitely know that something is wrong. 

I have travelled in almost all continents of the world and in each and every country I have travelled to, Parliament is one of the few institutions that enjoy immunity, respect and dignity. One fundamental question we must ask ourselves is: if a Member of Parliament can be arrested in such a brutal, humiliating, degrading and inhuman manner, how would a citizen, deep in my village, be arrested? Nonetheless, in Apac this was demonstrated in the way the Police treated people who attacked the Balaalo. 

In my considered opinion, Parliament has four roles and responsibilities: legislation, representation, budgeting and oversight. And I want to narrow my submission down to representation. All of us here in this House, hon. Members of Parliament, do not represent tear gas but we represent the people of Uganda. And we are accountable and we report to our respective constituencies.

When the temple of justice, the Judiciary, was raided, it took the high priest, the judges, lawyers – they put down their tools. And I want to emphatically put it that at this particular moment when the temple of legislation is at stake, when the integrity of Parliament is at stake, we need to act as the temple of legislation and ensure that all that is happening is reversed. (Applause) 

I want to briefly go through the statement by the minister and I want to request the minister to explain to this Parliament why on page 2, he left out one of the most fundamental functions of the Uganda Police Force as enshrined in the Constitution, Article 212(d); which is to co-operate with civilian authority and other security organs established under this Constitution and with the population generally. Why did he leave out that very fundamental function of the Uganda Police Force?

Mr Speaker, somewhere he says that anti-riot police was alerted by the DPC, Katwe. Why was anti-riot police alerted yet much as this assembly was an illegal assembly they were peaceful? There are other departments within police; we have special branch, CID, community liaison, what was the intention of alerting anti-riot police? Police is supposed to preserve law and order but in this case they were disrupting law and order. 

Finally, there was no riot; that assembly was peaceful –(Interjection)- I mean the one of hon. Lukyamuzi. 

I want to appeal to this honourable House: in Northern Uganda we highly respect hon. Rugunda because of what he has been doing in Juba and I think the entire country respects him. But I want this House to sympathise with him because he has spent two years in Garamba in Juba -(Laughter)- talking peace for Northern Uganda. I want to urge him because to me the way I respect hon. Rugunda, I think it is top but I want to urge him – honourable minister, I just want to give you a piece of advice: if possible, establish your own, independent investigation. I am suspicious there could be a master plan to totally bring you down and jeopardise your integrity. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. 

3.59
CAPT. GRACE KYOMUGISHA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like first of all to thank the minister for his statement because it is all embracing. And I want to be quoted right; it is all embracing because it brings out the problems the citizens are facing in that at the end of the day, it brings the challenges the security agencies are facing. And I thank you honourable minister because I am really fascinated. Members of the security are having problems and some of these problems are actually - we term them “non-traditional security threats”. The so-called assemblies, which are riots, are a serious security threat. And I would like to say that security is a public good with characteristics of non-rivalry and non excludability. When that aspect of our society is affected, you and I will really experience some disharmony. And I would call upon Parliament to be a fair arbitrator in this conflict; not to be one-sided. 

I appeal to all of you, hon. Members, to look at the challenges the security people are facing -(Interjection)– this is why I would recommend –(Interjection)– I seek protection, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

CAPT. KYOMUGISHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that we need an interaction of all stakeholders where we can listen to one another. Instead of condemning and demonising one another, I would like that we need a peaceful resolution of this whole conflict; and a permanent one.

Secondly, I would like that Parliament should enhance the quality of service delivery of the Police Force by urging people to give positive criticism and budgetary allocation. I support the idea of the select committee to investigate what happened in the recent past because I believe and I would appeal to all stakeholders to give a fair assessment of what happened so that we amicably get out of this. 

Finally, I heard some Member make mention of the Kiboko squad. Allow me use the words of Machiavelli, and I quote –(Interjection)–  that “When the existence of the state is threatened, the use of the available means must be sanctioned without fear or favour and it is done for the good of us and the end justifies the means.” I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, so far we have taken one hour and 20 minutes. I intend to give an opportunity to the Leader of the Opposition, the Minister in charge of Security and the Minister of Internal Affairs to make the final comments. What you should know is that there is a select committee, which is going to investigate this matter. 

4.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Given the original trend of the debate in the House, I had merely planned to rise to thank Members for the contributions they had made, but I will still do that. However, before I do that I would like to respond to the last Member who contributed. 

The last Member who contributed before me must have gone to the bush; that is why she is wearing the khaki uniform, and pips. The primary purpose the National Resistance Movement advanced to the country for going to the bush, and the name was chosen very deliberately, was to resist; to resist the machination of the state, the excesses of those who are given power, the unilateral-ness of those who think khaki uniforms give them special rights –(Laughter)- and the wanton desecration of peoples’ lives. After a recent promotion, for her to stand up and quote Machiavelli: “… the end justifies the means …” that is a very unfortunate thing!

Mr Speaker, in the last Parliament in 2004, you dispatched us to go to our people to present to them proposals for the amendment of the Constitution. I and a number of Members of Parliament went to our constituencies. We had two rallies; during the third rally we were surrounded by soldiers. We argued with them and eventually managed to speak. The next day on our way to Acholi Bur, we found groups of soldiers who had been on an operation and an LRA person had surrendered. I gave the soldiers a lift to take that LRA who had surrendered to an Army barracks, in fact I found a young lieutenant who used to participate in Kimeeza  in that unit; we laughed and then we went to Acholi Bur. 

Immediately we arrived, we saw soldiers coming and they said, “Get into your car and leave.” Hon. Odonga said, “We are coming for consultations.” They said, “We said, get into your car and leave.” The next order was: “Piga awa; ingiza kwa gari.”  I carry on my forehead and on my left shoulder beatings from the Army. We came and discussed the matter here! Ultimately, I must say this: I am very glad that the Army has gradually withdrawn from this wanton conduct. (Applause) I am extremely surprised that a representative of the Army wants to reintroduce what is being banished in the Army in the august House. [Hon. Members: “Shame!”] 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Professor, the little information I want to give is that the UPDF soldier who tortured me, Prof. Latigo, Reagan and Ocula was sentenced to two years and he served his sentence at Acholi Bur. He was just released just about a year ago. That is the information I wanted to share to show that the soldiers in Aruu County are so disciplined, not like the one who has just submitted in the House. (Laughter)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you. You know, I read Ndugu Rugunda’s statement. There is one element that probably if it were talked about; it was when I was not here. This was when in that statement, which the minister read, the RDC of Mbale orders hon. Lyomoki - the RDC orders hon. Lyomoki! Just forget about the Police but the RDC orders! And these are chairpersons of security committees and you can understand if your subordinate orders you around – the world that we are living in! Even in the military if the honourable lady committed an offence and she was going to be arrested, they will not send a corporal to arrest her; no! When Brig. Tumukunde refused to leave his office, they sent a whole general to deal with him. But for Members of Parliament, all the Toms, Dicks and Harries in the Police -(Laughter)- will deal with you! I feel very sorry for hon. Rugunda, he is a very good man as a person and he knows I feel very sorry for him.

MR OKUMU: Thank you very much, hon. Latigo. Mr Speaker, the information I want to give is that I was at one time arrested by the Police but I was arrested by the Assistant Commissioner, who invited me to report to Police and the arrest was effected. That was under the civilised command of Gen. Katumba Wamala. (Applause)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much. I was going to make reference to the times when Gen. Katumba Wamala was Inspector-General of Police. He proved to us that a military leader can also be a leader of the Police -(Applause)- but that military leader must have a human heart, that military leader must recognise that the Police as an institution has its way of life, that a military leader must not have a desire beyond service to the public under the Police.

Mr Speaker, I would like to join hon. Baryomunsi in urging the honourable minister when he gets up to withdraw his statement. (Applause) Otherwise, we will move a motion to reject the statement because it actually does disservice to you. And from today, do one important thing - go and clean up your backyard, there are very many snakes. There are very many snakes in your backyard and those snakes, you may be immune but they are still snakes.

Finally, I would like to thank all the Members on both sides of the House – we are challenged by the things that happen in our country. There are moments where we can disagree but there are clearly moments when the country looks to us to act as their voice, their shield, their eyes and what they believe is the protection they have. If such moments rise and we fail to reassure them, the country will be in big trouble. This is such a moment when we wait to hear what the honourable minister has to say on what Members have expressed from all sides. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.12
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I rise to make one point and my point is that we in the Executive hear you; we hear you. We hear the complaints that are being made and that is why you see us listening here attentively. 

Last Thursday when my honourable colleagues in the Opposition walked out, the remainder of the membership of the House unanimously adopted the motion to establish a select committee to investigate this matter. That is the evidence you have that the concern about the alleged happenings is not a concern of one side, but a concern of the whole House -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way and thank you for appreciating the motion that was moved hon. Dombo. The clarification I want to seek from you, who is my Secretary-General, will you punish hon. Dombo for moving a motion, which was not endorsed by the caucus, the way you want to punish me and the case, is still before you for having moved a motion that was not cleared by the caucus? (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Colleagues, I am afraid I cannot really comment on that because it is true that there is a complaint arising out of the NRM caucus to the NRM disciplinary committee and I think this is not the appropriate forum in which to debate or discuss the matter. I, therefore, would like to invite my brother and my neighbour hon. Banyenzaki to know that we have our own house where we can sort out these matters and the more he realises this and comes home within the house to sort out the domestic problems, the better for him and for all of us. 

I was making the point that the entire membership of the NRM in this House resolved last Thursday that a select committee be set up, why? That was because it was clear as you heard today that there are many allegations about the actions of individuals, many allegations against the institution. Now we are speaking in Parliament and as you know in Parliament we are the only ones that can speak here. 

The purpose of a select committee is to have an opportunity for the public, those who may have evidence and for those who are being accused, to appear before the committee and give information so that at the end of the day you have a debate in the House, which is based on established facts.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have heard the statement being made by the minister but I am also aware that the Leader of the Opposition made a statement to the effect that before we conclude this debate, the Minister of Internal Affairs, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, must first withdraw. But what I am hearing from the speaker on the Floor appears to be diversionary. He is actually debating a matter, which has already been disposed of. We are here now waiting for the decision on the statement made by the minister. So can you guide the Member on the Floor following the move, and ask him to follow the motive and the spirit of this debate? Can you guide the minister appropriately?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the Leader of the Opposition came in to make his submission I indicated to you that I will allow the Leader of the Opposition to make a submission and the Minister in charge of Security to make his statement; then Internal Affairs, and that is the order we are following -(Laughter)- but procedure? You know, Members we have a lot to do today. Please, allow him to finish.

MR MBABAZI: So, Mr Speaker, I would like to urge my colleagues and all those that may have even more information than we have been able to hear today to prepare to appear before this select committee so that all sides are heard. I am the Minister in charge of Security as you know, and I would like to make this statement boldly that I think the Police have been doing an excellent job. (Interjections) The Police have been doing an excellent job in Uganda. As the leader of Government Business told you, that is evidence that this government will not tolerate any behaviour within its armed forces that is contrary to the rules and to the law of this nation.

But this does not mean that there may not be one or two cases of infringement. I was Minister of Defence when that incident happened –(Interruption)

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. First of all, it is very unfortunate for hon. Amama Mbabazi, a man I know very well right from June 1981, you remember very well -(Laughter)- for you to stand here in this House and hon. Ndugu Rugunda as you know, to stand here in this House and say Police is doing a very good job. Go to the DP headquarters now and see the job the Police did by removing the doors of the DP headquarters and come here and then say Police is doing a very good job.

Police is doing a very good job when they are undressing this hon. Member of Parliament? [Hon. Members: “Shame!”] Is the minister in order to stand here in this august House and say, instead of saying, “We know there are problems here and there”, but to say the Police are doing a good job, to condone the act of the Police! 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have many times said that a question of opinion, of assessment cannot provoke a point of order. He may be right, the Police is not doing well in his view but he cannot say that, “Because you are saying this, he is out of order”. (Laughter)  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true my brother hon. Nsubuga and I know each other very well, and it is true that not many weeks ago, because of his knowledge of my steadfast support for the rule of law, he came to me, regarding the Police again, and we solved the problem. That is absolutely correct and I am sure he will not deny that. If he would, he would have stood up to contradict me. I was saying that the Police is doing a very good job. We who are in charge of security are happy with their performance. 

This does not mean that you will not have cases of infringement, like in the case that the Leader of the Opposition talked about, and when we received that information, we acted on it, and as my dear young brother, hon. Odonga Otto said here, appropriate action was taken. So, all I would like to urge my colleagues of this House today is the select committee is the way – it is the way that we can unearth the facts and then act on the basis of facts, having given those against whom accusations are being leveled, the opportunity - you know, you must always have a developed sense of fairness.

Those against whom accusations are being made by my brother hon. Lukwago a lawyer, he should be the leader in this. He should be the one championing fairness that everyone must be given an opportunity to be heard before he or she is condemned. Therefore, I would like to urge the House to set up, be ready, those who have information, like hon. Lukwago; you know really when hon. Lukwago comes here and waves pictures, really why should I believe that what he is saying is factual? Why? That there are people in yellow, therefore, this is the NRM! 

I see him in yellow, his tie is yellow -(Laughter)- it is yellow. She is in yellow, we cannot say -(Laughter)- we cannot say that these are NRM. Therefore, I would like to say that we should give the select committee an opportunity, let the facts come out -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Then we come here to debate on the basis of findings. I thank you.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for their contributions especially the hon. member representing the UPDF. I prefaced my remarks, my paper yesterday by saying that the paper is based on preliminary findings from the Uganda Police.

Secondly, I have obviously listened and read the paper of hon. Nabilah and other colleagues who have spoken. We have versions, different versions of what happened or transpired. So in its own wisdom, Parliament rightly established a select committee to examine all these issues so I expect that the statement that I made yesterday, and the statement made by honourable members, and the paper presented by hon. Nabilah, will all be scrutinised by the select committee and the select committee, I am sure, will also call other people, and get more evidence in order to come up with an objective position, which will subsequently be brought and presented to this House. I will, therefore, not go into the individual contributions made by colleagues because in my view, the different contributions have been enriching and the amount of information that is available will be scrutinised by the select committee.  

However, let me correct one picture that has been created or painted by my brother Ben Wacha that a new Police Force has been trained specifically in order to cause problems initially in Kampala and then in other areas of the country. Mr Speaker, there is not truth at all in that statement -(Interruption)

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have got information that is very pertinent to this House. (Mr Mbabazi rose_) Mr President, hold your fire. Whenever the Opposition is planning activities in Kampala, youth are assembled at a place called CHOGM Pork Joint in Wabigalo. This is the place opposite The Monitor parking yard along Namuwongo Road. These youths are intoxicated and given sticks: kiboko -(Interjections)- yes, Kiboko is like this. They are then loaded onto trucks and dropped at the venue where the Opposition is going to hold an activity. 

Mr Speaker, these youths are commanded by Mulowoza Kayondo, the Deputy RDC of Makindye Division. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable minister to dispute the information that has been given, which information is very critical information, by hon. Ben Wacha without any investigation of this group and without any statement to this effect? Are you in order?

THE SPEAKER: Are you asking the minister or me to rule on the issue? 

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I am asking you to rule on whether the minister is in order to dispute very key and truthful information that has been given to this House by hon. Ben Wacha.

THE SPEAKER: Since it will be necessary for me to visit the CHOGM Pork Joint point –(Laughter)- before I do so, I am not in position to rule on this. Honourable minister, wind up.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: In conclusion, Mr Speaker the Police –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, since you are in the process of going to check on this joint, can the minister desist from making any other statements related to this matter before you go there? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, in conclusion the Uganda Police force, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the government will give maximum support to the select committee that has been established by Parliament in order to get the facts and the way forward in sorting out this matter. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.35
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA ROAD FUND BILL, 2007

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Chairman, on clause 4, I would like to bring in “community access roads” in the definition of public roads. This category of roads is part of the public roads because there is unlimited access by the general public. I beg to move.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, as regards that proposed amendment and what the minister said yesterday in respect to the roads, which are going to be catered for under this fund, am I to understand that all the roads in Uganda will now be centralised and handled by one central organization, that is the ministry?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think that is for purposes of sharing the money.

MR NASASIRA: Hon. Wacha, we are still on the interpretation because the interpretation of public roads did not include community access roads. Now we are bringing them in so that they can be part of the public roads.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker and Mr Minister, but you know the interpretation impinges on what is in the other clauses, which we are going to handle later. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question on the proposed amendment; is it clear?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question on the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, in the same interpretation on clause 4, I would like to put in “fuel levy”; and this one will be taken as a portion of excise duty on petrol and diesel to finance the activities of the fund.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, clause 6(a), I want to insert “in consultation with the minister responsible for roads and the minister responsible for the local government” after the word “minister.” The justification is, with the involvement of the Ministry of Works, the Ministry of Local Government will enhance the technical competence of the fund in achieving its activities. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Mr Chairman, arising out of the debate yesterday, I would like to move an amendment that we have Clause 8(5) to read that “At least a third of the board members shall be women.”

THE SPEAKER: (Laughter)– Okay; that is a proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 8(1), I would like to delete “…with the approval of cabinet” appearing in the last line, to remove the requirement for the cabinet approval in the process of appointment of the boards of director.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why? You want Parliament?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question-

HON. MEMBERS:  No.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I do not accept this proposed amendment by the chairman because there is really no need for Parliament to come to approve this. Once Cabinet has a stand on this, this should suffice like what pertains to other laws in the country.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you will drop your proposed amendments?

MR TINDAMANYIRE: I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Another amendment?

MR OMACH: On clause 8, Mr Chairman, we propose to amend sub-section 2(d) to remove “a representative of the private sector”, and also we propose to remove 2(I), “the executive director of the board” from being members of the board. This will reduce the number of the board members from nine to seven. The justification, Mr Chairman, of removing sub-section (d) of 2 is that already we have other members from the private sector. And sub-section (I), the executive director of the board becomes an ex-officio member of the board but not a fulltime board member. The justification, Mr Chairman, is that we reduce on the expenses as regards to the board. A smaller number is easier to manage and this is also in consonance with other boards. I submit, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 14(3), I want to insert after “efficiency” the word “effectiveness” in that sentence and the justification is to require effectiveness in the performance of the functions of the board prescribed in clause 14(3). I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 21(1a), immediately after the paragraph, we insert “fines under the Traffic and Road Safety Act.” This one is to prescribe the fines payable under the Traffic and Road Safety Act as a source of monies for the road fund. 

MR NGABIRANO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. On clause 21, I would like us to add –

THE CHAIRMAN: No, why don’t we dispose of this? Is there any objection? 

MR NGABIRANO: No.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MR NGABIRANO: I am proposing an amendment that we add PSV licenses as another source of funds- (Interruptions) - funds from PSV licenses be added as another source of funds for this fund. These are Public Service Vehicle licenses which are usually charged. So I propose that we add it as an extra source of funds for this fund.

MR TINDAMANYIRE:  Mr Chairman, I would like to object to this inclusion. One, the PSV will include the licenses that are being paid by our brothers who have been using the water on Lake Victoria especially the people from Ssese Islands.  If we include it, the PSV will also touch them and they will be penalised whereas they are not gaining as people who are on the road.  I beg to move.

MR NGABIRANO: Mr Speaker, I object his justification because yesterday we agreed that the vessels on the water will also be part of the road fund so they will actually benefit from the road fund.  Therefore, the fees accruing from them should also be included as part of the road fund.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question. 

(Question put and negatived.)

PROF. LATIGO:  Mr Chairman, clause 21(1), I had written to the chair of the committee but I see he has not risen. I want to propose to add (I) after (h) - (Interruptions) - yes. Clause 21 (I) I would like to add (I) which is, “…earnings from investments and interest accruing from deposits of the funds in the banks.”  This is to enable us account for the provision in clause 34 where the fund is authorised to invest surplus funds and therefore, if these funds are going to be invested, interest accruing should really accrue to the fund and should be reflected under the revenue accruing to the fund.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, although it is implied but- okay.

MR OMACH:  Mr Chairman while I agree with the Leader of Opposition on his submission, the purpose of this fund is that it will be ring-fenced with the central bank. However, the law allows accrual of interest should that money be put on any account that accrues interest. And there are already laws that deal with that.  So, it is not necessary for us to bring it in this law.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think he wants it for clarity to clear any doubt. That is why he is proposing this extra amendment. It has no harm actually.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR TINDAMANYIRE:  Mr Chairman, on clause 22 I would like to delete (e) and insert it as follows: “research in road works.”  I am deleting “…research related to maintenance of roads and inserting “…research in road works.” The justification is to broaden the scope to which research activities apply.

MR OMACH:  Mr Chairman we have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. LATIGO:  Mr Chairman I had also passed a proposal to amend 22(1) (b) to add, “…erection of sign posts and support of road safety activities…”- (Interruptions) – clause 21(b)- (Interruptions)- yeah clause 22(1)(b)- to amend it to read, “…erection of sign posts…” as a very specific activity because so many of our roads do not have sign posts; part of the reason why we have many accidents.  To merely say road safety activities is vague.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24

MR NASASIRA:  On clause 24– actually sorry, Mr chairman, even- you know on clauses 23 and 24 where you have programmes and plans 25 and even the performance statement, we think where the law requires the funds for the board to submit to the minister, the board should also submit copies to the ministers responsible for roads because they are partners in this. So, you suggest a consequential amendment which will come from 23, 24 and up to 26.

THE CHAIRMAN:  So, we formally pronounce ourselves on that?

PROF. LATIGO:  Mr Chairman I think the proposal that the honourable minister has made is very important.  I read the Bill with the assumption of definition of minister as Minister of Works, until I saw in your proposed amendment to insert “…Minister of Works…” – (Interruptions) - yes “…Responsible for roads…” and then I went back to look at the definition.  I think when it comes to reports the most competent ministry to verify the activities of the fund is actually the Ministry of Works.

CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR TINDAMANYIRE:  Mr Chairman on clause 25, after (i), No.2, I want to introduce a new clause that will read as follows:  clause 25(2)(a) “There is hereby established for every district a committee to be known as the district roads committee.  The committee will consist of the following: 
(i)	the chairman or mayor of every local authority in the district;  
(ii)	all Members of Parliament from the district;
(iii)	 the Chief Administrative Officer ; 
(iv)	The District Roads Engineer;
(v)	The other members co-opted by the committee to represent such special interests as the committee may determine.
(b) The District Roads Committee shall appoint one of the Members under 1 or 2 to be the chairperson of that committee. The District Roads Engineer shall be the secretary of the roads committee. The District Roads Committee shall have powers and perform such functions as are conferred to it by this Act or any other written law. I beg to move.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to propose a further amendment in addition to what the chairman has just suggested. I have looked at the proposal on No. 5, which he has brought and I would like to have very specific provision such that instead of two other co-opted members, we would provide for the secretary of works in the district and the municipal works engineer.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that okay, chairman of the committee? I think it is fair enough. Isn’t it? [Hon. Members: “It is okay”] Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose that clause 25, as –

PROF. LATIGO:  I do not know whether the consequential amendment of the existing 2 – 3 is taken.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yeah! Okay, I propose that clause 25, as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Chairman, on clause 26 (1) where it says that submit a draft performance statement to the minister, in the definition, the minister is the Minister of Finance, but I would like to move an amendment that we add the phrase, “and the minister responsible for the roads.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to

Clause 27, agreed to

Clause 28

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, clause 28 provides that every road maintenance plan and performance statement shall be tabled in Parliament by the minister within 28 days after receipt or the approval by the board of the draft performance statement. I drew the attention of the minister to a provision where he is actually required to approve or return reports to the board. So, if after receipt he returns the report to the board and the 28 passes, what happens? I think we might have to provide for a period for which a report is rejected and returned to the board for further consideration.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what are you proposing? Okay, I propose that clause 28 – 

MR NASASIRA: I wanted to ask hon.Latigo to clarify on this so that we are together because we do not seem to be together.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, he has withdrawn it. 

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Chairman, I propose that we delete the word, “minister” and replace it with the words, “minister responsible for the roads.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 34

MRS SARAH NYOMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I propose that we delete clause 34. The justification is that we build more roads instead of spending this surplus money anyhow.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think they said that this money is for maintenance, not development.

MRS NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, this about surplus.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we were told that there is another fund to deal with development.

MR NGABIRANO: Mr Chairman, I would like to give information that constructing new roads is also an investment. So, if they do any activity involving construction of new roads that is also development.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think it has a restricted meaning. Since this is for maintenance, you cannot turn around and say constructing another road is also an investment.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I think we need to make clarification on this clause. I think what it means is that in case there are surplus funds, instead of keeping this money on the account, you can invest it, in a month or two, certainly using sound procedures. So, to limit the fund and not have this money invested is harmless.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it says that it maybe invested in a manner, which the board may, after consultations with the minister and the minister responsible for roads, determine. So, the best investment as –

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I just want to ask more out of curiosity. Do we really envisage surplus funding in our road maintenance situation in this country? (Laughter) If we do not envisage to have surplus funding – yesterday, the hon. minister talked about the difficulties that he has had because we do not have money. We have also said that we cannot expand roads to be catered for under this fund to include our community roads, but with the same breath we are talking about a surplus to be available to investment. I fear, Mr Chairman – and that is why I want to concur with hon. Sarah Nyombi, that this makes it a vulnerable fund. So, I would like to suggest that it is deleted because it is not practical to have surplus funding anyway.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is an innocent clause, this is in the event that there is – this is what it is. 

MR BAHATI: As you said, this is really an innocent clause. But also we are making laws not only for today, but also for the future and as you heard from hon. Alaso, the minister assured us yesterday that within three years, we shall have no potholes. So, most likely we might have a surplus. 

THE CHAIRMAN: It is actually an innocent clause.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, if it is innocent clause, it may as well be specific so that we spell it out in the Bill that it can be invested in community – whatever role.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it is pervasive to invest that money which has not been used without consultation. The board will consult with the two ministers and then decide on the best investment to make. 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, in the general debate yesterday, I actually opposed the proposal by the committee. The fact of the matter is that roads could easily attract lots of funds and commitment of those funds is not based on the Budget for a particular year; it could be a commitment that spills over. And therefore when they spill over, we want to decide. If you think it will be eaten, then let it be ring fenced. But if you provide for this investment, then even in accounting to the country during the Budget, on what the road fund did, then investment becomes a legal use of the road fund rather than situations where the financial year reaches a stage.

But otherwise, it would be very unfair to have a lot of money that does not earn interest when you can actually earn some interest which would underrate some of the costs and allow for that actual money to do other things.   

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, first of all, the clause says, “Any monies of the fund not immediately required -” it does not say that this money will not be required. It says, “not immediately required”. And to be specifically on the investment is tying the board’s hand. We would like it to be with the board, the two ministers, the one responsible for finance and road to see where – I think that gives a leeway. But do not expect a lot of excess money. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I put the question on clause 34. 

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 43, I would like to make two separate sub clauses. The one supposed to be clause 43 is clause 43(1) and then clause 42(2)(a) reads as follows: The board in consultation with the minister may impose such penalties, including the suspension of the funding allocations, as it may prescribe on a road agency which fails to comply with any directions issued under this Act; clause 42(2)(b) take such a remedial supplementary or alternative measures to ensure the performance of the functions of the road agencies which persistently fail to discharge its functions under this Act. I beg to move.

PROF. LATIGO: I do not know whether in this you want to use agency or agencies. Because the subsequent – it cannot be its functions, but their functions. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.)

MRS NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, on clause 44, let us change the word, “May” to “shall” to make it mandatory.

 THE CHAIRMAN: You see, the reason why it says “may”, is that you may not need it. So, in case they need it, then they can ask for it. 

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 49(1), which reads, “The minister may.” I would wish to put there “Shall”, to make it mandatory for the minister to consult with the board when making regulations since they affect the operations of the board. 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, if you put, “May” and leave the comma, then you are not commanding the consultation with the board. 

MR CHAIRMAN: He has said, “The minister shall” –

PROF. LATIGO: “Shall”, but the comma has to be removed.

MR CHAIRMAN: Okay. Do you have another amendment?

MR NGABIRANO: Mr Chairman, I am proposing that on the regulations we add the distributions formula, which the minister told us about yesterday. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 49 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

MR NASASIRA: Again on the regulations, in consultation with the board, again this is where the minister and the minister responsible for road should work together on this when making regulations. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So you add another minister?

MR NASASIRA: Yes, the minister and the minister responsible for roads. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, on clause 49?

MR OKUPA: Yes, it will not affect it substantially but I just wanted- because yesterday the minister had promised to get us the formula. Possibly if we had looked at that formula –

THE CHAIRMAN: It will be in the regulations.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, the formula will be catered for in clause 49(2), which stipulates the regulations.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 49, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 50(2) where it reads: “The minister may by statutory instrument amend the Second Schedule.” I would like to say that immediately after the word “may” insert the phrase, “in consultation with the Board”. The justification is to empower the board rather than the minister to amend the Schedule relating to meetings of the board.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, there was a concern on how the community roads will be catered for at the sub-county. I wanted to allay the fears of Members. The sub-county will be one of the agencies or a sub agency where the money will go directly to and it is catered for here.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second schedule, agreed to.

The Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports there to.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, The Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ENONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach):  Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Road Fund Bill, 2008” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ENONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach):  Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the Whole House on the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Road Fund, 2007.”
                
(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA ROAD FUND BILL, 2007

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ENONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach):  Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Road Fund Bill, 2008” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Road Fund Bill, 2007” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question.
           
(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE UGANDA ROAD FUND ACT, 2008”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much and congratulations, the Bill has passed into law. (Applause) Before we adjourn, hon. Members, I want to remind you that we decided that tomorrow at 11 a.m. leaders and people from cotton growing areas, which include: Lango, Acholi, Teso, Busoga, Bukedi, Kasese and Bunyoro, should meet with the minister – sorry, and West Nile. I thought West Nile was mostly for Tobacco but now I include it. (Laughter) They will meet in the South Committee room with the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of Finance, Trade and Tourism and other technical people to discuss the urgent matters concerning cotton. Let the leadership of the various districts decide on the members so that we finalise that matter in that meeting.  With this we come to the end of today’s business, the House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.18 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 June 2008 at 2 p.m.)
         

