Thursday, 10 June 2010

Parliament met at 3.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION BY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SPEAKER

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, Your Excellency the Vice President of Uganda, Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya, my Lord the Chief Justice of Uganda, the hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, traditional leaders, the Vice Chairman National Resistance Movement, former leaders, the leaders of political parties, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Ministers, the honourable Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, the honourable ministers, judges and justices of the Court of Judicature, your excellencies the high commissioners, ambassadors and members of the diplomatic corps, honourable Members of Parliament, religious leaders, head of Public Service, members of constitutional commissions, permanent secretaries, the Chief of Defence Forces, Inspector General of Police, the Commissioner General of Prisons, Governor Bank of Uganda, political leaders and distinguished invited guests, ladies and gentlemen,

“WHEREAS under Article 155(1) of the Constitution, His Excellency the President is required to cause to be prepared and read before Parliament in each financial year not later than the 15th day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year; 

AND WHEREAS at the commencement of this session on the 2nd day of June 2010, the Speaker declared that the reading of the Budget Speech shall take place on 10 June 2010;

AND WHEREAS it is expedient that Parliament sits at the premises of Kampala Serena Conference Centre to enable the delivery of the Budget;

NOW THEREFORE, I, Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me by the Constitution, the National Assembly Powers and Privilege Act, and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, hereby proclaim the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre including its fore courtyard and the garden, to be the precincts of Parliament for purposes of enabling the President to deliver the said estimates of revenue and expenditure for fiscal year 2010/2011 to Parliament, on the 10th day of June 2010 at 2.00 p.m.” 

Given under my hand at Parliamentary House, Kampala.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda and distinguished invited guests, Members of Parliament, on behalf of the entire Parliament of Uganda, I warmly welcome you to the Parliament when His Excellency the President of Uganda performs his constitutional duty under Article 155(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which provides as follows: “The president shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year but in any case not later than the 15th day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year”. 

It is, therefore, my pleasure and honour to invite the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to whom His Excellency the President has assigned the responsibility as aforementioned, to carry out her assignment. Hon. Minister.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009/2010

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2010/2011
	
3.23
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): In the name of God most gracious and most merciful. Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, your Excellency the Vice President, the Rt Hon. Speaker, my Lord the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Leader of Opposition, hon. ministers, colleagues, hon. Members, invited guests, ladies and gentlemen.

Mr Speaker, in accordance with our national motto, “For God and My Country,” I would like to start by imploring the Almighty God to grace this occasion and to grant me wisdom and strength as I conduct this noble national duty on behalf of His Excellency the President, and to provide special grace to this august House to listen attentively –(Laughter)– and appreciate the blessing in this budget on behalf of the people of Uganda. With humility, I dedicate this time to God and my country. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to start off with an apology. In the spirit of the East African Community, I should have used Swahili to present this budget like I did last year. However, I observed that a number of colleagues did not follow the Swahili I used last year. (Laughter) When I checked with the Clerk - I went to ask him for a list of Members of Parliament who were attending Swahili lessons, and he told me there were none. 

Consequently, in the spirit of democracy, since most Members of Parliament do not understand the regional language which is highly cherished by the NRM, I have decided to use English, but next time I will use Swahili and I encourage honourable colleagues to learn the language. (Laughter)

I. PREAMBLE

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration of:

1.	The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the financial year 2009/2010

2.	The proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for financial year 2010/2011.

Mr Speaker, Article 155(1) of the Constitution requires the President to cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament, estimates of revenue and expenditure for the next financial year. I am accordingly performing this duty with pleasure on behalf of His Excellency the President. I wish to thank the President for giving me another opportunity to deliver another budget speech on his behalf.

II. INTRODUCTION

Mr Speaker, let me express my gratitude to his Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for his visionary and tested leadership which has spearheaded the return to peace throughout the country, and the reconstruction of our economy.

Since 1986, the President has overseen the management of the economy, transforming it from one of despair to one of great hope - I think all Members of Parliament should clap for this. Due to sound economic management under the NRM Government, the economy has continued to grow at a pace averaging 8.4 percent since 2006. This solid performance is even higher than the remarkable economic growth that Uganda has experienced since 1986, which has led to a six-fold increase in the size of the economy that now stands at Shs. 34.2 Trillion. 

The economy has been transformed from a largely agriculture-based one, to one spurred by significant industrial and service growth. The industrial sector has increased its share in GDP from 9.9 percent in 1986 to 24.5 per cent in 2009; the service sector has increased from 36.1 percent in 1985 to 50.3 percent, while the dominance of the agricultural sector has declined from 53.9 percent in 1985 to 14.9 percent in 2009, indicating the extent of transformation. 

Bringing inflation down and keeping it to single digit from the peak when annual headline inflation rates averaged about 153 percent between 1986 and the 1990s is yet another major achievement of the NRM. Even skeptics cannot justifiably belittle the significant progress our economy has made under the sound economic management of the NRM Government.

III.	STRUCTURE OF THE BUDGET STATEMENT

Mr Speaker, the structure of the budget I am presenting today is as follows:

First, I will highlight the economic and sector Performance in line with the policy pronouncements made in my budget speech for the financial year 2009/2010;

Secondly, I will outline some of the emerging trends in the domestic, regional and international economy and the outlook for the financial year 2010/2011.

Thirdly, I will focus on the budget strategy and priorities for the financial year 2010.

Finally, I will announce the proposed taxation and revenue measures and outline the way forward.

IV.	ECONOMIC AND SECTORAL PERFORMANCE FOR THE FY 2009/2010 
AND OUTLOOK FOR THE FY 2010/2011

Performance of the Economy

On economic and sector performance for the year ending, and outlook for financial 2010/2011, I will start with the performance of the economy.

Mr Speaker, a year ago, I presented a budget strategy which broadly focused on improving the business climate of the country, and revitalizing production through a range of strategic interventions. I am glad to report significant progress in the following areas:

Economic Growth

On economic growth, the economy is estimated to have grown by 5.8 percent in real terms in 2009/10, compared to 7.2 percent growth recorded in 2008/2009. This year’s performance is in line with the Eastern African region average growth rate of 5.75 percent, which is the highest in the Africa region. Many African countries have had their GDP growth below 3 percent. 

This shows the resilience of the region to economic shocks. Honourable members may recall that at this time last year, we were concerned about the impact of the global economic crisis on our economy, which has had a secondary lagged effect. The slowdown in economic growth has also been attributed to natural calamities like the drought experienced in most parts of the country, plus the rising oil and fuel prices globally.

Inflation

Mr Speaker, on inflation, the economy has experienced inflationary pressures since 2008 due to events which led to double digit inflation for the first time since the financial year 1991/1992. These events ranged from the 2008 floods in the Eastern region, rising region-wide demand for food crops and regional disturbances, as well as the rise in global prices of oil and food, which exerted significant upward pressure on commodity prices. 

The country experienced high fuel prices in March this year due to shortages arising from the temporary suspension of operations on the oil pipe line from Mombasa to Eldoret. This resulted in higher fuel pump prices and increased costs, which were passed on to consumers through production and transport prices.

In response to these developments, the able Government prudently implemented structural and ant-inflationary policies in collaboration with Bank of Uganda. Government’s timely interventions in the agricultural sector, together with the increased regional trade, also led to greater agricultural productivity and output, keeping food inflation in check. There was a lot of demand for food products from the neigbouring countries; this was an opportunity for Uganda, but the supply could not adequately cover the demand. 

Mr Speaker, as a result, inflation has since reverted to a single digit from 13.9 percent last financial year, to 4.4 percent by the end of May 2010.

Exchange Rate

The exchange rate appreciated from over Shs 2,100 in July 2009 to Shs 1,874 in November due to increased inflows from exports and inflows from foreign direct investments, and remittances from our people working abroad.

However, it depreciated to Shs 2200 in May 2010 driven by increased demand for dollars, together with the depreciation of the Euro against the dollar. The turmoil in the Euro Zone has also contributed to the strengthening of the dollar against other currencies as global markets continue to shift into dollar denominated assets.

International Trade

The performance of exports of tea, tobacco and fish sectors was over 25 percent higher in this financial year than in the previous year. Ninety Six Thousand (96,000) metric tons of tobacco was exported, compared to 26,000 metric tons in the previous year.

Recently, the volcanic ash cloud which affected Europe caused an estimated 35 percent drop in flower exports and 6 percent reduction in fish exports in the month of April 2010. However, exports in both the flowers and fish sectors have since rebounded. 

Import growth has stagnated due to a fall in private sector imports. The total import bill for the twelve months up to end of March 2010 was around US$ 3.9 billion, down by 6.1 percent compared to the previous year.

Mr Speaker, Uganda is the only country in the East African region and on the African continent which did not resort to the International Monetary Fund for balance of payments support during the global economic crisis. (Applause) This was due to the strength of our international reserves position, which stood at 5.3 months of imports, reflecting the sound economic management by the NRM Government. (Applause)

Financial Sector 

The banking sector continued to support growth of businesses by increasing the range of products and services offered and by expanding the network. During the year, 21 new bank branches were opened to expand access to the banking system. The industry has managed to combine rapid expansion with financial stability. The ratio of non-performing loans remains at around 3 percent, which is within international standards.

Due to competition in retail banking, the private sector is demanding diversified banking products from the sector, beyond what is covered under the existing Law. I will, therefore, be submitting amendments to the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 to Parliament, which will allow commercial banks to offer bank assurance, financial products under Islamic banking and other market responsive products to their customers. This will allow banks to move into previously untapped markets. (Applause) 

I expected the members to really appreciate this – but I am surprised. I think there are some Members of Parliament who do not wish our people well. 

The Rural Financial Services Strategy continued to increase coverage of services to the wider population, especially in rural areas. Government has facilitated the establishment and strengthening of the financial infrastructure of the SACCOs and other micro-finance institutions as means for financial intermediation. There are now over 1,060 sub-counties, city divisions and municipal divisions with registered SACCOs, having over one million members in total. (Applause) The SACCO infrastructure has generated Shs 44 billion as share capital, Shs 83 billion as savings and Shs 122 billion in their lending portfolio in the financial year ending.

Technological innovations have now made it possible to extend financial services to millions outside the formal banking system. A case in point is mobile telephone money transfer services that allow mobile phone users to make financial transactions or transfers across the country conveniently and at low cost. 

MTN Mobile Money, ZAP and M-Sente have demonstrated that low cost means that use of modern technology can effectively expand the financial services frontier. Today, millions of Ugandans use mobile money to make payments, send remittances, and store funds for short periods. These innovations have illustrated how financial services can be extended to millions of people outside the formal banking sector at low costs and all these are happening under the NRM Government. (Applause)

The Bank of Uganda continues to maintain effective regulatory and supervisory safeguards to ensure that expanded access to banking is not at the expense of financial stability. Because of prudent regulation, the banking sector in Uganda has been insulated against the contagion of the toxic assets from the global banks. I commend the Governor Bank of Uganda and his team for managing the sector efficiently. (Applause)

Interest Rates

Mr Speaker, lending rates on shilling denominated loans also fell from 21.8 percent in August last year to 19.6 percent in January this year. However, this is still higher than the East African regional average, which is at about 15 percent.

Government’s efforts to bring down interest rates have yielded some results that have seen yields on Treasury bills decline. Government has introduced measures to bring interest rates down, such as the introduction of the Credit Reference Bureau, lowering cost of doing business in Uganda, and increasing competition between banks and boosting transparency by regularly publishing bank rates and charges, as well as maintaining macro-economic stability and fiscal consolidation.

Capital Markets

In line with the diversification process of the financial sector, the value of wealth held by Ugandans in the form of capital and equity shares has continued to grow. The Initial Public Offer (IPO) of the National Insurance Corporation was oversubscribed by 32 percent and has increased the opportunity for the public to invest in the insurance sector in particular, and the equity markets, in general. Ninety two percent of shares in the National Insurance Corporation were bought by Ugandans. (Applause) 

I urge companies to embrace capital markets as a source of long-term financing as we broaden the equity market. This is yet another record success of the NRM Government’s Policy of privatization of public enterprises, which give Ugandans an opportunity to directly own shares in public enterprises - (Applause)- before when they were 100 percent owned by Government, Ugandans had no window to own a block of these enterprises, but now the door is wide open.

Mr Speaker, the Securities Central Depository which was recently launched, will foster safer and more efficient clearance and settlement of securities. It will also lead to electronic trading once the automated trading system is in place. This computer-based trading will enable negotiations to take place between bidders anonymously, thereby reducing the cost of information exchange between participants. This system will also be linked with other East African stock markets.

Insurance Services

While our insurance service penetration is still low by regional standards and accounts for less than one percent of GDP, we commend the effort of the industry players who have played a big role to create awareness. As a result, the industry has registered an increase in insurance premium from Shs 129 billion in 2008/2009 to Shs 167 billion this year, mainly dominated by non-life insurance which accounts for over 90 percent. 

The insurance industry has also taken advantage of the opportunities available under the African Trade Insurance (ATI) Agency and so far, the agency has underwritten 14 projects in Uganda worth $ 106 million in the areas of manufacturing, telecommunication and infrastructure. I, therefore, urge the Ugandan business community to take advantage of the insurance policies available at ATI to increase competitiveness and profitability of their businesses by hedging against insurable risks.

Fiscal Performance

The expenditure out-turn for the financial year 2009/2010 budget is projected at Shs 6,576 billion, financed by domestic sources amounting to Shs 4,856 billion and Shs 1,720 billion from external loans and grants. URA revenue is projected to perform better this year with a 17.6 percent annual growth compared to the 15.6 percent growth in the previous year. This revenue effort is equivalent to 12.5 percent of GDP and I must admit that this is still low though it is a great improvement from the 4.23 percent of revenue as a percentage of GDP, collected in 1987. Several reforms are currently being implemented to improve tax administration. 

Overall expenditure is projected to perform at about 90 percent, the underperformance being on account of slow performance of the development budget. This low absorption is expected to be transitory, as ministries, departments and agencies become more conversant with new conditions precedent to accessing funds, which include preparation of workplans, recruitment and procurement plans which are meant to enable them implement their activities in a timely manner. The new requirements were instituted by my ministry to ensure value for money right from the time of disbursement of Government funds.

External support is projected to finance about 26 percent of the financial year 2010/2011 budget. The sectors that are expected to receive the highest support are Transport and Works, Agriculture, and Public Sector Management, which are key to growth and are complimentary sectors in the economy.

Sector Performance for the FY 2009/2010

Mr Speaker, in the budget statement of this financial year, I announced a number of measures aimed at stimulating economic growth with substantial allocations in the following areas: Increasing agricultural production and value addition; transport infrastructure; energy infrastructure; human resource development; and peace, security and good governance. These were priorities in last year’s budget.

For transparency and accountability, which is a cherished principle of the NRM Government, it is imperative that I present the key achievements and challenges of the financial year 2009/2010, before I present the Budget Strategy and Priorities for fiscal year 2010/2011.

Increasing agricultural production and value addition

In the agricultural sector, the budget for the financial year 2009/2010 set out to address the biggest constraints to agricultural production including crop pests and livestock diseases, lack of suitable inputs and appropriate technologies to increase productivity, the vagaries of weather and limited access to financial and extension services.

Mr Speaker, we undertook these interventions which enabled the agricultural sector to recover from the earlier slowdown in growth. This is exhibited by bumper harvests in the financial year 2009/10 in many parts of the country. I think those watching the screen can see evidence of the bumper harvest. (Laughter)

Preliminary estimates of agricultural sector output covering cash and food crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries grew by 2.4 percent in FY 2009/10 compared to 2.3 percent in the previous financial year, even as falling fish stocks led to the fisheries sub-sector to experience an annual decline of 7.3 percent. The bumper harvest of largely maize produce, caused challenges of post harvest handling, which Government is addressing.

Mr Speaker, the restructuring of NAADS has enabled the organisation to provide better advisory services. NAADS has enabled farmers to access technologies and gradually shift from subsistence to market based activities. It supported the establishment and development of over 1,000 sub-county farmer fora and over 60,000 technology learning sites. During the financial year, NAADS extended direct support to over 31,000 farmers in form of improved technologies for demonstration and expanded coverage.

As articulated by His Excellency the President in the State of the Nation Address, NAADS extended different technologies in crop, livestock, fisheries and agriculture, to farmers. Tractor hire services were also operationalised in Teso, Lango, Acholi, West Nile and Busoga regions. 

In order to increase the availability of water for production, funds were provided for the construction of bulk water facilities as well. The dams and valley tanks which were commissioned are as follows: 

i)	Rwenjubu in Isingiro District; 
ii)	Makukulu in Lyantonde District; 
iii)	Kibanda in Rakai District; 
iv)	Dyangoma in Mubende District; 
v)	Kasejere in Kiboga District; 
vi)	Ajamaka in Kumi District; 
vii)	Atar in Apac District; 
viii)	Wangkwok in Kitgum District; 
ix)	Imeri in Kamuli District; and 
x)	Kasiira in Kumi District.

Mr Speaker, for the first time, Government in partnership with commercial banks, established an agricultural credit facility amounting to Shs 60 billion to be lent to borrowers at interest rates not exceeding 10 percent per annum for a maximum period not exceeding eight years. This is in response to the public outcry for funds for financing the agricultural sector. 

Effective from next financial year, banks have agreed to double their contributions to Shs 60 billion, bringing the total scheme to Shs 90 billion. (Applause) The objective of the credit facility is to facilitate farmers in the acquisition of agricultural and agro-processing machinery and equipment. To date, Shs 54 billion has been disbursed from Government and partner financial institutions investments in the following areas:

i)	Tractors, planters and other farm implements
ii)	Irrigation systems
iii)	Milk processing equipment
iv)	Maize and feed mills
v)	Tea processing plant and machinery
vi)	Refrigeration equipment for meat processing; and
vii)	Flower and horticulture equipment

Industrialisation and value addition

In order to improve the business environment and competitiveness of Uganda’s economy, Government set aside funds for industrialisation and value addition. Through the concerted efforts by His Excellency the President, Government has supported Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) to become a centre of excellence in value addition, business incubation, innovation, product and process design, as well as technology transfer. UIRI has undertaken the following interventions, among others, as a result of the government intervention:

i)	Developed new technologies for soap production;
ii)	Developed machinery for paper production from banana stems and other fibres;
iii)	Fabricated machinery for producing feeds;
iv)	Developed machinery for silk processing;
v)	Built a variety of looms for weaving and enhanced its capacity to process bamboo into a variety of products; and
vi)	Renovated and equipped a vaccine production pilot plant. (Applause) 

These are efforts by our Ugandan scientists. 

The above technologies have all been prototyped and are ready for commercialisation. So, for the honourable Members of Parliament who want to access these technologies, they are already available and you can buy them for your constituents. 

Besides that, virtual incubation centres have been built in Lira District for peanut butter production, and in Mpigi District for fruit juice processing. I thought the Members of Parliament from those areas are happy with those innovations. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, Government has also provided support towards the new business incubation centre at Makerere University Department of Food Science to enable it equip students and new graduates of Food Science Technology with skills and knowledge in the operation and management of agro-processing enterprises in order for them to become job-makers and employers. This is being done through the following:

i)	Developing viable technologies and knowledge driven food processing and nutrition enterprises.
ii)	Promoting entrepreneurship amongst researchers and graduates.
iii)	Providing support to commercial enterprises based on technologies developed at the university.
iv)	Building human capacity in agro-processing, value-addition, nutrition and entrepreneurship.

Mr Speaker, Special Economic Zones (SEZ) have been set up in Kampala Industrial and Business Park (KIBP) at Namanve, Luzira, Mbarara and Bweyogere. Land for two estates in Mbale and Soroti was acquired and extra land was identified in Kasese, Masaka, Gulu, Fort-Portal, Jinja, Bukwo, Arua and Nakasongola for the same purpose. Graveling of 15 kilometers of road and construction of office blocks in Namanve was completed and 230 plots were allocated to investors.

The Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) which was revived as the investment arm of Government is already playing a role in the implementation of the Soroti Fruit Processing Facility Project, the Tororo Phosphates Mining Project and the manufacture of iron and steel from the abundant iron ore deposits in Kabale and Kisoro districts.

Mr Speaker, in order to strengthen the legal framework for improving the business environment, the following Acts were passed by Parliament: The Mortgage Act, 2009; The Trade Secrets Act, 2009; The Hire Purchase Act, 2009; The Partnership Act, 2009; The Contracts Act, 2009. 

In addition, the following Bills are before Parliament:

The Companies Bill, 2009; The Insolvency Bill, 2008; The Chattel Securities Bill, 2008; The Trademarks Bill, 2008; The E-Transactions Bill ,2008; The Computer Misuse Bill, 2008; The E-Signature Bill, 2008; The Industrial Property Bill, 2009; and The Anti-Money Laundering Bill.

The following draft Bills are before Cabinet: The Sale of Goods Bill, 2008; The Counterfeits Bill, 2009; The Capital Markets Amendment Bill, 2009; and The Free Zones Bill.

Mr Speaker, through you, I want to thank the Eighth Parliament for enacting those laws. (Applause) I am requesting Parliament for the speedy enactment of the pending enabling laws before we go for elections.

In line with the National Skills Programme, Enterprise Uganda has supported the youth to generate jobs. Over 7,000 youth have benefited from the Business and Enterprise Start-up Tool (BEST) clinics in Kampala and up-country. Within six months of gaining the business and entrepreneurship skills, 60-65 percent of the youth under the programme have been able not only to employ themselves, but have each generated one or two additional jobs. (Applause)

Transport Infrastructure

Road infrastructure

Mr Speaker, during the FY 2009/2010, Government continued to improve the condition of the road network through tarmacking gravel roads, rehabilitation and maintenance of the national, district and community access roads. 

I am happy to report that Government is making progress in the road sector. The list of tarmacked roads under reconstruction, and gravel roads being upgraded to tarmac, total 3,624 kilometers throughout the country. Some of these roads are as follows - I think you can see some of them:

i)	Kampala Northern Bypass which was completed in September 2009;
ii)	Soroti-Dokolo which was completed in December 2009;
iii)	Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Lamia border; Construction commenced;
iv)	Completion of the design of Gulu-Atiak-Bibia/Nimule, and Ntungamo-Mirama Hill/Kagamba-Ishaka roads was also completed;
v)	Substantial progress towards completion of Gayaza-Zirobwe-Wobulenzi, and a very important road, the Matugga-Semuto-Kapeeka Road in Nakaseke District.  (Applause)

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Road Fund (URF) commenced operations in January 2010 and has financed the routine maintenance of over 29,000 kilometers of road, the rehabilitation of about 1,200 kilometers, and maintained 87 bridges. Under the District, Urban and Community Access Road (DUCAR) network, an additional 31,700 kilometers and about 5,000 kilometers of community access roads have been maintained under routine and periodic maintenance, respectively. 

In order to address the slow pace of road maintenance in Kampala City, with effect from the third quarter of financial year 2009/10, the five divisions of Kampala City Council started receiving road maintenance funds directly from the Uganda Road Fund. (Interjections) This will continue as a means of improving road maintenance in the city. And I am sure these days it is a common feature to see potholes being filled in Kampala.   

Energy Infrastructure

Electricity Generation

Mr Speaker, I am happy to report that the power supply has considerably increased since mid-2005. As stated in the State of the Nation Address, Government’s major priority in the energy sector remains focused on increasing generation and transmission capacity through construction of large and mini hydro-power plants. 

The construction of the 250 megawatts Bujagali Hydropower Project is on course and will be completed as scheduled. The feasibility studies for the 700 megawatts Karuma and the 100 megawatts Isimba Hydropower Projects are also underway. The 13 megawatts Bugoye renewable energy project was also completed and commissioned during the financial year. Load shedding is currently at a minimum, and only localised due to network overloading. 

Rural Electrification

Mr Speaker, under rural electrification, for emphasis allow me to restate the list of rural electrification schemes which were articulated in the State of the Nation Address under the Rural Electrification Programme - I know this is of interest to honourable Members as February 2011 gets closer. 

The following schemes were completed during the FY 2009/10: Corner Kilak-Patongo-Adiang-Abim-Kiru with tee-offs to Pader and Kalongo, Iceme-Oyam District headquarters and environs. The  restoration of Soroti-Kalaki-Lwala power line, Kapchorwa-Kaprooni-Kelle Farm Institute, restoration of Kidongole-Bukedea-Masanda in Mbale, Bumbeire in Bushenyi, Atari in Apac; Buwekula-Musika-Kanyogoga in Jinja, and Kiyunga-Mbulamuti in Kamuli. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, progress on the above schemes is a further demonstration of the NRM Government’s commitment to deliver investments throughout the country as promised under the NRM 2006 Manifesto. (Applause)

Petroleum Exploration and Production

Mr Speaker, investment in petroleum exploration has so far exceeded US$ 900 million and is expected to increase when the development and production phases commence. To date, five out of the 10 exploration areas in the Albertine Graben are licensed to various companies. The principles for the Oil and Gas Legal and Regulatory Framework were approved by Cabinet and the Bill will be submitted to Parliament in the next financial year. 

In the financial year ending, as articulated in the State of the Nation Address, 33 out of 35 wells which were sunk have yielded hydrocarbons, which is a positive sign of existence of oil.

Human Resource Development

Education

Mr Speaker, in the financial year ending, the education sector placed focus on the consolidation of the achievements so far gained under Universal Primary and Secondary Education programmes. Specific emphasis was put on improvement of the quality of schooling through the construction, provision of instructional materials and improving inspection and sanitation in primary schools. 
 
The Universal Secondary Education programme was rolled out to cover senior four. In addition, Government has carried out emergency repairs in the following places: Kakungube and Kamodi secondary schools, and completed four classroom blocks in ten new seed secondary schools at Ruyonza, Busembatia, Serere, Busalaamu, Rubongi Army, Buhimba, Kapchorwa secondary schools and Bukooli College. 

The ground floors of storied blocks at Kabale, Pallisa and Nkoma secondary schools were also completed. An administration block at Kyamate Secondary School, a classroom block, science laboratory and administration lock at Rubaare Secondary School were also constructed. Government has also completed the payment for land compensation for the construction of Entebbe Comprehensive School. 

I also would like to report that Government has financed the completion of construction of a total 1,800 classrooms. An additional 2,600 new classrooms, 130 multi-purpose science rooms, 28 libraries, and 23 teachers’ houses are in final stages of completion. 

In higher education, Government recognises the contribution of the private sector to the provision of access to higher Education. Accordingly, Government has supported the following private universities with a total of Shs 7.7 billion. These are: Bugema University, Busoga University, Kampala International University, Kumi University, Mountains of the Moon University, Nkumba University, Uganda Christian University in Mukono and Uganda Martyrs University in Nkozi. Government has also supported the Islamic University in Uganda by guaranteeing their borrowing from the Islamic Development Bank. 

In order to provide the necessary human resource for the petroleum sector, the Uganda Petroleum Institute was established at Kigumba, with an initial allocation of Shs 1.5 billion for infrastructure development, and the Institute is now operational. I am happy to report that 30 students in geo-physics, chemistry and oil science related disciplines have been admitted to the institute this year. 

Mr Speaker, with respect to vocational education and training, Government completed construction of 44 classrooms and 34 workshops in 14 vocational schools enrolling Primary 7 leavers in the financial year ending.  Furthermore, machinery and equipment has been supplied to 15 vocational schools enrolling Primary 7 leavers. 

In addition, the following outputs were achieved: 

i)	Construction of a library block ongoing at Uganda College of Commerce, Kabale; 
ii)	Construction of a library block ongoing at Uganda Technical College, Elgon;  
iii)	Rehabilitation of a classroom and dormitory at Lake Katwe Technical Institute; 
iv)	Provision of 3 workshops, mainhall, and 2 dormitories at Nalwire Technical Institute; and 
v)	Training of 80 Instructors and 60 technical teachers is ongoing at Uganda Technical Colleges at Bushenyi, Elgon, Kichwamba, Lira and the Nakawa Vocational Training Institute. 

The procurement process for construction of an administration block, 2 workshops and 2 dormitories at Ahmed Sseguya Memorial Technical Institute is ongoing. 

Health 

Mr Speaker, under the health sector, according to the 2009 Uganda Malaria Indicator Survey, the proportion of households having at least an insecticide –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I am finding it hard to compete against the voices of the honourable members – the proportion of households having at least an insecticide treated mosquito net increased from 49 percent in the financial year 2008/2009, to 59 percent this year. 

In November 2009, the Global Fund in Geneva disbursed US$ 40 million to Uganda for procurement of Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets (LLITNS). Delivery of the nets throughout the country, which started in February 2010, is expected to be completed by this financial year. 

The Ministry of Health attained the targeted coverage for indoor residual spraying in the seven districts where malaria is endemic. These districts are: Apac, Pader, Kitgum, Oyam, Gulu, Katakwi. 

Mr Speaker, the scheduled rehabilitation and reconstruction of regional referral hospitals, particularly of Lira, Masaka and Kabale, are in advanced stages. The construction of six mental health units at Masaka, Jinja, Mubende and Mbale, Moroto and Lira referral hospitals is near completion. Civil works have been completed with the facilities commissioned at Masaka, Jinja, Mubende, Lira, and Mbale. 

The construction and rehabilitation of 13 Health Centre IVs and 26 Health Centre IIIs in the Southern Uganda districts of Mbarara, Isingiro, Ibanda, Kiruhura, Ntungamo, Bushenyi, Rukungiri, Kabale, and Kanungu is at an advanced stage. However, delays have been reported in the rehabilitation works in Soroti and Buhinga. 

Water and Environment 

Water is life. Mr Speaker, under water for production, the following schemes were completed in the financial year ending. These are: Rubaare and Nshenyi Valley tanks in Ntungamo, Kailong Dam in Kotido, Leye Dam in Apac and Mayikalo Dam in Sembabule. 

In addition, construction of the following dams is almost complete: Kagango Dam, Kagamba and Obwongerero valley tanks in Isingiro District; Kawomeri Dam in Abim, Olelpec and Alamia valley tanks. Other ongoing projects include: Akwera Dam in Lira, Lutunku and Kisozi valley tanks in Sembabule, Longoromit Dam in Kabong, Kobebe Dam in Moroto and Arechet Dam also in Moroto District.

The challenge in this sector is the unit cost, which appears to be disproportionately higher than the increases in the underlying cost of inputs. 

Mr Speaker, rainwater harvesting aims at supplementing other efforts to improve safe water supply, which currently stands at 65 percent. The main intervention is to implement demonstration schemes and subsidising of rainwater storage tanks for basic household consumption and promote the use through raising awareness. (Laughter) A total of 385 rainwater harvesting systems were constructed by 2007 in the districts of Mbarara, Bushenyi and Isingiro. 

In the financial year ending, 340 rain harvesting systems are under installation in Kakyera, Lwamagwa, Ddwaniro, and Kyalulangira sub-counties in Rakai District and in Namasagali and Balawoli sub-counties in Kamiuli District. 

Information and Communication Technology 

Mr Speaker, on Information and Communication Technology, I would like to report that this financial year, Government planned to complete the inter-connectivity of the entire country by laying over 1500 km of optical fibre to link most major towns in the country. Under phase two of the project, the optic fibre cable was laid through Jinja, Iganga, Bugiri, Busia, Tororo, Mbale, Kumi and Soroti; Luwero, Nakasongola, Masindi, Lira and Gulu.; Mityana, Mubende, Kyenjojo, Kabarole, Kasese, Bushenyi, Mbarara, Masaka and Mpigi were also covered. The National Information Technology Authority (NITA-U) set up business information centres in the districts of Busia, Iganga, Lira, Kamwenge, Mityana and Rukungiri.

Increasing Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) to support efficient delivery of infrastructure services

Government recently approved the PPP Policy and principles to be enshrined in the PPP Bill for presentation to Parliament in the coming financial year. 

The proposed PPP Bill will provide the framework for the implementation of selected public infrastructure by harnessing private sector financial and human resource skills, while sharing the construction and operational risks between public and private sectors. This will ensure improved efficiency and value for money in the delivery of public infrastructure services including speedy implementation of public-private sector investments.

In the meantime, the Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisons Services are being supported to deliver office and housing accommodation through a PPP arrangement under existing laws and regulations.

Reconstruction Programmes

Northern Uganda Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP)

Mr Speaker, in the current financial year, Government has commenced on the full implementation of the programme with an allocation of Shs 100 billion which has been fully disbursed.

In terms of planned investments, over 90 percent of the activities are being implemented with the following as the key major deliverables: 

i)	Over 700 classrooms are under construction; 
ii)	55 have been completed; 
iii)	275 teachers’ houses are under construction; 
iv)	930 toilet stances are being built; 
v)	Over 220 boreholes are under construction; 
vi)	About 30 shallow wells are under construction; 
vii)	160 boreholes have been rehabilitated; 
viii)	46 maternity wards are under construction; 
ix)	203 health workers’ houses are under re-construction; 
x)	36 out-patient departments are under construction; 
xi)	25 new health centre IIs are under construction; 
xii)	670 kilometres of feeder roads have been rehabilitated; and
xiii)	Over 360 kilometres of community access roads have been opened up.

In addition, the resettlement programme -(Applause)- thank you very much. 

The resettlement programme for former Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) registered remarkable achievements. For example, under the tractor hire scheme, a number of tractors were procured and communities were supported to open up land which has increased food production in the region. 

Seven thousand nine hundred hectares of land have been allocated for ploughing under the scheme. Iron sheets were procured and distributed to returnees. We have piloted construction of low cost housing using hydra form technology in Karamoja, Teso and Acholi regions, which has worked very well. (Applause) Government has also procured 300 ox-ploughs, 700 oxen and 350 heifers to distribute to farmers in the Lango sub-region, as part of the restocking programme for that area. (Applause)

The Luwero-Rwenzori Development Plan

Mr Speaker, last month, Government launched a 5-year development plan for the Luwero-Rwenzori Reconstruction Programme. This is an affirmative plan for this area that was affected by the NRA protracted liberation war and the ADF insurgency. 

In financial year 2009/10, Shs 10 billion was provided to cover over 40 districts in the two regions. So far, grants have been provided to 240 parishes, 60 sub-counties and 7 districts to support interventions in agricultural commercialization, construction of roads and bridges, schools and water in the cattle corridor. 

In financial year 2010/11, the plan will focus on establishing secondary schools in 50 sub-counties and primary schools in 108 parishes which have none. In addition, support will be extended to water, roads and construction of bridges.

Mr Speaker, I now want to move to the economic outlook for the year 2010 and the medium term. But before I do so, let me get energised. (Laughter)(Applause)

V. ECONOMIC OUTLOOK 2010 AND THE MEDIUM TERM

Growth Prospects

As stated in the State of the Nation Address, the economy has performed very well in the face of the global financial crisis that erupted in 2008. While the first rounds of effects of the global financial crisis were relatively limited, the international economy remains volatile. The recent turbulence in the Euro-zone has raised some challenges for our economy. The global economy is still clouded by a high degree of uncertainty but this, so far, should not warrant a radical change in the near term macroeconomic policy of the budget which I am presenting to the House today.

We shall continue to monitor the developments closely and we stand ready to adjust policies promptly if needed. We have a competent team to do this. (Applause)

Regardless of the recent developments, the economic growth outlook for the medium term remains positive and reflects the resilience of our economy because of the continued economic stability and diversification of our exports in the regional markets. The economy is projected to grow at 6.4 percent in the coming financial year and at an average rate of 7 percent for the outer years. This compares favourably with a forecasted growth trends in the Eastern Africa region where growth is expected to rebound to the rates of six percent per annum.

Balance of Payments

Under balance of payments, the coffee sector is expected to rebound in financial year 2010/2011. We expect to ship 3.15 million bags of coffee compared to 2.95 million last year, representing 10 percent increase in the value of the exports.

The tobacco sector is also continuing its rapid progress, and exports for next financial year are projected to be worth over US$ 100 million for the first time from an average of US$ 58 million over the last three years. I will be requesting Bank of Uganda to revive the study of the domestic resource costs (DRC) and also compile the index of agricultural production statistics so as to assess the relative price competitiveness of agricultural commodities.

Inflation

Mr Speaker, the NRM Government remains committed to low and stable inflation over the medium-term in order to provide a stable environment for investment. Government will continue to aim at stimulating demand in the economy while keeping inflation at around five percent.

Interest Rates

On interest rates, we realise the problems associated with high interest rates and are, therefore, working with commercial banks to bring lending rates down. Government is proceeding with the computerisation of land registries as well as lowering the cost of doing business through investments in the necessary economic, physical, energy and social infrastructure, and also underwriting risks which are mainly feared by the commercial banks as the case is under the Agricultural Guarantee Scheme. The introduction of the National Identification System and the full operationalisation of the Credit Reference Bureau, will further reduce risks, which raise the cost of loanable funds. 

The operationalisation, in a phased manner, starting next financial year, of the fibre optic-based National Transmission Backbone Infrastructure (NBI) will also reduce the cost of communication, which is high to the financial sector.

Deepening Regional Integration

Mr Speaker, on 1st July, 2010 - 20 days from now - the East African Community will establish a single economic territory within which business and labour will operate. It is –(Applause)- envisaged that the EAC Common Market will lead to greater productive efficiency, higher levels of domestic and foreign investments, increased employment and growth of intra-regional as well as extra-regional trade. 

The common market allows freedom of movement of goods, services, capital, business enterprises and skilled labour within an area bound by a customs union. The customs union is almost completed and the entire EAC region is looking forward to implementation of the common market. I am sure the Eighth Parliament looks forward to the same. 

We give credit to His Excellency the President for his commitment and strong support towards regional integration. (Applause) I am sure all of us know the role he has played in getting this integration to full shot. 

VI. Budget Strategy for the financial year 2010/2011

Mr Speaker, let me now turn to the Budget Strategy for the financial year 2010/2011. 

The theme for next year’s budget is “Strategic Priorities to Accelerate Growth, Employment and Socio-Economic Transformation for Prosperity,” in line with the thrust of the National Development Plan. 

The coming financial year budget marks the transition from the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) to the recently launched National Development Plan (NDP), which lays out the strategic five-year plan for Uganda’s development up to 2014/2015. The National Development Plan provides a single framework for guiding the strategic allocation of national resources as a means of attaining its strategic objectives.

The objectives of the NDP clearly reflect the strategic vision of the NRM Government to transform Ugandan society from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country within 30 years, through growth, employment, and prosperity for socio-economic development. (Applause) 

Rome was not built in one day; 30 years is not long –(Interjections)- Even God took a whole week to create man. So, the NRM Government is moving cautiously towards realising its vision. (Applause)

The achievement of the NDP’s and Government’s core objectives require identification and targeting of key areas of the economy responsible for accelerating economic growth and socio-economic transformation.

The National Development Plan seeks to address structural bottlenecks to the economic and social transformation of Uganda over the next five years. It spells out the most binding constraints to achieving the vision of a transformed Uganda in the following ways: 

i)	Inadequate physical infrastructure to efficiently transport inputs to production areas and final goods to markets, together with high communication costs and limited availability of energy infrastructure to increase productivity and enhance the quality of life.

ii)	Low application of science and technology that impedes technological capabilities and competitiveness

iii)	Inadequate supply and limited access to critical production inputs such as fertilisers, water and construction materials, leading to high costs of these items.

iv)	Inadequate quality and quantity of human resource due to limited
v)	capacity of the education system and low health and education service delivery standards.

vi)	Limited availability of financial services and high costs of financing.

vii)	Weak public sector management and administration is another one.

viii)	Poor mindsets, negative attitudes and perceptions that limit business and entrepreneurship; limited use of modern science and ICT tools; and discrimination against women in certain spheres. 

But of course, the NRM Government is at the forefront of promoting women. (Applause)

Over the medium-term, the Ugandan economy will not only be faced with a number of macro-economic management challenges, but also with a number of opportunities. Among the opportunities is the continued progress towards economic integration, particularly the East African Community, and the discovery of oil resources. The former provides opportunities for increased trade and employment opportunities.

At the macro-level, therefore, Government policies and the budget allocations will be geared towards ensuring enhanced efficiency, competitiveness and productivity, if the country is to benefit from regional integration.

VI. Budget Framework for the Financial Year 2010/2011

The resource envelope for the next financial year amounts to Shs 7,552 billion of which Shs 5,640 billion is financed using domestic sources and Shs 1,912.1 billion –(Applause)- is financed –(Applause)- from external loans and grants. Resources from both tax and non-tax revenues will contribute Shs 5,034.4 billion and Shs 91.5 billion respectively, while loan repayments will contribute Shs 59.9 billion. 

Next year’s budget will be about 19.1 percent of GDP. Domestic sources are projected to finance about 75 percent of the budget in the coming financial year, while the balance of 25 percent will be provided by our development partners. (Applause) This is in line with our long-term objective of gradually increasing the share of the budget financed through domestic sources. In Luganda, we have a proverb, which says that, “A weapon at the neighbour’s place cannot be used to safeguard your house.” So, we are becoming self-reliant under the NRM Government. (Applause)

 As the ministry responsible for mobilising resources on behalf of Government, I wish to register our gratitude to our development partners for the continued support to our country. (Applause)

VII. Budget priorities for the Financial Year 2010/2011

The financial year 2010/11 budget priorities seek to implement the goals of the National Development Plan (NDP). Next year’s budget priorities are, therefore, in tandem with the NDP’s and are as follows:

i)	Infrastructure development in terms of roads and energy;
ii)	Promotion of science, technology and innovation to facilitate value addition and employment;
iii)	Enhancing agricultural production and productivity;
iv)	Private Sector Development; and 
v)	Improving Public Service delivery.

Mr Speaker, I now wish to turn to the details of the budget priorities for the coming financial year 2010/2011. 

A. Infrastructure development

Road transport

Whereas the national road network has registered substantial progress, the status of our road infrastructure still remains inadequate by regional and international standards. This hinders access to markets and negatively affects overall economic performance by imposing high transport costs. The focus of the roads sector in the coming financial year 2010/11 will be concentrated on completing ongoing projects and road maintenance to clear the backlog.

During the coming financial year, priority will be given to completing the tarmacking, rehabilitating and maintaining critical road links that are important to the promotion of production, competitiveness and regional trade.

Some of the roads are the following - we shall continue with completing the upgrading or reconstruction work of the following roads - it is quite a long list, but for the interest of this House, I will endeavour to elaborate:

i)	Dokolo-Lira Road (60.4km)
ii.	Kampala-Gayaza-Zirobwe-Wobulenzi (Phase 1 – 43km)
iii.	Matugga-Semuto-Kapeeka (41km)
iv.	Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana/Kyanika (98km)
v.	Masaka-Mbarara (154km)
vi.	Busega-Masaka (124km)
vii.	Busega-Mityana roads (57km).

Commencement of the upgrading to tarmac of the following roads will take place:

i)	Mbarara-Kitagata (75km)
ii)	Gulu-Atiak-Bibia (Sudan border) (108km)
iii)	Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba (92km)
iv)	Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge-Fort Portal (208km)
v)	Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Lamia (104km)
vi)	Mukono-Kyetuume-Katosi/Kisoga-Nyenga (72km)
vii)	Ntungamo-Mirama hills/Ishaka-Kagamba (72km)
viii)	Rukungiri-Kihihi-Kanungu-Ishasha (74km)
ix)	Moroto-Nakapiripirit (90km)
x)	Kapchorwa-Suam (77km)
xi)	Mpigi-Kabulasoke-Maddu-Sembabule (135km)
xii)	Hoima-Kaiso-Tonya (85km)
xiii)	Mbarara-Katuna (152km)
xiv)	Mukono-Jinja (52km)
xv)	Mukono-Kayunga/Nkoloto-Njeru (94km)
xvi)	Tororo-Mbale-Soroti(155km)
xvii)	Malaba/Busia-Bugiri (982km)
xviii) Kawempe up to Kafu (166km)
xix)	Kafu-Karuma (67km)
xx)	Jinja-Kamuli (60km)
xxi)	Kamdini to Gulu (60km)

Completing the rehabilitation of the following roads will continue:

i)	Kampala-Mukono (23km)
ii)	Lira-Kamdini (68km)
iii)	Masaka-Kyotera; Villa Maria-Nyendo roads (38km)
iv)	Mbara-Ishaka/ Mbarara-Ibanda roads (123km).

Completing the design for upgrading to tarmac of the following roads will continue:

i)	Olwiyo-Gulu-Kitgum (167.1km), 
ii)	Muyembe-Moroto-Kotido (291.5km), 
iii)	Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto-Loktanyala (290km), 
iv)	Masaka-Bukakata (36km), 
v)	Mpigi-Maddu-Sembabule (124km), 
vi)	Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi/Kisoga-Nyenga (74km), 
vii)	Villa Maria-Sembabule (48km), 
viii)	Rukungiri-Kihihi-Kanungu-Ishasha (74km), 
ix)	Kyenjojo-Hoima-Masindi-Kigumba (238km), 
x)	Musita-Lumino-Busia/Majanji (140km), 
xi)	Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi/Pallisa-Mbale (111km)
xii)	Mbale-Bubulo-Lwakhakha (41km)
xiii)	Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu (30km)
xiv)	Kamuli-Bukungu (64km)
xv)	Hoima-Wanseko (111km)
xvi)	Kayunga-Galiraya (88km)

Work will continue on completing the design for capacity improvement of the following roads:

i)	Kampala-Jinja (80km)
ii)	Kibuye-Mpigi (30km)
iii)	Kampala-Entebbe (35km)
iv)	Kampala Northern Bypass (17.5km)

We will commence the design for reconstruction of Tororo-Mbale-Soroti (156km) and Lira-Kamdini-Gulu (122km). 

I apologise for the long list, but that is what the NRM Government is delivering.

Mr Speaker, Government will commence the rehabilitation of the Nalubaale Bridge at Jinja and the design of the second Nile Bridge at Jinja in the coming financial year. This is very important and I would expect all the MPs to applaud this. (Applause)

We will also complete the construction of the following: Aswa Bridge on Gulu-Kitgum Road; commence construction and rehabilitation of ten bridges in West Nile, namely: Enyao, Alla and Kia Kia in Arua, Goli, Cido, Nyagak, Nyacara, Pakwala, Ora I and Ora II in Nebbi District; and commence the construction of bridges and landing sites on Atiak-Moyo-Afoji Road. Bunyamusenyu bridge on River Kafu, which links Nakaseke District to Masindi will also be constructed. One of the Ten Commandments says, love thy neighbour as you love thyself. (Applause)

In line with the National Transport Master Plan, Government is committed to improving the transport system and infrastructure within the Greater Kampala Metropolitan area. In the coming financial year, Government has earmarked US$ 50 million specifically for road rehabilitation and improvement within Kampala City. This is in addition to Shs 13 billion that Government will continue to provide directly to the city’s divisions for road maintenance.

Government has also embarked on plans to construct the Kampala-Entebbe express highway. This is expected to greatly improve the traffic flow between the city and international airport.

In order to address the challenge to maintenance and rehabilitation of district roads, urban roads and community access roads in the country, Government has secured funding to procure road equipment for zonal, district and urban road units.

In a bid to improve transport infrastructure within Kalangala Island, I have made a provision of Shs 1 billion for the shadow road toll to enable the private contractor commence construction of the Kalangala Main Island road under a public-private partnership agreement.

I have provided an additional funding of Shs 50 billion over this year’s budget under the Uganda Road Fund towards maintenance of 10,000 kilometres of national roads in the coming financial year 2010/11 that were taken over by the Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) for the Local Government.

Under water transport, ferries for Obongi-Sinyanya and Rwampanga-Namasale will be provided.

The scope of works for the refurbishment of the MV Pamba is now complete, and its rehabilitation to restore its seaworthiness will be undertaken in the coming financial year.

In order to improve the procurement process next financial year, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) will strengthen its capacity in contract management and will institute an inter-ministerial technical committee in the sector to ensure cooperation across government agencies.

In the coming financial year, the Auditor General will periodically undertake financial and technical audits on road construction works before the works contracts are completed to ensure that quality is maintained throughout the construction process. Mr Speaker, I thought that since one of the roles of Members of Parliament is oversight, they would be happy with this.

Railway Transport 

Under railway transport, Government has undertaken a feasibility study for upgrading Tororo-Pakwach railway line, and intends to carry out a study to extend the railway line from Gulu to Nimule, Southern Sudan.

We have also commenced the feasibility study for the full restoration of Kampala-Kasese railway line. Furthermore, Government is in the process of procuring consultancy services for studies for the development of a Standard Gauge Railway between Kenya and Uganda. 

Energy Infrastructure

Our power supply needs to be in tandem with the growing demand as higher growth rates translate into higher levels of demand for electricity. In the short run, thermal power generation will continue to mitigate the hydro power shortages and Government will step-up generation capacity in the long-run. 

In the next financial year, construction of the 250 MW Bujagali hydro power will continue and the first turbine will be commissioned in October next year raising installed generation capacity from the current 550 MW to about 800MW in 2012 when the Bujagali Project is fully commissioned. The feasibility study for the engineering design for the 700 MW Karuma hydro power project and 100 MW Isimba hydro power project will be completed.

Mr Speaker, next financial year, Government will undertake the following power transmission projects:

i)	Complete upgrading of 132 KV Tororo-Oluyo-Lira and Mutundwe-Entebbe transmission lines;
ii)	Construction of the following lines: the 220 KV Bujagali-Kawanda-Mutundwe; the 132 KV Mbarara-Nkenda, Nkenda-Mputa, Mbarara-Mirama, Masaka-Mwanza, Jinja-Tororo-Lessos in Kenya, Kawanda-Masaka, Karuma-Lira, Kaiso Tonya-Fortportal-Nkenda, Opuyo-Moroto, Karuma-Oluiyo and Mbale-Nakapiripirit-Moroto; and
iii)	Regional interconnection of Bujagali-Jinja-Tororo-Lessos in Kenya; Mbarara-Mirama-Birembo (Rwanda); Masaka-Mwanza (Tanzania); and Nkenda, Beni Rutshuru and Beni-Bunia (DRC).

B: Promotion of science, technology and innovation for value addition, private sector development and employment creation

Mr Speaker, in order to achieve the NRM vision of developing a self-sustainable and private sector led economy, Government will continue to address impediments to private sector development. As a key priority in the coming financial year, Government will support industry by enabling the acquisition of appropriate technology, financial capital, and skilled human resource by the private sector, complemented with a conducive entrepreneurial environment.

In the coming financial year, Government will focus on the promotion of science and technology application to enhance private enterprises technological capacity for greater employment creation. The Uganda National Council of Science and Technology (NCST) and UIRI have, therefore, been strengthened to promote the use of technology and to spearhead the efforts of translating Research & Development results into practical products and processes, using the business incubation model. 

Government will continue to support UIRI to expand its programmes in business incubation by establishing four multipurpose value addition centers across the country, and to expand its Small and Medium Enterprise outreach programme, among other interventions. 

An allocation of Shs 1.207 billion has been provided to UIRI to set up a science unit. Makerere University will also receive an additional Shs 5 billion for innovation in engineering and technology research and development. In order to enhance and retain high scientific skills in the country, I have provided Shs 18 billion for salary enhancement for scientists to curb brain drain from this country.

In addition, an allocation of Shs 1 billionn has been provided to Enterprise Uganda to provide existing entrepreneurs and enterprises with the necessary skills and training to re-orient their business processes to tested and fruitful ventures.


Mr Speaker, youth unemployment is a major concern to the NRM Government. In the next financial year, Government will set up a School Leavers Industrial Training Fund at the Directorate of Industrial Training. I am providing Shs 2 billion for this Fund. 

Furthermore, in pursuit of employment opportunities for the youth, Government is sourcing funding to enable the acquisition of small scale machinery and processing units for ‘Jua Kali’ businesses. 

In addition, the Industrial Processing Venture Capital Fund will avail financing for bankable start-up ventures for university and college graduates with interest rates not exceeding 5 percent per annum payable within eight years. For a start, I am providing Shs 4 billion for the Fund in the next financial year.

In the Information and Communication Technology sector, Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) will be encouraged to create jobs for the educated youth and generate exports. The ICT sector will receive Shs 2.6 billion in priority allocations for the operation of NITA-Uganda which is expected to eventually lead to the decline of the cost of access to ICT related services. 

The operationalisation, on a commercial basis, of the National Transmission Backbone Infrastructure (NBI), will commence in the first quarter next financial year in a phased manner, and is expected to substantially reduce the cost of communication. 

Sourcing of funding for the third phase of the NBI, which will link the system to other countries in the region is being finalised.

C: Enhancing Agricultural production and productivity

Improvement in the agricultural sector will greatly contribute to the attainment of the NDP objectives through increasing household incomes and promoting equity. 

The successful contribution of the agricultural sector to the attainment of NDP objectives will be assessed by measuring changes in the following areas: Farmer incomes per capita; farmer income distribution; on and off-farm employment; skills development, agricultural production, productivity and value addition.

Accordingly, in the FY 2010/2011, the sector will focus on the following priority programmes, among others:

i)	Enhancing production and productivity and improving access to markets.
ii)	Enhancing the availability and quality of gainful employment through increased on and off-farm employment opportunities;
iii)	Increased hi-tech and other professional agricultural employment;
iv)	Increased farmer earnings; and
v)	Increased agro-industrial production and productivity.

The above programmes will be implemented through generation of improved varieties and stocks by NARO, and sensitisation by NAADS Secretariat, as well as scaled-up provision of pesticides and fertilizers in key commodity areas such as cotton and coffee production. 

I have allocated an additional Shs 31bn to the sector to fully operationalise the Agriculture Development Strategy and Investment Plan (DSIP) that will achieve the objectives I have mentioned above.

In order to accelerate farmer adoption of technologies for improved production and productivity, NAADS will extend direct support to 100 farmers per parish commencing July 2010, by providing them with input kits consisting of seeds, fertilizers and herbicides for selected enterprises such as rice, wheat, maize, tea, coffee and cocoa, and some implements such as hoes and spray pumps where they are needed, to address food security and reduce poverty. This will be in addition to mobilising farmers to form groups, farmer institutional development and promoting technology transfer and value addition.

In addition, a Commercialisation Challenge Fund will be established to support technology development at the sub-county. It will also support commercialisation and value addition through agro-processing. I am providing Shs 15 billion for this fund. These measures will boost the agriculture sector to allow increased reliable production through the availability of resources within the control of farmers, and also enable them to receive reasonable incomes from increased agro-processing ventures from both existing and established ventures.

Mr Speaker, Government will make arrangements for the provision of rice hullers, maize mills and other processing units at every sub-county for value addition in the medium term. (Applause)

D: Human development

Government needs to re-energise the delivery of social services to ensure that quality human resources are developed and engaged in the economy to address inadequate quantity and quality of human resources as identified in the NDP. This not only requires the enhancement of technical and business skills, but also the delivery of social services across the board to ensure improved standards of living. Actions to improve human resource development will be prioritised in the following sectors:

Education Sector

Under the education sector, Government will continue to focus on increasing and improving equitable access to quality education at all levels. Specifically, increasing net enrollment ratios for primary, transition rates from primary to secondary, maintain admission student enrollment numbers at 4,000 in public universities for Government-sponsored students, and improving access to physical education and sports.

Accordingly, the provision of Shs 31 billion has been to support Universal Secondary Education under the capitation grant for S.1 students to complete a full cycle of secondary education. In addition, Shs 11.20 billion has been provided for instructional materials and hardship allowance for teachers in hard-to-reach areas. (Applause)

Under higher education, an additional Shs 5 billion has been allocated to the National Council for Higher Education and the National Curriculum Development Centre in order to ensure quality and standards improvement. Furthermore, all school inspection funds will be sent directly to the Local Governments in order to eliminate the bureaucracies in accessing these funds, and also to ensure timely implementation of the activities.

In the coming year, construction of the following seven seed secondary schools will be completed: Buwambo in Wakiso, Butiaba in Buliisa, Bundihakhungu in Bundibugyo, Burunga in Kiruhura, Ruyonza in Ntungamo, Kamaruka in Budaka and Lugoro in Kitgum. Sixteen new seed secondary schools will be constructed in the sub-counties of Nalusala in Sironko, Bukabooli in Mayuge, Paicho in Gulu, Mpungwe in Mukono, Ogoko in Arua, Kanara in Bundibugyo, Katunguru in Bushenyi, Bufunjo in Kyenjojo, Purungo in Amuru, Patongo in Pader, Atutur in Kumi, Kalisizo in Kalisizo Town Council, Mella in Tororo, Apo in Yumbe, Wakyato in Nakaseke and Bumayoka in Bududa.

In a bid to expand equitable access to secondary education, 31 secondary schools will become Government grant aided. Government will also continue the renovation of the following six traditional secondary schools; Masaba S.S. in Sironko, Kabalega S.S. in Masindi, Mpanga S.S. in Kabarole, Kigezi College Butobere in Kabale, Lango College in Lira and Kololo S.S. in Kampala.

The following eight traditional secondary schools will also be provided with fully furnished and equipped ICT laboratories: Bishop S.S. in Mukono, Wanyange Girls’ School, Sacred Heart in Gulu, Rock High in Tororo, Nyarilo S.S. in Koboko, St Mary’s College Rushoroza in Kabale, Kinyansano Girls’ School in Rukungiri and Kibibi S.S. in Mpigi. (Applause)

The following eight traditional schools will also be rehabilitated and expanded: Kigezi High School in Kabale, Namagabi S.S. in Kayunga, Comboni College in Lira, Bwere S.S. in Kasese, Gulu High School in Gulu, Kitgum High School in Kitgum, Kitante Hill School in Kampala, and Ndejje S.S. in Luwero; and a dormitory will be constructed at Mbale School for the Deaf.

In order to improve teacher retention in the 15 seed secondary schools in the rural sub-counties, teachers’ houses will be constructed in Buwambo in Wakiso, Butiaba in Buliisa, Bundihakhungu in Bundibugyo, Burunga in Kiruhura, Ruyonza in Ntungamo, Kamruka, Lugoro in Kitgum, Shituni, Bukonte, Namasale,
Jangakoro, Lwabiyata, Busii, Kabezi and Karusandara.

In line with emphasis on skills development to enhance employment generation, Government has provided funds to complete and equip the following technical institutes: Abim, Kyeizoba in Bushenyi, Kaabong, Kisomoro in Kabarole, Kamwenge Youth Polytechnic in Kasese, Kyaka in Kyenjojo, Lwengo in Masaka, Nkoko in Mayuge, Kahaya and Maanji Memorial Academy, in Mbarara; Moroto, Katonga in Mpigi, Nakapiripirit, Rutunku Community Polytechnic in Sembabule and Lt Col Nasuru-Amin Izaruku in Yumbe. The following technical colleges will also be equipped: Kichwamba in Kabarole and Birembo in Kibaale. The following technical schools will be among those to be equipped: Bumbeire in Bushenyi, Kaliro, Kitagwenda in Kamwenge and Barlonyo in Lira. (Applause)

Over the next four years, Government will establish a secondary school in every sub-county and a vocational training college in every district. (Applause)  So, 2014, every sub-county will have a secondary school under the NRM Government. (Applause)  The NRM is still around –(Laughter)- (Applause) 

To enhance research in science and technology, Government will continue to implement the Presidential Initiative on Innovations in food science, engineering technology and skills for production, employment and development in animal industry in the faculties of Agriculture, Technology and Veterinary Medicine at Makerere University.

Water and Environment

In the water and environment sector, the provision of safe drinking water in rural areas will be a priority with an additional funding of Shs 5 billion, which I have allocated in the coming year towards this area. In addition, Shs 3 billion has been provided for the operationalisation of the Meteorological Department to improve weather forecasting which will be of direct benefit to agricultural production and planning. As I pointed out earlier, we will tackle the challenge of unit cost in the water sector using the model which has been piloted in Katakwi district where it has been proved that a medium scale dam can be built at Shs 20 million as opposed to Shs 100 million currently used.

In the financial year 2010/2011, 600 rain harvesting systems will be installed in the water stressed areas of Kiganda in Mubende District, Ngoma in Nakaseke District and Bukooli in Bugiri District. 

Under conditional grant funding, local governments shall install 1,300 plastic tanks mainly at public institutions and selected households in areas where traditional technologies like hand pump equipped boreholes are not feasible. 

In the medium term, plans have been finalised for the promotion of integrated rainwater harvesting to cover household needs for human consumption as well as for small cottage agricultural processing industries, small scale irrigation and water for livestock in addition to health centers and schools in rural areas. This will be phased over a five-year period. 

The following outputs are expected from the intervention:

i.	35,000 rainwater harvesting systems will be installed
ii.	180 artisans and masons trained on installation of rainwater harvesting systems and maintenance
iii.	Capacity development for staff in 30 districts
iv.	Technology, expertise and demonstration models will be developed for higher level of service.

Health Sector

Mr Speaker, despite the progress registered in health service delivery, the sector still faces a number of challenges. For instance, the Uganda Malaria Indicator Survey of 2009 reported that 59 percent of children under five years affected by fever in the last two weeks before the survey had received anti-malarial treatment. Only 3.2 percent of the children had received correct treatment for malaria within 24 hours from the onset of fever. It was also estimated that only 31.7 percent of expectant mothers were receiving the second dose of intermittent preventive treatment of malaria.

In the Financial Year 2010/11, Government will mainly focus on development of health infrastructure through rehabilitation of regional referral hospitals, at Arua, Fort Portal, Hoima, Gulu, Jinja, Mbale, Soroti, Mbarara, Mubende and Moroto.

Government will also expand health facilities and accommodation for health workers at Kiryandongo, Kawolo, Kitagata and Nakaseke referral hospitals. (Applause) Government will further undertake the rehabilitation of the Mulago National Referral Hospital.

In addition, Government has earmarked US$ 130 million over a five year period specifically to improve maternal and reproductive health outcomes and also construct health infrastructure based on verifiable master plans. Of this total amount, US$ 30 million is earmarked for reproductive health. (Applause)

In the coming financial year 2010/2011, Government will further improve the management of drugs through central procurement at the National Medical Stores and Joint Medical Stores. Government has defined a basic kit of medicines to be delivered by the National Medical Stores directly to each health centre instead of delivering medicines to the district stores.

In a bid to enhance Government’s ability to attract, recruit and retain health workers, Government has earmarked funds for the enhancement of the salaries of medical officers and other health workers in the next financial year. (Applause) In addition, the construction of staff accommodation at health facilities will be given priority under capital development projects.

To implement the ongoing interventions, the health sector will receive an additional Shs 7 billion which will be targeted towards the purchase of essential drugs and the control of malaria.

Northern Uganda Reconstruction 

With the restoration of total peace and security in Uganda, our focus now is to support the Northern Uganda Reconstruction and Development Programme. 

Next financial year 2010/2011 will see the second year of the implementation of the Northern Uganda Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP). Accordingly, Government has increased the funding for PRDP from the Shs 100 billion provided in the last financial year to Shs 124 billion in the next financial year. These resources are earmarked towards capital development projects in roads, water, health and education sectors. The resources will also support the provision of ox-ploughs, oxen and heifers as part of the restocking. I am also making an ex gratia provision of Shs 200 million for the families of the 69 victims of the Mukura tragedy to be paid through the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. (Applause)

E: Improvements in service delivery

Focusing on results for more effective service delivery

For the past two financial years, our budgeting and reporting system has moved to an output based approach in line with international best practice. This enables clearer scrutiny on linking performance to financial resources. This has been complemented with the introduction of performance contracts for accounting officers and quarterly performance reporting. Secondly, the development of the Output Budgeting Tool (OBT), which is an integrated repository of financial and performance data, has enabled comprehensive and uniform reporting to be generated.

Government has also stepped up its monitoring efforts geared towards enhanced effectiveness of public expenditures. The initial focus is on agriculture, education, energy, health, industrialisation, roads, water and sanitation, ICT and micro-finance sectors. 

The information submitted in the budget performance report is monitored and verified by the Budget Monitoring and Accountability Unit (BMAU) under my Ministry; they also carry out field visits to verify physical outputs of interventions on the ground. This compliments the Baraza Initiative which was piloted in four districts before its full rollout, which seeks to transparently provide accountability for public resources by public officials at sub-county fora. The Presidential Public Sector Round Table also meets half yearly to discuss the performance of Government agencies.

Strengthening Financial Services

Mr Speaker, in the coming financial year, my Ministry and the Bank of Uganda will finalise the Financial Markets Development Policy with the objective of deepening and broadening the financial sector by:

i.	Expanding financial inclusion, 
ii.	The establishment of an appropriate regulatory framework that covers all financial services with a focus on those currently excluded, and 
iii.	Setting up an institutional framework that will ensure that key sectors of the economy begin to access financial services.

Improvement of Public Sector Efficiency and effectiveness

A diagnostic review has revealed that a number of public sector organisations have duplicated and overlapping functions leading to ineffectiveness in public service delivery. Accordingly, Government in the coming financial year will undertake various reforms and interventions aimed at improving public sector organisations’ efficiency and effectiveness, and also ensure value for money in their operations. The Parastatal Monitoring Unit in my ministry will continue to liaise with other Government institutions to monitor the performance of the public sector organisations.

Absorption of Funds

Implementation of Government programmes will be improved by building capacity in all ministries, departments and agencies and linking work plans, procurement plans and recruitment plans to cash releases.

Pension and Gratuity

During the financial year 2009/2010, a comprehensive audit of existing pension and gratuity arrears was undertaken to establish the outstanding stock. I have provided Shs 124 billion to clear all the outstanding verified pensions and gratuity arrears as verified.

In order to improve the efficiency of pensions’ payments and eliminate graft, all pension and gratuity payments are being paid using the Straight Through Processing (STP) system directly to the specific accounts of the beneficiaries. Government has paid all gratuity and pensions for all those who are retiring this financial year 2009/2010; and in this financial year, a total of Shs 184 billion has been paid to clear current pensions and gratuity and another Shs 49 billion to clear arrears, including ex gratia payment for ex-combatants.

In the new financial year 2010/2011, Government will also pay all Local Council I chairpersons an honoraria in recognition of their contribution at improving governance and accountability at local levels. I have made a provision of Shs 10.7 billion for this purpose. (Applause) I think this should be good news for all of us who cherish decentralisation. 

Mr Speaker, the Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority (RBRA) Bill to regulate the retirement benefits in the country was presented to Parliament. The objectives of the Bill are to establish an authority to regulate the sector and prepare it for liberalisation.

Public Sector Management

Government is committed to improving the management of the public sector. Therefore, in the coming financial year 2010/2011, our focus will be on the following areas:

1.	Accountability and Governance 

The NRM Government is committed to zero tolerance to corruption and wastage of public resources, which is one of the major challenges facing our country.

It is the NRM Government which has put in place a number of measures to root out this vice in terms of prevention, detection and sanctioning of corruption by establishing and strengthening institutions such as the Anti Corruption Court, the Inspectorate of Government, the Public Accounts Committee and the Auditor General. And, the CID has been strengthened in order to be able to carry out expeditious investigations.

2.	Workplans and Reporting 

As a measure to enhance the performance of the public sector, all Government institutions are now required to prepare comprehensive workplans specifying the location of activities and outputs by sub-county. This has greatly facilitated the monitoring of Government programmes and improved the delivery of public services. And here I would like to invite honourable Members of Parliament to embrace this too and monitor Government funds which go to your constituencies; it will improve the delivery of services.  In the coming financial year 2010/11, Government will focus on strengthening the monitoring of and supervision of various projects as indicated in the annual and quarterly workplans. Preparatory work for this process has already been done by training various district leaders including LC V and III chairpersons, Chief Administrative Officers, Sub-County chiefs and Gombolola Internal Security Officers and other Local Government officials in order to augment the monitoring.

3.	Payroll Management 

The introduction of the Straight Through Processing (STP) of salaries and pensions has greatly improved the management of Government payroll and reduced delays previously experienced. In the next financial year 2010/11, Government will commence implementing the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS). The system will computerise and integrate personnel records in all Government institutions and will eliminate weaknesses existing under the current system.

4.	Pay Reform

Government is taking action to improve the remuneration of public servants as a means of improving their motivation and better service delivery. However, due to resource constraints, Government will start with enhancement of salaries for key selected staff in the financial year 2010/11. Accordingly, I have provided for a 30 percent increase to enhance the salaries of scientists, primary school teachers, low cadre health workers, and low cadre staff in security forces. (Applause) The NRM Government cares for the people who work under it. For the rest of the Public Service, I have provided financing to cater for inflation. I have also provided Shs 3 billion to enhance salaries for commissioners in Constitutional Commissions. The details of these will be provided by the Minister of Public Service.

Public Finance Management

Domestic Arrears

To control the accumulation of arrears, the following measures will be implemented to curtail the accumulation of arrears which hurt the private sector:

i)	Accounting officers will be required to provide a detailed account to explain their outstanding bills and service providers will have their bills settled within three months. Any accounting officer who does not comply with this will be held responsible. 

ii)	All new non-statutory arrears will raise an automatic audit query and will be subjected to scrutiny by the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of Parliament and here I am requesting PAC to play an active role.

iii)	Arrears will have a first call on spending agencies’ resources for the subsequent years.

iv)	The Straight Through Processing (STP) system now employed for pensions will be extended to utilities and rental due from Government, in order to ensure prompt payments for them.

v)	Mandatory rotation of accountants and procurement officers will start with effect from next month - July 2010.

vi)	The Commitment Control System will be adhered to and penalties stated in the performance contracts of accounting officers will be religiously enforced.

Management of Accounts

Government is taking measures to eliminate the scope for diverting budgetary funds which remain unspent at the end of the financial year. These measures will commence with the closure of the current financial year and will include the following: Publishing the balances as at June 30 and September 30 of each calendar year on all Government accounts at the Bank of Uganda and commercial banks, and presentation of these accounts to Parliament by July 31 and October 30 of the following fiscal year. 

It will also be a requirement for Parliamentary approval to spend any balances held over from the previous fiscal year beyond end of June, as well as supporting work and procurement plans showing how such funds would be utilised. There will be a mandatory return of all unspent balances which have not been re-appropriated by Parliament by end of September to the Government Consolidated Fund. I will be proposing amendments to the Public Finance and Accountability Act and other relevant laws and regulations to support these measures. 

Management of Oil Revenues

Under the NRM Government, oil will offer numerous opportunities and is going to be a blessing, contrary to some skeptics who are engaged in the debate of how oil is going to be a curse to Uganda. When some people get to a rose plant, they only see the thorns and curse. For us in the NRM, everyday presents an opportunity; we see the flowers and thank God. And indeed, when we see the sun setting in the West, we see the blessing of oil glowing like an evening star. I would like to assure Ugandans, that oil will not be a curse, but a blessing. 

In line with the National Oil and Gas National Policy, my ministry is putting in place legal and institutional infrastructure to ensure that oil revenue is managed prudently. In this regard, tax legislation has been amended and the Public Finance and Accountability Act is being reviewed to provide best practices with respect to the assessment, collection and accounting for oil revenue. 

The relevant tax legislations have been amended to cover all oil taxation aspects and Government will amend the Public Finance and Accountability Act in accordance with international best practices to ensure prudent management of oil revenues. 

The revenues will be integrated in a prudent macroeconomic fiscal framework and the Medium Term Expenditure Framework that is underpinned by the recently approved National Development Plan. Government will ensure that the management of petroleum revenues is handled in a transparent manner that does not undermine the integrity of the budget framework, and macroeconomic stability. 

F: Peace, Security and Good Governance

Security

The hallmark of the NRM Government has been the maintenance of peace throughout Uganda; eradication of terrorism; building professional security organisations; and restoration of law and order. The NRM Government has a track record in this respect unmatched by any other regime since independence. Government will continue to protect the Constitution and promote the rule of law. 

In the security sector, Government will focus on implementation of the Defence Strategic Infrastructural Investment Plan (DSIIP) to continue professionalising the UPDF and build capacity of its specialised units. Cooperation in defence and security within the region especially in the East African Region, will be enhanced and the Memorandum of Understanding will be upgraded to protocols. 

General Elections 

This financial year ending 2009/10, Government embarked on implementation of the roadmap for the forthcoming general elections. Funding for the general elections of 2011 has received special attention to facilitate free and fair multiparty elections. (Applause)

Accordingly, I have provided an additional Shs 102 billion in addition to the amount provided in the financial year ending 2009/10, to the Electoral Commission to ensure successful conduct of the 2011 general elections. I would like to request you honourable members to fully support this huge provision for conducting free and fair elections in the country. I have also provided Shs 6 billion for the recruitment of Police constables as provided for in the electoral laws. (Applause) I have also provided Shs 500 million to fund activities of political organisations. (Applause) This should be a welcome development because there is no Government in the history of this country that has ever made such a provision –(Interjections)– yes.

Mr Speaker, we have embarked on the implementation of the national identification exercise in order to establish a national identification system for the country, among others, to improve voter registration, promotion of financial sector development, public service delivery and governance. 

To further improve governance in Uganda, we will continue implementing the African Peer Review Mechanism National Programme of Action. This will be done by respective ministries, departments and agencies in accordance with the provisions in the National Development Plan and the budget. 

Constitutional Self-Accounting Bodies

The budgetary proposals of the following self-accounting bodies have been submitted in compliance with Article 155(2) of the Constitution. These are: 
i)	Courts of Judicature, 
ii)	Electoral Commission, 
iii)	Inspectorate of Government, 
iv)	Parliamentary Commission, 
v)	Uganda Law Reform Commission, 
vi)	Uganda Human Rights Commission, 
vii)	Uganda Aids Commission, 
viii)	National Planning Authority, and 
ix)	The Office of the Auditor General. 

In accordance with Article 155(3) of the Constitution, Government has made recommendations on these proposals. I hereby lay both the budgetary proposals and the recommendations of Government before this august House, as required by the Constitution. Mr Speaker, I have fulfilled that constitutional requirement. (Applause)

In order for me to submit a fully financed National Budget for your consideration in accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the budgetary provisions of these self-accounting bodies are in accordance with the resource envelope, conveyed to them in the course of budget preparation, including the presentation of the National Budget Framework Paper to Parliament, in accordance with the Budget Act, 2001. 

VIII. Tax Proposals for Financial Year 2010/2011

This financial year 2010/11, URA revenue collections are projected to under-perform by Shs 160 billion against the target of Shs 4.474 trillion projected for the period. This will impact on the base for the next fiscal year. Based on the macro assumptions of GDP, inflation, exchange rate and efficiency gains, URA collections for next financial year are projected at Shs 5.034004 trillion. 

In the coming financial year, the policy is not to introduce major tax proposals, but to provide stability for the tax system as an incentive to investment. However, I am proposing minor amendments to improve assessment and collection and also take into account the decision of East African Finance Ministers. The details are contained in various tax law amendment Bills and the East African Gazette.

The proposed measures are as follows:

To make transport for the ordinary Ugandans more affordable - those of you who use boda bodas - I am proposing to reduce registration fees for motorcycles by Shs 80,000 -(Applause)- and I have also given instructions to the URA to decentralise registration. Right now, they have been going through a cumbersome process of coming to Kampala to register their boda bodas centrally. We are now going to set up decentralised registration points especially at the border points, to save these people the high cost of coming to Kampala and the problems associated.
‘
Software license

Consistent with Government policy of promoting the use and development of the ICT, VAT on software license will be exempt as is the case with computers and their software. (Applause)

Petroleum tax legislation amendments

I am proposing to integrate procedures for assessment and collection of petroleum revenues in the Income Tax Act. The objective is to ensure adequate provisions within the tax law to handle petroleum revenue streams. The details will be contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill.

IX. EAC Pre-budget Consultations of the Ministers of Finance

Mr Speaker, it is now a requirement that the ministers of finance from the East African region hold pre-budget consultations. 

In our pre-budget consultations, it was agreed that we suspend application of the Common External Tariff (CET)of 25 percent for buses and trucks for Tanzania, Uganda and Rwanda for one year to ease the transport of persons and goods. I call upon Ugandans to take advantage of this stay of application.

Furthermore, we agreed to extend the duty remission for the list of Uganda industrial inputs for one year. This will enable our manufacturers to remain competitive as we address the infrastructure constraints which are making the cost of doing business hard.

We are also continuing with tax exemption on trucks and pick ups which transport agricultural products because we want to make it easy for our farmers to access the markets cheaply and using proper means. 

In addition, the Ministers agreed as follows:

To maintain the current structure of the common external tariff of zero percent, 10 percent and 25 percent as it has served the Community well in trade and investment among partner states.

We also agreed to establish an East African Infrastructure Fund which will be domesticated under the East African Development Bank.

We also agreed to develop a coordinated framework of engagement with the multilateral agencies like the World Bank, the IMF, the African Development Bank and others.

We agreed to convene a meeting of ministers of Finance together with their permanent secretaries, and governors of the central banks, to agree on the roadmap for the Monetary Union including macro-economic convergence criteria immediately after conclusion of the budget sessions of the partner states. 

We also agreed to review the sensitive list within five years with a view to reduce the list and preserve the current tariff structure of zero percent, 10 percent and 25 percent.

Pre-shipment Inspection

Following representations from the private sector regarding the re-introduction of pre-shipment inspection on imports to the country, Government is going to review this policy to make sure that it does not hurt our private sector.

X. Report of tax expenditure for financial year 2009/2010

Article 152(2) of the Constitution requires me to periodically report to Parliament on the exercise of powers conferred upon me by any law to waive or vary a tax imposed by that law. This is to report that this fiscal year, I have exercised those powers conferred upon me under the Income Tax Act and Value Added Tax Act, and waived Shs 4,305,819,623.

Government has also paid Shs 12,422,648,957 in respect of hotels, hospitals and tertiary institutions, and Non-Governmental Organisations with tax exemption clauses in their agreements.

XI. Schedule of Indebtedness

On the schedule of indebtedness, in accordance with the provision of section 13(1) and (2) of the Budget Act 2001, I hereby lay before the House the statement on:

i)	Government’s total external indebtedness as at 31 March 2010, and

ii)	The grants that Government received during the financial year 2009/2010.

Mr Speaker, I have fulfilled another Constitutional requirement. (Laughter)

With respect to Section 13(3) of the same Act, Government did not guarantee any new loan during the financial year ending.

On utilisation of loans and grants, I have pointed out some implementation issues on a loan by loan and grant by grant basis in the matrix attached to the report. The matrix provides the summary on implementation and disbursement benchmarks and triggers, and also the status of each loan and grant.

Implementing agencies are expected to provide detailed information regarding the progress of their respective projects. I hope that the details of the utilisation and the performance of each loan and grant, including the extent of the achievement of the objectives and targets, will be provided in the policy statements of the ministries and departments which received the loans and grants, as well as in our poverty monitoring and assessment reports.

Debt Sustainability

On debt sustainability, Uganda’s external debt is projected to remain sustainable in the medium term and this can be attributed to our current borrowing policies and continued strong macroeconomic performance. Despite the recent global crisis where economies are concerned about their credit worthiness, Uganda has continued to attract financing at our preferred rates which is consistent with our borrowing strategy.

Mr Speaker, prudent debt management has been a factor in our good credit rating for the last three years. Uganda’s rating by Fitch International improved from B to B+ with a stable outlook. (Applause) Standard and poor rating was also improved from B to B+. This rating remains the best in the region. (Applause) These strong credit ratings reflect our economic resilience to the international markets and have made Uganda an increasingly attractive destination to investors.

Mr Speaker, before I make my concluding remarks, as you have observed over the last two and a half hours, the task of preparing this budget speech is a big one, which cannot be accomplished single-handedly. I, therefore, wish to put on record my gratitude to his Excellency the President, His Excellency the Vice-President, the Prime Minister, colleagues and ministers, particularly, the ministers of state in my ministry, and the technical staff led by the Secretary to the Treasury for their invaluable contribution to this budget speech. (Applause)

XII. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, this budget is presented as we plan to hold our second multiparty general elections. As Ugandans, we should take pride in our efforts to consolidate and deepen our multiparty democracy and constitutionalism for the benefit of the entire population. 

The NRM Government, under the wise leadership of His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, must be commended for ushering in and sustaining democracy in this country. (Applause) The priceless contribution made by the people of Luweero Triangle and others in liberating this country from anarchy should remain a living testimony. 

Uganda has transitioned from a no-party democracy to a full-blown multiparty system of governance in an orderly and peaceful manner. Democratic principles have firmly taken root and Uganda has democratic institutions such as the Parliament where Government and the Opposition execute their functions of making laws for peace, order, development and good governance for the welfare of all Ugandans. 

In consolidating democratic governance, Government ensured improved service delivery through enactment of the decentralisation policy, which has increased accountability to the people through local authorities and councils, placing them in control of their destinies. 

Therefore, there should be no doubt that the NRM Government cherishes democracy. In spite of the high cost involved, our Government shall always allocate sufficient resources for democracy to flourish in this country. I would like honourable colleagues to note this seriously. 

For the last four budgets since 2006, an overwhelming majority of Ugandans embraced the policy of NRM and indeed the country has made significant progress with the economy growing at an average of 8.4 percent above the sub-Saharan average of 2.4 percent. The sub-Saharan Africa average is 2.4 percent and the average for Uganda is 8.4 percent. (Applause)

This budget provides a long-term perspective and lays out a firm basis for achieving the nation’s vision of a transformed Ugandan society from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country within 30 years. 

The central theme and message of this budget is to continue with the progress registered in democracy, the rule of law, constitutionalism and significantly improve the standards of living of all Ugandans. Therefore, we are confident that Ugandans will be in position to make a majestic stride into the future.

It is a well-known fact that over 52 percent of the population of Uganda comprises the youth who have been born under the good environment provided by the NRM. (Applause) Accordingly, the NRM continues to pay attention to their development and has provided them with many opportunities, including political stability, free education in primary and secondary, and good health care, and has now embarked on providing them with skills through vocational training and higher education.

In addition, Government has introduced special programmes that directly or indirectly target the youth. These include commercialisation of agriculture for creation of both farm and non-farm employment; special school-leavers’ fund for start-up capital; increasing the ICT infrastructure and related opportunities such as provision of online services in business outsourcing; and provision of entrepreneurial skills and machinery for small-scale industries.

From the foregoing, it is clear the NRM vision is to provide a bright future for the youth of this country. We should not forget that the young people are the leaders of today’s leaders. I, therefore, with humility dedicate this budget to the youth of this country. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I beg to move, and I thank the honourable Members of Parliament for attentively listening and appreciating my budget speech. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, the Vice-President and hon. Members of Parliament, as I indicated at the beginning, this duty that has been done today is a duty of His Excellency the President, but he assigned it to the Minister of Finance. Prima facie, I must say, the work has been done; but since His Excellency the President who has done this assignment is here, I think it is proper to request him to address us, and confirm and seal what the Minister of Finance has presented. Your Excellency -

5.45
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Excellency the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, other leaders, ladies and gentlemen. I thank the Minister of Finance for the budget, which we agreed on with the Cabinet. However, I just want to emphasise some points. 

First of all, she mispronounced some place names because she is busy in the ministry and does not travel as much as I do. Purongo should be Purongo not the other thing you said; then Icebe not Ikeme –(Laughter)- and Barlonyo  is not an English word for you to say Bar -Lonyo, no; it is Barlonyo. I know these places because I have walked there.

I do not want to repeat what the minister said, but the highlights of the economy are:

Since 1986, the economy has grown six times. (Applause) I read in one of the newspapers, the Daily Monitor, and it was trying to give some composition. The average rate of growth has been 6 percent since 1986; but in the last five years, it has even been faster, at 8.4 percent. Now, the Daily Monitor in their confused way of thinking, decided to quote the CIA that they said - the CIA does not know very much about Uganda. They have got enough work knowing about America; otherwise, they would have done a number of things there.

They were trying to say in their editorial - yes, you say 8.4 percent rate of growth; but how about the population growing at 3.4 percent? Okay, that is alright; but that still leaves a balance of five points above the population rate of growth, and we need the population to also grow. I have rejected the idea that we should remain few. No, we need to defend our country, and the more we are, the better.

We have been achieving this rate of growth of six percent - 8.4 percent, in spite of the bottlenecks which we still have, and some of which were caused by the other Parliament before yours; the Sixth Parliament. We have been achieving this high rate of growth in spite of the energy shortages and so on. So, the question is, what will happen once we solve these bottlenecks? You can see that the future is very bright. We are definitely going to move to nine, 10, 11 percent rate of growth.

The population rate of growth will also decline because these people who are producing a lot of children are mainly our people in the villages. Once they become part of the educated class, they will not have so many children; so the rate will also come down and we are tackling that through Education for All. This Education for All is tackling literacy and numeracy as well as culture - to have a modern culture.

As I said in the State of the Nation Address, the total receipts from exports and services in 2009, were $ 3.7 billion excluding remittances from Ugandans working abroad. If you include that, then it goes to US$ four point something billion.

In 1990, our total exports were only $ 250 million. The international reserves at present areat $ 2.8 billion. As you heard, inflation has come down to 4.4 percent. Revenue collection as you heard – we are going to collect about Shs 5 Trillion in the coming financial year. You remember, I told you, that our tax collection in 1986 was Shs 5 billion; so our tax collection has gone up 1000 times since then. Our capacity is great; I pity those who think that Uganda can be thrown around. With this money, nobody can throw us around.

That should be clear, and the sooner people settle down and concentrate on what is positive, the better; I can assure you of this. We were able to defend this country with nothing, now with all this, nobody can disturb Uganda - this is before the oil by the way. (Laughter) Next year, and even this year, we are going to start getting that oil money, and then we are going to tax these people who are selling shares.

The minister talked about regional integration. I see people talking about politics; but the politics you are talking about is for whose benefit? I told you the other day in the State of the Nation Address that my starting point - why I am very interested in Uganda, is that I am a producer, and I can see a number of producers there (Points at Investors). Once you produce, you need somebody to buy what you have produced; otherwise, you will not continue producing. 

So, when I produce milk in Rwakitura, the people who buy my milk here in Kampala are my greatest allies. Those Banyakole are there. We talk Runyankole, “Agandi”, “Oriregye” and all that, but they do not buy my milk because they also produce milk. They help me by building up volumes. I produce and they produce, so we have a lot of milk, and when the traders come from Kampala to buy, they do so easily. 

Therefore, those Banyankole supplement my efforts in building up the volumes; but the real allies who make me rich are the people of Kampala who buy what we produce, and this is the basis of nationalism. That is why we cannot tolerate anybody who tries to divide Uganda -(Applause)- because that fellow is interfering with the ‘plate’ of all Ugandans who are in production. When you step in our ‘plate’, we cannot look at you kindly.

The Uganda market, however, is not enough, and that is why we need the East African market. People are now crying with maize in their houses as the market is not enough. People have bought the maize but we Ugandans are not enough to buy all this maize. Normally, Kenyans buy our maize; but this time, apparently, they bought some maize from Malawi; that is what I hear and so they could not buy our maize. 

This is the struggle for livelihood and that is why NRM says, these Kenyans need to be tied constitutionally because now they are still free. They can buy our maize one year and the other year they buy from Malawi, because they are independent and so are we. Okay, we are part of the Community but we are independent countries.

So, when we talk of the East African Federation, what am I talking about? We are talking of tying those Kenyans. We are now one country; so, you can no longer buy from Malawi because there is this maize of yours here. If East Africa was one country, there is no way Kenyans could buy maize from Malawi when maize from Luwero is rotting in the Houses. That is why we talk of integration - economic and political –and we are going to explain this to the people of Uganda, and they will understand it.

Politics is not for parasites - those who take from the social surplus only. Politics is primarily for the producers. We need a framework that facilitates the producers – we the producers. We can take care of those who do not produce also, but they should not interfere with our mission; they should not; because we shall not accept it.

Our priority, as you heard the minister saying for this budget, is roads and energy – electricity - she talked about it quite a lot; then science and technology as well as value addition. I have already experimented with this idea in that area near my place - Rwakitura.

In 1989, I introduced some coolers provided by the Dairy Corporation in different sub-counties; and now, all those areas have coolers and it has helped the incomes of the people in that area. We would like to spread this out to the whole country.

Each sub-county should become a processing centre. There should be a maize mill, a feed mixer, a rice huller, milk cooler - if there is milk there - an oil extractor if there are oil seeds like simsim; a fruit processor; and others.

Hon. Members, please, aim at this. I have told the minister that I am going to ensure we get money for this. Some of this oil money, when it comes, will be used for this. But you must also follow up. Yesterday, we were in Luwero and people were ‘crying’ with pineapples; they want a machine to process pineapples. In Soroti, people have responded to our call for growing of citrus fruits; very soon we shall have a very good crop and we must have these machines there.

These will be mini-industrial units at the sub-county. For the youth, you heard the minister saying that we have now started a fund apart from skills training. It is not true that there are no jobs in Uganda, but the youth sometimes do not have the skills that coincide with those jobs. Because if there are no jobs, why is it that in the health centres there are no doctors? The jobs are there, but there are no doctors to take them up.

Our children are trained in other professions which are not required in the job market. We have now agreed that it does not matter; whatever course you trained in, if you do not get a job, but you have got a university degree, there is a fund for you, where you can go and present a profitable project; borrow; implement your project and then pay back later. This fund is to help families that have spent quite a bit on educating their children through private sponsorship; the parents have paid; it is not good for them to pay and their children do not get jobs. We should at least support them through business if they don’t get jobs; and that fund is targeting those people. There are other funds for other youth in the villages. We are going to continue to roll them out as the situation becomes clearer.

The minister talked about the performance of the Civil Service. In fact, she said that this time the economy grew by 5.8 percent, but it would have grown at a faster rate if the civil servants had utilised the money in time; because when that money goes into the economy, it helps in the purchasing power; but they did not utilise it. The civil servants were just seated; and the money is piled up there; and we noted it in the middle of the year that these civil servants were not spending the money. I do not know why they were not spending the money on the agreed plans; why they were not even implementing the projects.

We are now going to make it a condition that for you to continue to work for the government; if you are not able to implement Government projects then you can go and implement your own projects. That is why they are talking of these performance contract terms. 

We need to restock Northern Uganda which lost cows during the chaos that was there. This is not a new situation; we have seen it before. In 1894 there was rinderpest which killed many heads of cattle in Uganda. My great grandfather saved seven cows; those cows are now very many. In Luwero recently, during the Luwero War, all the cows were looted by the Government that Olara Otunu was serving. (Laughter) But if you go to Luwero today, the cows are overstocked. 

We had started this programme sometime ago in Northern Uganda, but there were all these problems of corruption, this and that, which all the political leaders should deal with. But if the political leaders do not deal with them, then my RDCs must deal with them –(Interjections)- if they are equally corrupt, then they are under my authority. My daughter, hon. Anywar has now introduced new biology; she is talking of yellow flies. I have never seen yellow flies. Flies are always some other colours and not yellow. (Laughter)

The RDCs - the Minister of the Presidency is there – if the political leaders do not do their work, the RDCs must do their work; and so should of course the civil servants, but somebody must supervise them. I called the RDCs the other time and I gave them a seminar. They were complaining about vehicles and so on – I hope those were solved in this budget. I am glad the minister is now very clear. It is not enough to say we have built one school here or another there and all that – that is alright; but we want an infrastructure for education in the whole country – uniform. (Applause) Now she is categorical; by 2014, all the sub-counties must each have a secondary school; and all districts must each have a technical college. (Applause) So, that is the target. We may not achieve it one year but by 2014, it must be achieved and we shall do everything possible to do that.  

On the issue of roads, there is now quite a bit of outcry on the murram roads. There were these murram roads which were taken over by the Ministry of Works; they are in a bad state; I have heard reports from many people. 

Like the other time when I was in Amolatar; I flew by helicopter from Dokolo to Amolatar, but my staff who came by road said the road from Lwala or someplace to Amolatar was bad - Namasale and many other roads. But the minister has now come up with a proposal to engage all the contractors using the Shs 30 billion you gave him recently. He got a supplementary to deal with all these roads. So, please, I do not want to hear people crying about these murram roads. They should be repaired, and they are going to be repaired. And when they are repaired, they should be properly repaired. You do not build canals and you call them roads, because I have seen that some of the roads do not have drainage channels. Now what sort of road is it without a drainage channel? That means that it is a canal. When it rains, all the water collects there on the road.

The Ministry of Works must be organised in such a way that there must be regional engineers to see that these roads are bad and they work on them, instead of people coming to disturb me. Because, wheneever I am going there, you hear people crying to me. What do the regional engineers do? 

Again on the roads; I created an inspection unit for the health ministry. You have been seeing them going around and fighting some health workers who have been stealing drugs - and they are going to stump out corruption in the Ministry of Health – those young people. The Banyankole say, “enjiri ezeire teribwa mbwa” meaning, a warthog which has got children cannot be attacked by dogs. When the dogs come to attack it, the children defend it. Now the children of the NRM are now going to defend the NRM –(Applause)- these young people – (Laughter)- is he the one they call hon. Lukwago? This is the one? (Interjections) Now, you can see the confused reasoning of hon. Lukwago –(Laughter)- the proverb says, “a warthog with young ones cannot be eaten by dogs”. So, the Banyankole were very clever; they talked about complementality between the young and the old –(Laughter)– now, here hon. Lukwago is writing off the old –(Laughter)– what sort of society will you have without – the Banyankole have another proverb. They say, “eteine mukulu egendwa bwira”, which means that when there are no elders in an area, the youth are so arrogant that when a traveller wants accommodation, the youth, because of their arrogance and lack of foresight, will deny him accommodation and he has got to travel even in the night. 

You see, the Banyankole have got a complete philosophy about all these things and I am sure also the Baganda do. But hon. Lukwago has not taken time to absorb some of this -(Laughter)- -(Interjections) – no, but here the problem of accountability – some of the NRM people also have problems - but fortunately for the likes of hon. Lukwago and others  - and hon. Lukwago is a lawyer – he is also literate and knows how to read – the Constitution is very clear. Which is this article that deals with the Civil Service? The one that deals with the Civil Service? –(Interjections)- -[Prof. Apolo Nsibambi: “Article 173”]-

Now, those articles of the Constitution gave responsibility for money for contracts, not to politicians, but to civil servants. So, even if these politicians of NRM were corrupt, but if the civil servants knew what they were doing, they would definitely help this country. As you know in many countries, the political governments are very short-lived. Like in Japan, how many prime ministers have they had in the last few years? Something like four! So, who is running the country all this time? Civil servants! And if the servants were good, even these bad leaders, like the ones we had, could have benefited from them. If a civil servant comes and says, “Your Excellency, I think we should build a road; if we built a road or power, it would be good for industry.” I do not think even these past leaders would have refused, because they also wanted success. 

So, these young NRM who are coming to help us will deal with these civil servants and you will see the change. 

I am going to set up another unit now –(Interjections)- hon. Banyenzaki is not a civil servant; we are talking about civil servants and professionals; to help the political class defend the resources of the country. I am going to set up another unit, this time for civil engineering. This unit will check on these roads – if there was supposed to be cement in a place or not. If it is not there, then the one who made the road badly will answer. We are going to fight this corruption. 

Finally, the minister spoke about the pre-shipment charge. I do not know who brought back this idea. The business people should not worry. We had abolished this pre-shipment charge – trying to get to private people to do the pre-shipment; they are paid and then it affects the cost of the business; but do not worry; we are going to handle that. I do not know who initiated it again –(Applause)- and especially initiating it without involving Finance. That is not a good idea; because the idea is to lower business costs not to –(Applause)- even Lulume has now clapped. (Laughter) Our young people on the Opposition just put cotton wool in their ears; they cannot –(Laughter)– I think these people should read a little bit of Acholi. Many of you have not read Acholi. There is what we call in Acholi, “nyeko”. Many of these people suffer from “nyeko” (meaning envy). (Laughter)

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, on behalf of Parliament of Uganda and on behalf of the distinguished guests here, I want to thank you, because last week, you were able to fulfil your duty under Article 101 of the Constitution when you made the State of the Nation Address. Today, you have carried out your functions under Article 155(1) of the Constitution; and the two are related because we have not started debating your State of the Nation Address, but now that you have given us the budget speech, you have equipped the Members and they will competently scrutinise and debate the State of the Nation Address. 

Today, the presentation was pegged on a motion; a motion that we resolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply to consider what we have been presented with today. I want to assure you, Your Excellency, the Minister of Finance and others, that we have already decided on the ways of expeditiously handling the Budget. It is true the Budget Act provides dates, 31 August, but if we get the necessary cooperation from the Executive, we may be able to handle and complete the process of the Budget before that date. And the kind of cooperation, Your Excellency that we request from the Executive is not to tie themselves to that date of presenting policy statements. We would request that ministries send their policy statements as soon as possible so that possibly by end of June or early July, we complete the Budget process. (Applause) 

Your Excellency, this is necessary because as you are aware, in the months of August, September and even in July, Members of Parliament will be involved in their constituencies; they will be distracted. Therefore, the earlier we process the Budget, the better. For us we are ready; we need your cooperation and the needful will be done. 

Your Excellency, we have come to the end of this process, but as I had indicated in my proclamation, even the gardens of this place were declared part of Parliament where Members will enjoy the privileges that they enjoy in Parliament. We do not have a canteen here, but the gardens may present the facilities for a canteen. The invitations that were extended to invited guests included an activity in the gardens. 

I am adjourning this House to Tuesday 9.30 a.m. to continue with –(Interjections)- we agreed on that; maybe you were absent. We agreed that from next week, we will be transacting business in the morning and afternoon so that we clear the work that is pending. 

With this, we come to the end and once again I thank you, Your Excellency, for coming, and for carrying out your duty. 

National Anthem (Two verses) 

(The House rose at 6.38 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 June 2010 at 9.30 a.m.) 

