Wednesday 16th June, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE CAPACITY PAYMENTS FOR ELECTRICITY BY UGANDA ELECTRICITY BOARD TO A.E.S NILE POWER,  AN INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCTION AGREEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to present a resolution to Parliament to authorise partial risk guarantee to A.E.S Nile Power Limited. I beg to move that Government be allowed to guarantee Uganda Electricity Board's commitment to A.E.S Nile Power Limited for capacity payment for power produced,  under the independent power production agreement. 

Whereas under Article 159 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is a requirement that before Government can guarantee or raise a loan for a public institution, the Government has to seek the authority of Parliament;  

Whereas under implementation agreement, and a power purchase agreement to be executed between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and Uganda Electricity Board, the public institution respectively with A.E.S Nile power Limited, A.E.S proposes to construct a hydro electric power production facility at Dan Bell Island on River Nile approximately 8 kilometres north of the existing Owen Falls hydro electric facility and to construct associate transmission facilities;  
Whereas Uganda Electricity Board under the power purchase agreement be obligated to make annual capacity payments to A.E.S in respect of the energy constructed and delivered in accordance with annex hereby attached;  

Whereas as a condition to its investment,  A.E.S. requires the Government of Uganda to guarantee the payment obligations of U.E.B, until certain conditions set out in the implementation agreement are made; 

Whereas the Government of Uganda may determine that the overall costs of the investment and consequently,  the monthly payments can be reduced by having the World Bank provide a partial risk guarantee to the investors to protect against non commercial risks;  

Whereas in the event the Government will be obligated to provide the World Bank with an indemnification in the event that the World Bank is obligated to make payments to the investors pursuant to the World Bank partial risk guarantee; 

Whereas the provision of the guarantee and indemnification by the Government of Uganda is a contingent liability on the part of the Government of Uganda;  

Whereas the Parliament of Uganda has evaluated the terms of the investment,  the conditions and terms of the implementation agreement and the power purchase agreement, and that Government has concluded that the investment will enhance the social and economic development of Uganda; 

Now therefore, be it resolved that the Government of the Republic of Uganda acting by and through its Ministry of Finance is hereby authorised and empowered in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to execute and deliver to A.E.S Nile Power Limited a guarantee of the Government of the Republic of Uganda.  

Be it further resolved that the Government of the Republic of Uganda acting by and through its Ministry of Finance is hereby authorised and empowered in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, to execute and deliver the required documents of indemnification in connection with any partial guarantee issued by the World Bank, with respect to the Bujagali project, provided that such risk guarantee shall lower tariff payable from Uganda Electricity Board to A.E.S Nile Power Limited.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.  Thank you.
  
THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded?  You can speak to your motion.

MR. NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On page one of the parliamentary resolutions,  the last but one paragraph,  there is, "and whereas the Government of Uganda may determine that the overall costs of the investment and consequently the monthly payments can be reduced by having the World Bank provide a partial risk guarantee to the investors to protect against...." And these are the words I am very concerned about,  'to protect against non commercial risks'.  Can the Minister responsible let this House clearly know what these are?  Do they include inter alia,  acts of war?  

Secondly,  I would like clarification on page two. It reads, "now therefore, be it resolved..."  I am asking the mover whether it would be prudent, given the couching of the parliamentary language;  'be it resolved,' by who?  Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, this is a very important motion,  in view of the fact that Members of Parliament, especially the Committees,  have spent a lot of time discussing the phenomenon related to the project proposed here.  With reference to the Environment Statute 1995, I would like to know if we have conducted a public hearing on this matter?

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs. Syda Bbumba): Hon. Members.  I want to give a few introductory remarks to this resolution. As many of the Members here are aware, Uganda is under supplied with electricity.  The development of a country is measured by the power consumed.  The per capita power consumption in Uganda is 10 watts, which is less than an average bulb.  An average bulb is 60 watts,  but the average intake of power per person in Uganda is less than the smallest bulb.  This is so because of several reasons.  

The main reason is the low generation capacity.  Right now U.E.B generates 180 megawatts,  and that falls far below the country's requirements.  That is why we experience load shedding almost everyday in most parts of the country.  

This low generation does not only stop at providing under capacity,  but the distribution is limited to just a few areas because there is not enough to go to all parts of the country.  As a result of this, the country is not developing as fasts as it should. According to the current level of electrification, only six percent of the urban centres have access to power.  Mr. Speaker, in the rural areas, it is only one percent.  


MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU:  I would like to be educated on a certain procedural matter. I was wondering whether it is possible for us to engage in the debate of this resolution before the Committee report is ready.  I just need to be educated, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it is the prerogative of the Speaker to call upon the Chairman of the Committee to move a motion. Given that the Chairman is here, I think this is how we proceed.  The Minister moves the motion, makes his statement,  and I call upon the Chairperson.  So, we will sort out that problem when we get there.

MR. LWANGA TIM:  I would like to be clarified.  After your ruling, does this mean that Members should keep quiet until the Chairman has made a statement,  then we can debate?

THE SPEAKER:  No, I am not saying so;  I am not saying that at all. You see,  he is anticipating an event that I am not aware of,  and I think hon. Members are not aware of it too.  Because, I have not yet called upon the Chairman to present his report,  have I?  I have not.  So, hon. Member,  proceed.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  With reference to the Minister's submission, I do not see any signs that the Minister is answering the challenge I put forward, and yet it is environmentally important that she answers it before she proceeds.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, this is a simple matter.  Hon. Minister, there were three issues,  two raised by the hon. Nyai and one by the hon. Lukyamuzi.  I thought that in the course of your presentation you would answer those questions.  But if it is the wish of the hon. Members who have drawn your attention to those issues,  that you deal with those issues first, I am prepared to call upon you to respond to those issues.  The issues are as follows.  

As far as the hon. Dick Nyai is concerned, the first issue is legislative drafting.  He says, who is being referred to in,  'be it resolved that the Government of the Republic of Uganda...?' He would like you to comment on that manner of drafting.  But I would also like to draw the attention of hon. Dick Nyai to the top of page one where we are talking about parliamentary resolutions.  

The second issue which he has raised is what these non commercial risks are.  

Then thirdly, the hon. Lukyamuzi is wondering whether - on the question of environmental assessment - public hearings were conducted.  

MR. MUTYABA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is not the first time this matter has come before this House.  This matter came before the House last year,  and the House referred it to the Committees of National Economy in consultation with the one of Energy, Lands and Environment.  I am wondering and seeking your clarification on whether extending from that position, the Committees should not report because the Government had already sought the approval of this House for the guarantee,  noting that the House could not make any decision before they are advised by the Committee?  

The way the motion is coming to us now is as if it is a new motion,  and I am still wondering at what stage the Committees would be able to make a report.  I believe that now the House should be waiting for the report from the Committees,  and after that report is made, then the Motion can be moved by the Ministers.  Your clarification is sought, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MWANDHA:  Referring to the debate in this House which my Colleague hon. Mutyaba has just mentioned,  on that occasion the House wanted a comprehensive law on the energy sector before it could consider licensing or giving authority to licence independent operators.  But this was going to be done within the context of an energy sector,  which policy has not been brought to this House.  And if I can remind the Members, the Minister - then hon. Kaijuka, I think is here - promised that he would bring that law to this House by December.  At that time we were discussing the subject,  it was August.  I do not know how this Parliament can turn round now and begin treating independent power purchases when we do not have a law covering the entire energy sector.  I think it is premature for the Minister to come with this resolution,  Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I take it that you are seeking clarification from the hon. Minister.  I think let us proceed, hon. Members.  The Minister is here, what you have raised the Minister has heard,  and I would like to call upon the Minister to direct her mind to the issues that have been raised so that Members can know exactly where we are.  Hon. Minister,  -(Interjections)-.  I would request hon. Members that you give the hon. Minister an opportunity to respond and explain the issues you have raised.
  
MRS. BBUMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I was still seconding the motion.  I thought it would be better for me to second it first, and then respond to the issues raised.  But according to your ruling, Mr. Speaker, I will respond to the issues now.  

You have already handled one which was raised by hon. Dick Nyai on the resolution;  that the resolution is by Parliament.  

To the second issue which was raised by hon. Dick Nyai,  the answer is,  the non commercial risks which are being guaranteed here are the foreign exchange risks and the political risks.  

And then on the issue raised by hon. Lukyamuzi on whether the environmental public hearing has been held,  it has not yet been held, but it is going to be held, and the developer  -(Interjections)- Mr. Speaker, the developer is not going to reach financial closure until this environmental public hearing has been held.  This is because it is a condition,  one precedent to financing.  So,  those people will not be able to reach financial closure and we are not going to sign the agreement with them until after we have received the whole environmental impact assessment report.  Mr. Speaker, -(Interruptions)-(Mr. Mutyaba rose_).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can you allow her to make her presentation?  I gave you an opportunity.

MRS. BBUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, I would now like to move on to the issue raised by hon. Ben Mutyaba on the resolution being submitted a second time.  I am advised that what was submitted last time was not a resolution.  It was an amendment to the UEB law,  it was not a resolution for guarantee, Mr. Speaker  -(Interruption).

MR. MUTYABA:  Point of information.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  when I give an opportunity to someone to make a contribution and you would like to respond,  you wait for your turn.  Then when you catch the Speaker's eye,  I will allow you to make a contribution.

MR. MUTYABA:  Mr. Speaker, I was very, very clear that in fact I am not against this resolution coming to this House.  I was just expressing my concerns about the procedure.  What I said was that this matter was brought before this House and the House could not pronounce itself on it until they got a brief from the Committees.  The clarification which I sought from you, Mr. Speaker, was whether - stemming from that fact that this matter had been before this Parliament and referred to the Committee - we should not get the report of the Committee before we go to the motion for the resolution. It is just procedure.  I am not by any chance suggesting that this motion should not come here.  So I think the Minister got me wrong there.

MR. MUSUMBA ISAAC: Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, the Committee on National Economy in consultation with the  Sessional Committee on Energy of last year's Session has since January this year been looking at the request by the Minister for this House to give a guarantee to UEB and a partial risk guarantee for the World Bank.  We have put our thoughts together and we will be in a position to give our comprehensive report soon.  How soon will be as soon as from tomorrow; that is the position of the Committee.  

Having said that, I can say that I have no problem with the Minister putting his motion to the Members,  and our reaction to it will come in due course - as I have stated.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. RWAKOOJO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Order please!  Can we decrease on the conversation across the House?

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Mr. Speaker, I am a Member of the National Economy Committee, and I have participated in the discussions that have taken place between the Ministry of Energy and our joint Committees.  I am slightly disappointed though that this resolution has been presented - and I am trying to seek clarification as to why it should be presented - in such haste.  I am saying this because there were very many issues that were raised at the beginning.  A number of those issues have been resolved,  answers have been provided.  

There were,  nevertheless,  still a few more questions that were outstanding.  We had for instance asked to have a look at the draft agreement,  and there were very few things that were left.  A preliminary report for this Committee had been prepared and we could not sign it this morning because it was not complete and we state so.  I am therefore wondering about the spirit behind this rush of presenting -(Applause)- a resolution that is not 'totally cooked';  and make it look like there is unpreparedness on the part of Parliament yet this not the case?  I am wondering what the motive of this is.

MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU:  With all due respect to the Chairman of the Committee on the Economy, this morning the draft report of the same Committee was presented to us. We were supposed to go through it and put final touches,  but we put in a request to meet with the Minister tomorrow,  to have a harmonized position. 

This report was supposed to be distributed, and the Chairman of the Committee on Energy contacted our Chairman of the Economy with the report that he had seen the report being distributed outside.  Our Chairman went and stopped the distribution of the report so that we could first go through it and then put final touches to it tomorrow.  I wonder how the report could even be distributed before the Members of the Committee put the signatures on it,  because you do not see the signature of the Chairman, you do not see the signature of even one Member of that Committee!  What is the problem in holding on for one day and we meet with the Minister of Energy and have a harmonized position to debate on the Floor of this House!  What exactly is the problem? (Applause). Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order please. Hon. Members, the impression I get from what the Chairman said and from what one or two Members of one of the two Committees have said, and the reason why I precisely had to call upon the Chairperson to say what he has said, is that the Committee is not ready with its report. That is my understanding. The procedure we had adopted is for the Minister to move the motion and then I would call upon the Chairman to present a report. But before I even went to that stage something happened, because there were some people who had prior knowledge of the fact that the report was not ready. 

If that is the case, what will not take place is debating the motion,  but the motion can be presented and the -(Interjection)- yes, that is the procedure.  The motion has been presented and he spoke to the motion. Now when I call upon the Chairman -(Interjection)- order please. It is when I call upon the Chairman and he says he has no report to present that the issue whether we should proceed with the debate or not arises.  

Hon. Minister can you answer those questions, finish your presentation?  And in light of what the Chairperson has said about the non availability of the report, then we will take a decision.  I repeat that the Minister has moved the motion and it has been seconded and someone is speaking to it.  It will be upon me to call the Chairperson to present a report. If the Chairperson says that he does not have a report, that is when the decision whether or not to proceed to debate will arise.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Energy requested Finance to move this resolution,  and we were assured that the Committee had finalised the report and that it was ready for presentation. Even this morning we were aware everything was fine,  until the time of entry into this House when we realised that actually the report had not been signed. In view of what has taken place and considering that we need to understand each other and move together, may I on behalf of Finance withdraw the Motion.

THE SPEAKER: Is that supported?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER: So, the motion has been withdrawn.  Hon. Members, according to the programme on the Order Paper that was a subject which should have committed us the whole of this afternoon and in light of the withdrawal of the motion by the Minister of Finance,  I will adjourn the House to 2.00 O'clock tomorrow.  But that is to allow the Minister of Finance to organise his House so that tomorrow we can proceed again.  So, the House is adjourned to 2.00 O'clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 3.13 p.m and adjourned to Thursday 17th June, 1999 at 2.00 p.m).
