




Tuesday, 16 June 2020

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this First Meeting of the Fifth Session of the Tenth Parliament. As I indicated to you at the end of the Budget Speech, this Session will have a lot of disruptions. You may have heard this morning that the Electoral Commission has issued a revised programme for elections and I hope that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs will be able to formally come and inform the House about that programme so that Members may get clarification.

I have also invited the Business Committee for a meeting on Thursday, 18 June 2020 at 11.00 a.m. However, in the meantime, I would like to advise that as much as possible, we take up the matters which are on the Order Paper and conclude them. 

I would also like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain to us the reasons why payment to the Ugandan traders – of the South Sudan issue – has not been handled yet the money was appropriated by this House. The financial year is ending and if the traders are not paid, the money will go back to the Consolidated Fund. We need answers. Parliament did its work. Our committee investigated, reported, their report was adopted and appropriation done. The House should not work in vain. I hope the minister will come today to give us an answer to that issue.

There are just one or two matters of national concern. I invite hon. Kibalya for two minutes; hon. Kasumba for two minutes and hon. Waira for two minutes.

2.14
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Towards the end of last year during the President’s regional tours, he came to Busoga and addressed a rally where he promised the Basoga, who were complaining about the failure by the existing sugar mills to consume the sugarcane that they had, that Government was going to give them a sugar mill to at least help them. 

The President used the words, “Since the mills of Busoga are facing constipation, I am going to address it and see what we can do.” The President gave two options; he said he was going to meet with Cabinet to see whether the growers in Busoga could partner with Government and we see how they could run the mills or, he said, he could ask the Uganda Development Bank to avail money to see that that sugar mill was established.

Madam Speaker, time has passed and in a situation where people are now being hit hard financially, the Basoga are wondering whether the President still holds them in mind. Recently, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was here giving the way forward and explaining how the Government was going to address issues affecting people but he did not mention anything concerning the Basoga, which raises a concern.

Madam Speaker, our prayer is that – (Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, from about last month, sugarcane growers in Busoga have been suffering. You find lorries waiting in Mayuge for almost three hours, four hours, two days or a week and the sugarcanes are drying on the lorries. These people are stuck. If you go to Kakira or Kaliro, it is the same thing. There is a very big problem that needs to be sorted by Government. The President has to come out clearly and solve the issue of sugarcane in Busoga once and for all.

The majority of our population survives on sugarcane. However, I think the factories that exist do not have the capacity to buy all the sugarcane. Therefore, these people are in abject poverty and they are stuck with sugarcane and this is amidst the COVID-19 lockdown. People planted sugarcane from which they expected to earn but now they cannot earn from it.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, this issue raised by hon. Kibalya is very important for the people of Busoga and I request that Parliament gives it the attention it deserves so that we can, at least, give something to the people of Busoga and the sugar millers so that we can move forward. That is the information I wanted to add.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I have one request. Hon. Walyomu was in the same vehicle with the President when he was making that pledge. I just request that you allow one second for him to say something.

MR WALYOMU: Thank you, hon. Kibalya, for giving way. Madam Speaker, about sugarcane in Busoga, I would like to inform this House that farmers are really suffering. Last week, I was in the constituency and I tried to visit these factories. Out-growers are suffering to the extent of assuming that when you are given a permit, you have to spend about eight months before getting another permit. This means that the consumption or milling of sugarcane in Busoga is becoming a problem because the existing factories cannot consume all the sugarcane within Busoga. 

As hon. Kibalya stated, the President was clear. During those days of zoning the sugarcane industry, the out-growers came out clearly and informed the President that “we are suffering” and the President promised the out-growers that within this financial year - which is coming to an end - they would get money to establish a factory for sugarcane so that the farmers do not suffer. That is the information I wanted to give to hon. Kibalya.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, our prayers – (Interjection) – Another farmer, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, this issue is really hitting the people of Busoga. The information I would like to give is that, personally, I am a sugarcane farmer and I am stuck with my canes. I do not have anywhere to supply them. The factories are either deliberately consuming the canes slowly so as to give low prices to the farmers or the supplies are in surplus.

Madam Speaker, when Kigezi region was suffering with tea – those tea growers – the Government came out clearly and established a factory for the tea growers. 

The same issue applies to dairy farmers. A solution has been provided by Government. It is important that we implore Government to expedite the process of finding a permanent solution to sugarcane growers’ problems. This, I propose, just indeed like the President promised - let a factory, managed by the out-growers themselves, be established. They can form a cooperative society and that situation will be solved once and for all. Thank you, colleague, for giving way.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I know that when we discuss the factors that are affecting the sugarcane growers - you have taken time off, visited these people, shared with them, visited the mills and you know what is going on. So, we cannot say much more than what you have experienced yourself. I am also aware that there are many letters in your office, telling you how those people are suffering and what they are going through.

Therefore, our prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes to Parliament and tells the public clearly whether they have provided for this sugar mill. He should clarify whether they have shared with the President information about this sugar mill. That will give hope to the suffering people of Busoga. Thank you.

MS TAAKA: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is that while Parliament is in session, the frontbench is empty. So, are we proceeding well when there is nobody from Government; Government is not here to take our concerns, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I issued notice that the House would sit at 2 O’clock. It was not only for the backbenchers; it was also for the Government. So, we shall proceed with our business. 

However, I would like to say that I have become so tired of writing to millers to issue permits to sugarcane growers. That is why last week, I had to go and spend a day in one of the sugar mills so that we could come to an agreement on how our people can be served. 

It is really important that the Government responds to this issue. It is an emergency; it is actually a catastrophe. So, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come and update us on how this matter will be handled.

2.23
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since February this year, Bujenje Constituency, specifically the two parishes of Nyantonzi and Kasenene, have been severely hit by scabies. The scabies have spread around the neighbouring district of Masindi, particularly the areas of Pakanyi and Kyatiri and Kyabigambire Sub-County in Hoima District.

We have made efforts to contact the district health officers in the respective districts who have also tried to contact the Ministry of Health but to no avail. Recently, I was at the Ministry of Health over the same but no one was ready to give me attention. People claim they are concentrating on the coronavirus.

We are also aware that scabies are a result of poor hygiene. Bujenje is one of the constituencies that is water stressed and we have been trying to contact the Ministry of Water and Environment and the concerned district authorities over the same but with no response.

Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that Government intervenes quickly to provide drugs and to empower the district health officials, including the village health attendants, not only to provide drugs but also to sensitise the public over the same disease. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Health is directed to address the outbreak of scabies in Masindi District and in particular, in Bujenje and arrange for the treatment of the patients there and carry out sensitisation about hygiene to the population.

Let us go to item three.

LAYING OF PAPERS
BI-ANNUAL INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT PERFORMANCE REPORT

THE SPEAKER: Commissioner Silwany, can you lay that report?

2.25
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Bi-annual Inspectorate of Government Performance Report to Parliament. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. However, I would like to appeal that we should at least handle one or two reports of the Inspector General of Government. We are doing a disservice to the country by not studying and making reports on the reports from the Inspector General of Government.

2.26
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTATY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, the concern that you have is the very concern the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has had for the last six months; we have to find time.

We resolved that before we break off for the scientific campaigns – if possible – and the elections, we should be able to go - we shall come to your office and the Clerk to facilitate us.

We have the report of the 2016 elections and then the IGG report. So, we can make an undertaking that we shall be able to have at least a one or two-day’s event; the Members had agreed to give ample time to consider the reports from the IGG. It is very important and I hope that we shall get the opportunity to do so.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. I think the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget had something to say. Hon. Lugoloobi, you have the Floor, before we come to item 3 (ii).

2.28
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, this is a matter of national importance and it is in relation to the inconsistencies between the figures in the approved Budget for Financial Year 2020/2021 and those contained in the Budget Speech delivered by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, on 31 March 2020, the annual Budget estimates for Financial Year 2020/2021 were presented to Parliament, as per Section 13 (1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Also, the Appropriation Bill, 2020 was read for the first time and subsequently referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration. 

The committee consulted widely, discussed and reviewed the proposed Budget estimates. Consequently, on 24 April 2020, Parliament approved the Appropriation Bill, 2020. The parliamentary approval of the Budget process is elaborate, as you are all aware, as provided for in the Public Finance Management Act and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the matter of national importance I am raising relates to the inconsistencies or you may call them variations between the Budget speech – some figure therein – presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and those in the annual Budget estimates, as approved by Parliament.

I wish to draw your attention to some of the items, which the minister mentioned in his speech but are at variance with the Budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021, as approved by Parliament. The examples I am highlighting here are:

    1. The increased access to credit at Uganda Development Bank to offer low interest financing for manufacturing agri-business and other private sector firms. The budget provided for Shs 103 billion. However, in the speech the minister made, he gave a figure of Shs 1,045,000,000,000, which is a huge variance.

    2. The second example is about expediting the payment of arrears owed by Government to private sector firms commencing July 2020. We approved a figure of Shs 400 billion. However, the minister talked of Shs 673 billion. There are more figures on UDC, Micro Finance Support Centre and a couple of others. 

It is, therefore, my considered view and prayer that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development clarifies on the inconsistencies and variations in the figures. 

Secondly, I pray that he corrects the figures to be consistent with the ones approved by Parliament. I have more figures here: for the Export Promotion Strategy, we provided Shs 38.5 billion but the minister talked of Shs 138 billion. On the rollout of the Social Assistance Grant for the Elderly, we have Shs 66 billion in the Budget but the minister talked of Shs 107 billion. On small scale enterprises, he talked about Shs 94 billion but we have Shs 40 billion. About the Talent Support Scheme, we have Shs 100 billion but the minister talked of Shs 256 billion. I believe there are more inconsistencies in the Budget.

Madam Speaker, this matter is very important because we have a law governing the Budget process and it is very dangerous to read figures that were not approved by Parliament. If there are changes made by Government, they should present them to Parliament before they are pronounced to the public. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much -

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, the matter raised by the chairperson is really very important. We were in the same venue when the minister said, “I know I brought this Budget but I am coming back with another Budget.” This statement was made by the minister. When Ugandans heard him speak – because that is a constitutional day when a minister must come and tell the country that this is how we have performed, this is where we are going and this is the new Budget.

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter and I do not think it is sufficient for the minister to come here and make – The minister must meet our Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline so that he is told that these are constitutional matters that must not be played around with. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members –

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are things that we can allow to be taken for granted but issues of manipulating the Budget should be handled appropriately. Madam Speaker, a Budget process is very long and you have always told us here that we are beginning the Budget process and each sector and agency should present their figures so that we can move. Everybody expects that all went through the right channels and processes.

Madam Speaker, the President has always said he is fighting people that manipulate things. If the minister did not manipulate the figures himself and instead manipulated them with the knowledge of the President, we need to know. 

As Parliament, we cannot have a Budget that we debate and agree on and then the minister comes on the day of reading the Budget and fools us. He duped us by saying he was reading the Budget we approved yet he read something different. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it would be procedurally right for us to regard what the minister read as the Budget that we debated or as another Budget so that we regard what he read as a statement from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We will then expect the reading of the real Budget that we went through and passed as a House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the history of the Budget Act was that the Parliament, at that time, was not involved in the Budget process. They would be surprised on the day of the Budget; the minister would come with a briefcase and announce this and that. We have been moving well over the years. That is why we sit for very long hours to finalise this Budget and pass it together with the Appropriation Act. 

Therefore, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is required urgently, in fact tomorrow, to come and explain the variances between the Appropriation Act we passed here and the figures he read on the day of the Budget. We would also like to know; if the President assented to the Appropriation Act, where did these other figures come from?  

Concerning the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, I think let him come first to explain the variances and then we shall decide whether to send him to that committee. This is very urgent; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come and help us on that issue. Let us go to the next item. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO CONSIDER USING SOME OF THE FUNDS CONTAINED IN THE NATIONAL RESPONSE COVID-19 FUND TO BUILD THE CAPACITY OF BIO-SCIENCES RESEARCH LABORATORIES IN DIAGNOSING VIRUS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Komakech - Next item. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EFFECTS OF FLOODS ON UGANDA’S ROAD NETWORK

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is not around.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON BRIDGING THE DEMAND SUPPLY GAP THROUGH ACCELERATED RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROJECT (BDSGAREP)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is not available.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE PROPOSED ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES OF TORORO AND NAMAYINGO DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Local Government is unavailable.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE GOVERNMENT ECONOMIC POLICY RESPONSES TO COPE WITH THE EFFECTS OF COVID-19 AND STRATEGIC ECONOMIC DIRECTION FOR SUSTAINED GROWTH

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? I do not know whether, at this stage, I can invite hon. Mpuuga who had something along the same lines. There is a motion on item 13 relating to the management of a resolution for Government to provide payment of water and electricity for a period of six months for the people of Uganda under the COVID-19 pandemic. Isn’t he here? Let us go to the next item. 

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT ON THE INACCESSIBILITY OF KALANGALA DISTRICT DUE TO THE ABSENCE OF NAKIWOGO FERRY THAT IS UNDER REPAIR, SUSPENSION OF BOAT OPERATIONS AT KASENYI DUE TO THE THREAT OF COVID-19 AND THE FLOODING OF A 2KM ROAD STRETCH IN BUKAKATA IN MASAKA DISTRICT AND THE ATTENDANT INHIBITION OF ACCESS TO BASIC SERVICES

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is not there. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) ON THE MANAGEMENT OF FLOODS IN KASESE AND BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: The Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) is not there. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we come here, we come for serious business. Indeed your Office and that of the Clerk distributed the Order Paper far back in time for all the ministers, including those on the Opposition. However, there is neither a shadow minister nor cabinet minister. 

May I know whether there is an agreement between Government and the Opposition that they want to work on one thing because we are here and there are no ministers? 

Therefore, are we proceeding well when all the ministers including the shadow ministers are not here? May I, therefore, request if possible and in your wisdom, Madam Speaker, that we suspend the House for five minutes because most of the concerns Members are raising are critical issues. For example, issues regarding sugarcanes have been raised and there is no one - (Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Waluswaka for giving way. You may recall that last week, the Minister for Information Communication Technology and National Guidance, hon. Nabakooba, addressed the nation and told us that all ministers had been requested to go on self-isolation. I do not know whether this was formally communicated to you; that could be the reason they are absent here is because they have gone on self-isolation. 

However, she communicated and the whole country heard that ministers had been requested to go on self-isolation. That is the information.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I wouldn’t have taken that information if I knew that he was objecting. However, since it has come from my elder brother - the only person we know to be self-isolating is the Prime Minister. Therefore, in a nutshell, I do not know whether we are proceeding well. Also, I request you that we suspend and call the ministers; otherwise, they are taking your humble Office for granted. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not aware of the information given by hon. Angura. I would have expected that if Government had sent ministers for isolation, they would inform me so that I can inform the House. In the circumstances - can you imagine, it is almost 3.00 O’clock and there is no state ministers, no deputy Prime Minister, no Cabinet ministers?

Let me suspend for 15 minutes and we resume at 3.00 O’clock.

(The House was suspended at 2.45 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.01 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO CONSIDER USING SOME OF THE FUNDS CONTAINED IN THE NATIONAL RESPONSE COVID-19 FUND TO BUILD THE CAPACITY OF BIOSCIENCES RESEARCH LABORATORIES IN DIAGNOSING VIRUS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Komakech? Is hon. Mpuuga here? Let us go to item 5. Since I do not see the minister, hon. Mpuuga should move his motion.

MOTION FOR RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PROVIDE A WAIVER ON PAYMENT FOR WATER AND ELECTRICITY FOR A PERIOD OF SIX MONTHS DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC LOCKDOWN

3.02
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do apologise; I stepped out for a minute. I did not know this item would come very fast. I had a late lunch. Nevertheless, I thank you for your indulgence for affording this item time at resumption, Madam Speaker. 

I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to provide a waiver on payment for water and electricity for a period of six months during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown. I move this motion under our Rules of Procedure, specifically rule 55, under which I move hereunder. 

WHEREAS the outbreak of the coronavirus (COVID-19) was declared a public health emergency of international concern by the World Health Organisation on 30 January 2020; 

AND WHEREAS following the confirmation of a COVID-19 positive case, the Government of Uganda issued several guidelines to contain the spread of the COVID-19 Pandemic, resulting into a total lockdown in the country; 

AWARE that the lockdown, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, has had devastating effects on the Ugandan economy, including but not limited to, closure of companies, loss of employment through laying off of workers, loss of earnings for those in the informal sector who could no longer access their workplaces because of movement restrictions, which state of affairs has rendered the citizenry generally unable to pay for essential services, including food, water and electricity; 

FURTHER AWARE that at this critical moment, access to electricity and water for a Ugandan household, health facilities and other vital public services is fundamental to mitigating the most devastating impact of COVID-19 in the country; 

RECOGNISING the fact that hand washing with soap and water is a key critical defence against the spread of COVID-19 and access to electricity is key to ensuring a rapid economic recovery and helping put Uganda on a sustainable trajectory after the immediate crisis has passed; 

COGNISANT of the fact that many countries around the world have come up with policies to mitigate the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy; such countries include but are not limited to Indonesia, that provided extra funding for affordable food programmes for 15 million low income households to buy staple food, the Government of Ghana announced free water for three months bi-seasonally and a three months’ tax holiday given to health workers, among others, the Government of El Salvador has provided waiver for utility bills, water, internet, electricity, telephone for three months for those tested positive for COVID-19, Guinea-Bissau has announced that it will freeze rent prices and the prices of pharmaceuticals and basic necessities until December 2020; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government of Uganda is urged to provide waivers for utility bills for water and electricity by making payment for the same to the utility companies of National Water and Sewerage Cooperation, other umbrella companies and Umeme for a period of six months, as a form of mitigating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Ugandan economy. 

I so move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by several members. Justify it.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before attempting to move this motion, I needed to consult across the political divide from colleagues in Parliament. The central opinion was that we are all troubled. We waited for Government to clearly come out, as promised since March this year, for some form of relief. At some stage, we were promised that a stimulus package would come to relieve the citizenry of this widespread suffering due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 

When Government made an attempt to come with some form of relief – when it appeared in the budget speech – it came in passing and it did not address the critical needs of the citizenry and the common man did not view himself or herself in this kind of relief package, Madam Speaker. 

The stimulus so promised is wide-ranging but fails to be on spot on these key utilities that move life every day. Water is key in keeping communities safe and healthy and like I said in the motion, washing hands is one of the key advisories in making sure that we stay off the COVID-19 pandemic.  

Power is a key input in the survival of SMEs and the informal sector that employs the bulk of our population. Madam Speaker, the biggest part of these key sectors is still under lock, and therefore, at resumption, they cannot resume to employ our people when they are faced with very huge utility bills. 

We are lucky for the part that the National Water and Sewerage Corporation did not disconnect water but the meters are running. Immediately we get a lift of this lockdown, they will be demanding for their pay and rightly so. 

Madam Speaker, the citizens will not be able to meet these obligations to face with this direct problem. When we were discussing this matter, the people have been questioning; what about Yaka? Yaka is an app. Once the provider relieves of it, the same app can be moved and the charges normalised. 

Therefore, it is my considered view that Government has the capacity to make up for the loss of revenue from these entities through the loans so far acquired and the grants that are still flowing in and try to make some direct subvention to the companies, where Government can make relief from March up to September, bearing in mind that by September, some additional relief could have come our way; citizens would be able to address these problems.

Madam Speaker, I so pray that this House be satisfied with the conditions in the country and this motion cuts across the divide that we can resolve and therefore, leave it as a duty to Government to go and find the best way of making these services available to the citizenry and provide the necessary relief that is very immediate of these key services. I so pray, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Are there members – yes, hon. Ababiku.

3.12
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. As water and electricity are so essential to us and more importantly at this critical time, I would request that before we make a conclusive decision, we need to be provided with information on how much revenue Government would have lost to guide us on whether we should scrap it totally or just have certain percentages preserved.

Secondly, the Ministry of Water and Environment wrote to the district local governments directing the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) to repair all boreholes in the respective districts. However, the CAOs and the district local governments do not have that money. Therefore, as we talk about tap water, we should also look at borehole water because many rural areas take water from boreholes. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ofwono, hon. Waluswaka, hon. Angura, hon. Mbwatekamwa. Can we use just two minutes each? 

3.14
MR APOLLO OFWONO YERI (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the member for moving the motion. This is a very critical issue. I represent a municipality where water and electricity are key factors.

As we talk, some national water branches have disconnected water from the population. In addition, for security purposes - imagine you are in lockdown but you do not have power at home. Therefore, this is a key utility, which other countries - when I visited Ghana, I realized this is a service freely given by the Government of Ghana. 

Therefore, we can even propose that it is not only suspended but also that Government offers it as a free service. It is very important to the population and for development. Therefore, I suggest that we support this motion and make sure its prayers are implemented. Thank you very much.

3.16
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of water and power is very critical. For the first time - and its good I am saying this when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is here - let Government offer water and power to the people free of charge. If that is hard, at least let it be done for water because water is life.

Madam Speaker, we have constituencies, like mine, Butaleja, where there are no services offered by National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC). Now when we pass this, it will be like the food, which was distributed only to people in Kampala and nearby urban areas yet when it comes to paying taxes to repay the loans for that we approve for borrowing, every villager including people from Butaleja that do not access water supplied by NWSC, they will also pay. 

I would like to propose that Government - the minister came with a request of around Shs 11 billion for water - at least, let them also include boreholes. Otherwise, if the people who access water from boreholes are not catered for, then let everybody meet the cost because we shall only be considering very few people.

On the issue of power, I think it should be catered for and supported. I only propose that we amend the motion moved by hon. Mpuuga to include boreholes and other water sources in the communities. I beg to submit.

3.18
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues who have already said that we need the community to be supported with some incentives in terms of power and water.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the bills for water and power, you realise that a big percentage consists of taxes. Madam Speaker, if Government refuses to waive the payment for these few months, they can consider giving tax relief and VAT exemptions on all payments for water and power because it constitutes a big percentage on the bills that we get.

We have given tax holidays here for PAYE, which are yet to be implemented, and I am saying this can also be included because it will help our people during these hard times.

I would also like to inform Government that boreholes are a major source of water for many of our rural people. We were promised - and the minister communicated instructing all districts to prepare the repairing of boreholes but they have not supported them with any funds to implement this exercise. How I wish we could also ask the finance ministry whether the Ministry of Water and Environment would come and tell Parliament what they are doing in terms of repairing the boreholes. 

That is one big remedy that will help our people. During this period of Covid, washing hands requires water but where is the water to wash hands. That would be very important. In that case, I want to support the motion that let Government consider giving our people a waiver whichever will be convenient to them; whether through taxes but some benefits during these months of COVID-19. Thank you very much.

3.20
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank my brother for this motion. For sure, water and electricity are very critical components to our people, more especially water during this time of COVID-19. 

In Toroma, the constituency I represent, the district was able to give water to the people of Kapujan sub-county but there was a problem encountered. The district failed to pay the contractor and he decided to switch off the panels. As I speak, the people of Kapujan, Apapai and all other areas do not have water. I request the Ministry of Water and Environment to work with the district to make sure that water is given to these people. 

Secondly, on the issue of electricity, we had power connected to three sub-counties of Omodoi, Toroma and parts of Angodingod. However, as I speak, it has been more than six months with the transformers in place but electricity has not been commissioned. 

I request the responsible minister to work out the modalities so that the electricity can be commissioned. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Members, let us stick to the motion. I know we have those other problems but we are now moving away from the motion. 

3.22
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable, for presenting this motion. I think it is long overdue. Our people should have already benefitted because of this problem of COVID-19, which we did not invite. 

I support this motion for two reasons: One, Lake Victoria is found in Uganda and it is the source of River Nile, which is the major supplier of electricity in Uganda. If Lake Victoria was not in Uganda, we would be very worried that the Government is going to incur a very big loss in terms of revenue. Yes, it is true we shall lose some revenue but our people should benefit from our natural resources. 

Let us look at Mt Elgon and other mountainous areas where many rivers originate. For example, in Bugisu sub-region, we have River Sisiyi. Electricity is being generated from River Sisiyi and therefore, the people of Mt Elgon and Uganda as a whole should also benefit during this difficult time. 

Madam Speaker, they talked about boreholes. The day before yesterday, I was in my constituency. Of course this is a very difficult time and we managed to buy hand washing facilities for the people. 

However, many of the boreholes are out of use. I told my people that the Minister of Water and Environment directed all CAOs to repair the boreholes and therefore, all our boreholes should have been repaired. My voters were suffering and were crying to me. Indeed, many of the boreholes are broken down.

It is therefore my humble appeal that we take this opportunity since the honourable member has presented this motion. Let us help our people and ensure that all village boreholes are repaired and so that the burden, which is now being put on the Member of Parliament, especially now that the roadmap is out, is lifted. Thank you very much.

3.24
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the mover of this motion, hon. Mathias Mpuuga, for thinking about Ugandans. I am also here to add my voice to urge Government to help Ugandans and bail them out. 

With COVID-19, we were all compelled to always wash our hands. Our children are also washing their hands and we are consuming a lot of water. What is very challenging is, although Ugandans are being told to wash their hands often, some Ugandans are not doing it because they fear the water bills. 

You will note that because our children are using radios and TVs to study, all this needs power. Therefore, the electricity bills are shooting up. 

My humble prayer is, as we are considering people who have running water, especially in towns, we need to also consider people who are in villages and do not have a single borehole in the entire village. 

I therefore appeal to the Government that when we are bailing out some Ugandans to pay – (Member timed out.)

3.26
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Dear colleagues, whereas I support the proposal by hon. Mpuuga, I would like us to ask ourselves what the percentage of the population, that actually accesses safe water for drinking and electricity, is. It is a small percentage. 

My proposal is that we should urge Government to try, as much as possible, to marshal some resources as an emergency to extend water to a bigger population of this country. This COVID-19 is not going away in six months; it may be here for a longer time. Therefore, I support the waiver on water and electricity but I would like to make a small amendment and propose that after three months, we can assess the progress. 

We know that water is life. Therefore, I urge Government to take this matter seriously. Electricity and water are very essential and we would like to see Government extending water and electricity to many people. 

As my colleague said, we see the Government planning for two televisions for every cell and this requires electricity. Therefore, I anticipate that every village must access electricity and water. 

Madam Speaker, I anticipate that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is soon coming with a revised Budget. I would like to see a Budget that aims at extending a lot of water and electricity in every cell of this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the President of Ghana, Nana Akufo-Addo, facilitated payment of water for his citizens for six months, because of this pandemic. 

3.29
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion on ground that we need to thank the Government, for making efforts to make sure that Ugandans are protected due to this COVID-19. However, Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Government came up with a policy of protecting Ugandans by requesting landlords and the landladies not to ask for rental fees. In most cases, these landlords and landladies, use the rental fees to pay for electricity and water. Therefore, since they are not collecting the revenues from their rentals, then it would be good for the Government also to come in and give – we are saying that they are not collecting but the demands are there. Umeme is demanding the landlords to pay for electricity and National Water and Sewerage Corporation are also demanding for water payments.

At the same time, the landlords are locked down and are not allowed to ask for rental fees from the tenants. They are asking, if these people say that they do not have money and we are not allowed to chase them out – (Member timed out.)   

3.31
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, with your permission, I would like to request for the attention of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to support hon. Mpuuga for his very wonderful motion. Hon. Mpuuga, your motion is very timely because you have talked about the issues concerning the people in urban areas.
 
As I talk, water in Busia Municipality is very expensive because one of the pumps has broken down. It broke down during the time of COVID-19 and we had also a problem of electricity. However, I would like to appreciate Mr Turyahikayo - the Mayor and myself wrote to the Executive Director of Rural Electrification Agency, Mr Godfrey Turyahikayo, who immediately sent a team to come and rectify the problem and our people now have hope. 

At the same time, I support hon. Mpuuga’s motion because when Government gives a waiver on water and electricity, which I would like to propose that it extends to the 40 affected border frontline districts, they should be given six months waiver and this will help to solve a lot of problems.

As a result, this has forced some of my people to cross through gardens to go to Kenya and fetch water because of the costs. As we discuss this motion, Madam Speaker, let us have a think tank of why National Water and Sewerage Corporation charges water highly. Scientifically, what they do on it – we believe that if the cost of water is cheap in this country, it would help a lot.

In all, the 40 affected districts, where Busia Municipality falls, I request that we should be given the waiver on water and electricity for six months because all the markets are locked and taxis are not moving. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Rural Electrification Agency, for the attention they gave to Mawero East A and Mawero East B for our people to have the power. This will help even the candidates.  Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.34
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mathias for this motion. COVID-19 and its implications on the economy, has had devastating effects not only on the livelihoods of the people but the incomes of our people in Uganda; most of them have lost their jobs.

Indeed, we are talking of mass unemployment. So, utility bills of water and electricity - in fact, I would like to propose an inclusion of internet, telephone bills and transactional bills of mobile money. In COVID-19, there has been a Divine blessing of ever-increasing levels of our lakes; Lake Victoria, Lake Kyoga and Lake Albert, courtesy of the heavy downpours. In the past, there would be complaints that the water levels have gone down from the dams, complaints from National Water and Sewerage Corporation and even from the Directorate of Water Development. This time round, they have nothing to use as an excuse. The water levels are very high and therefore, this would be the time, for an incentive for our people, to have these bills waived at least for six months.

Madam Speaker, they are in need. We expected Government at this time - given the many clarion calls that we made from various strata of leadership - that at least NSSF should give the savers part of their savings but this does not actually – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter is on the Order Paper. Don’t mix NSSF with water; let us deal with water and power for today.

MR NAMBESHE: The stimulus package we expected from Government, Madam Speaker, would have included waiving these utility bills. Our neighbours here in Kenya, are even wiring real cash to the wananchi so that they are able to survive in this time of need. In time of need like this, the only way to help the learners, who are learning scientifically using radios, televisions and telephones, all these will need electricity. The way to facilitate these is for Government to waive the Yaka bills on our people.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, –

THE SPEAKER: No, you have taken more than two minutes, please. 

3.37
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mpuuga, thank you very much, for the motion. We always say, water is life. Water is necessary for sanitation, for industrial use, we need water for the police personnel, for the Army, for all the security agencies, for the health officials and all those who are on the frontline, fighting against COVID-19.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, in Moyo District, as I talk, there is pressure from the urban refugees. The urban refugees who are in Moyo town really need water but because of that population pressure and because of lack of water, there is that issue which should be addressed seriously. 

The Government had promised, as alluded to by my colleagues, to repair all the boreholes in all the districts but up to now nothing has being done. My request, therefore, is that the Government should fast-track that promise so that all the 40 districts at the border can be helped on the issue of water. Thank you.

3.39
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of this motion. Water is much needed especially during this time of COVID-19 where prevention, among others, is the frequent washing of hands. 

Members of Parliament have been reinforcing the Ministry of Health in passing on information to our people back in the villages. Personally, when I did that, the people were asking about where they could get water for the frequent washing of hands because the water sources are few and even the few that are there have broken down. 

Therefore, I support the motion that the Government should give a waiver to the payment of some of these utilities. In urban areas, Madam Speaker, people pay for water as well as electricity. However, with this lockdown, people lost income and so they are unable to pay for the utilities.

Madam Speaker, this morning we were with officials of Moroto Regional Referral Hospital and the accounting officer was updating us about what was going on there. He told us that in Moroto and Nabilatuk districts, there is cholera and these are all issues to do with health and sanitation. 

Therefore, I call upon the Government to also look at the issue of water in rural areas by repairing the boreholes which have broken down so that the people can combat COVID-19 and other diseases that are –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Ssemuli on Zoom and later hon. Esiangu.

3.42
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Again, I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Mathias Mpuuga, for that important motion. Greetings from Mubende Municipality. 

The motion is very critical especially, in this COVID-19 moment, because most people have spent almost four months without doing anything. We have to be mindful that most of the business people are engaged in the informal sector. I think it is very critical at this moment to adopt some of the stimulus packages that other countries have been able to adopt. We have to be mindful that most of the people in the business sector have loans and they have to pay rental bills, water bills and electricity bills. 

This motion is very critical in such a situation whereby people are suffering from loss of income. As we talk, they do not have any income and they are being subjected to paying bills like for electricity and water. That implies that our economy is again going to be facing another deficit. Therefore, I think it is very important at this moment, especially when it comes to essential issues like electricity, that our Ugandans should be highly protected and secured.

Madam Speaker, I support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have hon. Esiangu, hon. Ogwal, hon. Kabaziguruka, hon. Sebaggala and we close with hon. Pacuto.

3.45
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would also like to thank hon. Mathias for this timely motion. COVID-19 has been a challenge worldwide but what most governments have done is that they have announced relief packages in various areas in order to support the lives of their citizens. 

I implore the Government to let this be among the supports that it can extend to its citizens because water and power are central to the day-to-day lives of its citizens. It is no doubt that the majority of the people are struggling with life. Most have lost incomes and the cost of living has become unbearable. With all these costs around, Government should do something.

Madam Speaker, I need to bring to the attention of Government that National Water and Sewerage Corporation has been struggling with its activities. Government owes it Shs 50 billion for the past two financial years. I implore Government to do something so that National Water and Sewerage Corporation can continue to be able to extend water and continue with its projects.

Madam Speaker, for the rural people – most of us represent constituencies that are rural – their major sources of water are boreholes and protected wells –(Member timed out)

3.47
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion has come timely and it is anchored on the motion that was based on hon. Elijah Okupa’s ad hoc committee’s report. It was a very important report that was touching on several activities that needed to be undertaken by the Government in order to fight COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, I think it is high time we took over from there. We should take a second look at that report and be able to highlight those issues that we, as Parliament, felt were of emergency in nature and that included water and electricity. We also need to go for the medium-term and the economic stimulus that the Government is talking about.

For now, Madam Speaker, I feel that six months is not enough because the economic situation is very bad that in six months people will not be ready to pay for the water bill. Let Government be ready to come up with that adjusted budget that we are all expecting so that we take care of water supply and electricity holistically. 

I beg to request the movers of this motion to allow an amendment that would request for a six month-waiver for electricity and one-year waiver for water, if that could be allowed. Water is paramount when it comes to fighting COVID-19. The Government should also consider waiving taxes on the importation of soap because these two items are very essential.

Madam Speaker, I finally want to request you to plead the case of those who are facing floods now, who include people in Dokolo, Kasilo and Kasese. We need – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: There is an item on the Order Paper to deal with floods.

3.50
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I am not only supporting the motion but I also encourage Government to devise various ways on how Ugandans are going to be assisted.

When there was food relief, many parts of this country were not catered for yet that was the first line of assistance to Ugandans in this COVID-19 period.

A waiver on electricity and water this is the right step in the right direction because many Ugandans right now are still financially constrained. It is upon us, leaders and Government, to support Ugandans in various ways.

I have heard of, Madam Speaker, that many countries are coming up with excellent relief stimulus packages for various sectors. My request is that as we request Government to ensure this motion is taken up, there is also the issue of institutions. We know that institutions use a lot of water and electricity.

Therefore, I beg that as institutions reopen, sooner or later, they should also be relieved of these bills because right now, they are using electricity for security purposes. I think by the time they reopen, they will be having many things to attend to –(Member timed out.)

3.52
MR MICHAEL KABAZIGURUKA (FDC, Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion that Government of Uganda pays water and electricity bills for the wanainchi for at least six months.

Madam Speaker, the people of Uganda were already finding hardships in paying water and electricity bills before the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Today, so many of them are out of employment or at home for different reasons; either because they were directly locked down or as a result of the lockdown.

To suggest that the utility companies simply defer payments cannot be very helpful to our people. The people are not earning any money at the moment and so, we cannot simply postpone the payment schedules. It is important that Government undertakes to pay the bills in their entirety.

Madam Speaker, the experts have told us that the first line of defence against COVID-19 is washing hands; that washing hands is better than sanitising. So, we cannot keep telling our people, “Wash your hands, wash your hands, wash your hands” without enabling them to do that. The best way to enable them is to pay for the water bills.

Our people are also very hard-pressed, to the extent that some of them do not even have anything to eat. Some of our people go to sleep after drinking only a glass of water. So, to deny them that would be unfair. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Akello, then hon. Pacuto. Hon. Akello is on Zoom.

3.54
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): I bring you greetings from Amuru District Headquarters. I just stepped out of a district taskforce meeting for COVID-19. I would like to thank my brother, hon. Mpuuga, for bringing this motion, urging Government to pay electricity and water bills for Ugandans, for at least six months.

Madam Speaker, this is a serious problem. Right now, the whole country knows that Amuru District, particularly Elegu Border Post is now a hotspot. I am also aware that National Water and Sewerage Corporation, at the onset of this COVID-19 pandemic, put up some hand-washing facilities in some places in Kampala.

Madam Speaker, on top of urging Government to pay the bills for Ugandans for six months, I would also urge that these hand washing facilities that were established by National Water and Sewerage Corporation be put up in places, especially in the border posts like Elegu, that do not have them.

As we speak, we already have 25 community infections, out of the 216 already confirmed cases that have been discovered at Elegu. So, if we get those hand washing facilities placed in such places, I am sure they will help in fighting COVID-19. The approach will help out people to appreciate the importance of hand washing. The fact that now the face masks are coming - they will know that it is important to wash their hands and keep safe.

Madam Speaker, my appeal is that on top of paying the electricity and water bills, I would really implore the Government of Uganda to put up, through National Water and Sewerage Corporation, the hand washing facilities in these hotspots, so that people can adequately wash their hands. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and greetings from the people of Amuru.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We are happy that the Amuru people are greeting us. Can we invite hon. Pacuto?

3.57
MS JANE AVUR PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague for tabling this motion. It is indeed timely. Like many honourable members have stated, water is indeed life. We all know the areas that require water. COVID-19 has made it very clear to the world that when we wash hands and keep hygiene, we can prevent a lot of diseases.

Madam Speaker, in the centre of all this need for water, there is a woman - and I speak for the women in the rural areas - as we urge Government to give a waiver on water bills, we should think of the greater population; the women in the rural areas, some of whom do not even have easy accessibility to water points.

When one goes to some rural villages, they will wonder how these people have, for all these years, survived without any water points. As we think about the waiver, I would like to add that Government should put much of the funds, if they are there or if they will be available, to rehabilitate and even drill more boreholes. The current policy is that when a new borehole is to be drilled in a village, the communities must contribute between Shs 200 to Shs 300. That should be waived as well. Even the repairs on these boreholes that sometimes the communities are asked to incur should be waived.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, how I wish the honourable colleague had come with figures – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, 20 Members have contributed on this matter. I would, however, like to remind Government that when the COVID-19 situation begun in the country, Parliament was very proactive. We set up a special committee to look at the effects of COVID-19 on the population and part of the recommendations included support for water and electricity. Obviously, the Government did not think our resolutions were important because they have not even included them in the budget. This motion is to reinforce what we discussed and agreed upon. 

I also would like to remind Government about the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) No. 06 on clean water and sanitation. We have an obligation, as a Government, to ensure that there is clean water for the people of Uganda. 

I put the question that this motion be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us go back to Item 3 (ii). I see part of the Government here. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow up to US$ 30 million from the Exim Bank of India to finance the supply and installation of solar powered water pumping systems for providing water supply systems in rural sub-counties of Uganda with the lowest safe water coverage.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal of Government to borrow up to US$ 159.3 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the Irrigation for Climate Resilience Project. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table Supplementary Schedule No. 3 for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table an addendum to the Supplementary Schedule No. 3 for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Can I invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget to lay documents on the Table concerning issues he raised earlier on the discrepancies between the Appropriation Act and the budget?

4.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Earlier, I presented a matter relating to inconsistencies in figures between the budget that we passed and what the minister read on the Floor. I beg to lay on the Table this document that I presented on this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: We had asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain to us the discrepancies. Therefore, you will come back to us and explain the discrepancies. Item 4 –

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I wanted to raise a matter of procedure concerning the supplementary schedule that has just been laid. We only have a few days to go to the end of this financial year and the minister is laying on the Table a supplementary request exceeding Shs 1 trillion. I am really wondering how we are going to process this supplementary request in the remaining few days - present it on the Floor, process it, and assuming it is approved get it cleared by the Auditor-General, released to the agencies, and then utilised by those agencies within the remaining 14 days.

Madam Speaker, I do not think this is going to be feasible. I would propose that rather than calling this a supplementary schedule for the financial year 2019/2020, we present this as a supplementary schedule to the budget of the financial year 2020/2021. I think that would be more appropriate because that budget has already been passed. We could delay this for a few more days and get it considered within that budget.

THE SPEAKER: We are dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic but is this feasible? Can we process the supplementary request before the end of this financial year? 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, although the budget has been passed, we are aware that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has made a commitment to go back and do adjustments. I would propose that what the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget is proposing be part of those adjustments so that when the minister comes back with an adjusted figure, we know exactly the items that he has captured, which had not been captured before.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget brings any amendment concerning the Committee on Budget, it should have gone through a full committee so that we do not have any contradictions. When he comes and says, “I want to lay” through whom is he laying it on the Table? I am a member of the Budget Committee and I have not received any notification for any meeting. I have no idea of what the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget has brought today as an amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, I think you were late. What he was laying on the Table was something different. I think we need to resolve this. Do we really need to waste our time on this? 

4.08
Mr Jacob Oboth: Madam Speaker, I sympathise with the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget. You have to have been well trained to chair that committee. I, however, do not admire the argument that he is getting overwhelmed right now – probably because we are not capable of analysing. 

What we are faced with right now is unprecedented. Commitments of Government – and I do not want to speak like a spokesperson of Government – within this financial year, are obligations created within the financial year, unless we say that they can be carried forward. 

I would be glad to hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is a chartered accountant. Today is 16 June 2020, he knows it is 14 days to the end of this financial year, he also knows the procedure of Parliament; what could have motivated him? It could be something more than we are seeing.

Mr Chairperson, you remember when we met as the chairpersons of committees, when we were processing the budget of next financial year, I said that we should be ready for a very fluid budget execution because we do not even know what we are facing; we cannot predict it or be able to know how it is going to turn out. These kinds of things will overwhelm us and I pray that the Government of Uganda gets ready and this Parliament readies itself to do what is right, like we have always done, but also to be responsive to a government that plans.

I am sure the Minister of State for Planning, who is here, in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has planned, but the planning during the COVID-19 pandemic is very fluid. It can elude them. Can I get clarification from him, Madam Speaker? I would support that if the chairman and the Budget Committee would do anything possible, they do so and execute this budget for this financial year? For next financial year, there is the three per cent and others - we are going to be overwhelmed. I am not a prophet of doom, but we are likely to be overwhelmed by the needs and other obligations-

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, since I have already committed the same to the committee, let them go and meet and then they evaluate. If the reasons they have stated are still there, you say that you are unable to proceed for the following reasons. Therefore, let us send it to the committee; they will sit together and then come back to us. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO CONSIDER USING SOME OF THE FUNDS CONTAINED IN THE NATIONAL RESPONSE COVID-19 FUND TO BUILD THE CAPACITY OF BIOSCIENCES RESEARCH LABORATORIES IN DIAGNOSING VIRUSES IN UGANDA

4.12
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry for being late today. I would request that I remove this mask to allow me to be clearer. Thank you.

Madam Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to consider using some of the funds contained in the national response COVID-19 fund to build the capacity of biosciences research laboratories in diagnosing viruses in Uganda. I move this under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS in March 2020, the Government of Uganda announced an outbreak of the viral disease COVID-19 in Uganda and since the outbreak, about 100 Ugandans and many foreigners have been infected by COVID-19 and are receiving treatment in various quarantine facilities;

AWARE THAT Coronavirus Disease is a new highly infectious virus that is transmitted from person to person through sneezing or coughing, human to human contact and contact with contaminated surfaces;

FURTHER AWARE THAT COVID-l9 has no known vaccine or cure and the treatment given to COVID-19 victims is in form of supportive care to help them recover from the virus;

NOTING THAT Government established the National Response COVID-19 Fund to support Government efforts to equip healthcare workers and also support the health sector that is now challenged by this pandemic;

FURTHER NOTING THAT various people have contributed cash and other items to the National Response COVID-19 Fund and a management team has been put in place to manage the fund on behalf of Government;

CONCERNED THAT whereas Uganda has witnessed numerous outbreaks of several viral diseases over the recent years, the biggest being the haemorrhagic fever (Ebola), Marburg haemorrhagic  fever, Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever and yellow fever, there is limited research in Uganda on the causes, contributing factors, possible cure and vaccines for these common viruses that affect the people of Uganda;

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT Uganda Virus Research Institute remains the only reference laboratory for testing and confirming viral diseases including COVID-19;

RECOGNISING THAT currently in Uganda, there exists other state of the art biosciences research laboratories which can supplement Uganda Virus Research Institute, including laboratories at the Joint Clinical Research Centre (JCRC) and other public universities such as the one at Gulu University, which can help with virus diagnosis, epidemiological surveillance and patient monitoring as well as overall epidemic control at the national level;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT the state of the above biosciences research laboratories have not been fully utilised or engaged during the Government response to the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) or any other viral outbreaks in Uganda in spite of their expertise in research and diagnosing of such viruses;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this House that Government is urged to-
(a) utilise the services of other state-of-the-art biosciences research laboratories to supplement the services provided by Uganda Virus Research Institute in virus diagnosis, epidemiological surveillance and patient monitoring;

(b) utilise some of the funds contained in the National Response COVID-19 Fund for research into the common viruses that affect Uganda, including the haemorrhagic fever (Ebola), Marburg haemorrhagic fever, Crimean Congo fever and yellow fever, among others;

(c) consider availing some of the funds contained in the National Response COVID-19 Fund to biosciences research laboratories in order to build their capacity in diagnosing the various viruses that affect Uganda, including provision of reagents and other consumables needed to efficiently and safely operate the laboratories;

(d) Accredit biosciences research laboratories to handle COVID-19 and the other viruses such as the haemorrhagic fever (Ebola), Marburg haemorrhagic fever, Crimean Congo fever and yellow fever.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are there seconders? 

(Motion seconded)

THE SPEAKER: Okay; there are a number of seconders. Justify.

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, it is worth noting that in human history, this is the first time since 1918 that you can say that we can easily die together. However, given what we call social distancing, it is very important that we are surviving together but in a very scattered way.

The motion that was earlier brought was about utilities and other issues concerning our survival. It is important that we recognise the important fact that to date, while we practice social distancing, it is emerging clearly that economic distancing may be the greatest threat to the survival of the citizens of Uganda. Therefore, it is important that we go to the roots of how we can sort out these messes. That is what brings the Government of Uganda into the centre of dealing with the roots of these challenges. 

I know many will doubt, as in the Bible where it was said that nothing good can come from Nazareth. However, I think, in Uganda, we have a formidable capacity in the field of sciences. We believe that if they are well supported, they can come out with a lot of miracles that will surprise the world.

Madam Speaker, you remember that in the early 1920s, and specifically in 1936, Uganda Virus Research Institute came into being because of the rigorous work that our scientists in the early times embarked on. That is why Uganda Virus Research Institute was founded in 1936 to deal with some of the emerging challenges of diseases that were coming into this country. Later on, Uganda went ahead to found the Uganda Cancer Institute in 1967 and other institutions of higher learning like Makerere University Medical School. This was the golden era in terms of what biomedical research in Uganda. 

From that period to date, Uganda has made many discoveries in the field of medicine and we would need to pick lessons from that time. Madam Speaker, we are aware that from that time, Uganda Cancer Institute was responsible for the initial description of Burkitt lymphoma and further went ahead to have what is known as the combination chemotherapy for cancer and some of the original descriptions such as Kaposi’s sarcoma. All this was from the Uganda Cancer Institute. 

At the Uganda Virus Research Institute, we also had discoveries of viruses, especially Zika, West Nile, Chikungunya, Bwamba, Semiliki Forest, O’nyong-nyong and Kadam viruses. All these are names of viruses and they were discovered by the Uganda Virus Research Institute. 

The Makerere University Medical School is also responsible for discoveries of the prostaglandins, and more recently, some of the initial HIV trials on prevention of mother-to-child transmission, which we call the PMTCT. 

Unfortunately, these discoveries were never commercialised and not even patented. That means, in any case, most of this research today is externally funded. Therefore, Uganda has minimal control over their output. 

However, what we are saying today is that, through this coronavirus, it is time that the Government of Uganda came straight to go into the depth of the challenges affecting us. The scientist in this country has capacity to begin this. If you look at what the Government of Uganda did in Gulu University, for example, you will notice that we have a fully-fledged biosciences laboratory that was supported by an African Development Bank loan of $4.5 million. This laboratory is one of the biggest in East and Central Africa. It has the capacity to do trial tests for 1000 samples in eight hours. 

If we are in a position to give them the reagents that are required to do this work, that would summarise some of the challenges that we have in terms of the case management coming from all over the country and being congested in Entebbe at the Uganda Virus Research Institute. That is why, while we provide food and other interventions in terms of economic surpluses, we now need to be scientific. We need to support our scientists to go into the laboratories, like any other scientists in the world that are working towards this, and ensure that the Ugandan group are part of the medical teams that will undertake this virus research in this country.

Madam Speaker, you are also aware that the virus that causes COVID-19 is a virus that is referred to as a single strand virus in science. It is not like DNA; DNA is double strand and that is why we call it deoxyribonucleic acid. The virus that causes COVID-19 is single-stranded, and it is called Ribonucleic acid (RNA). 

The reason why this thing is expanding is because when it goes into the blood cells, it hides its identity, and therefore, it pretends to be a DNA virus. If scientists are struggling to find out - you find that an immune system cannot fight it because it hides under DNA. That is why our scientists in this country should now go to the root or the beginning and exclude the RNA through scientific discoveries and see how they can deal with it at a very high scientific level. 

That is why this motion is very important, Madam Speaker. This is the only opportunity for the Parliament of Uganda to resuscitate medical research in this country. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Lyandro Komakech for the motion. 

When COVID-19 struck, the President assembled a team of scientists from Makerere University schools of science and technology, Entebbe Virus Research Institute, Mulago Hospital and from all over. He asked them to table their budget so that Government can fund them. Every Monday, on Cabinet day, we have been interacting with these scientists. Some of them have been given money and the procurement of important equipment, which they need, has started. The first batch of the equipment is arriving in the last week of July. 

Hon. Komakech is moving a motion asking Government to use the money from the COVID-19 fund, yet the initiator of this fund came out specifically to mention his preference for this money. He specifically said that he wants to help the health department get vehicles so that every district at least has 10 vehicles. We have started sending these vehicles to the districts that are most hit. 

Madam Speaker, I wonder whether we can proceed with this motion, which urges Government to use part of this money, yet the initiator, the Commander in Chief, the President of this country, came out to tell us his preference. He said that he has looked for money from elsewhere to put into this area where the honourable member wanted money to be put in. 

Therefore, should we proceed with this motion or should we ask the Minister of Health to come and tell us what Government has done so far, in as far as putting money into research is concerned? I would just like your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, I think you have not read the motion. I am surprised that you are objecting to a request to support the laboratories in the universities. It is not the individuals; we are talking about the universities doing research. How can you object to that? Let us have the seconder. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the motion is to use some of the funds contained in the National Response COVID-19 Fund. He wants this money to be used – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, supposing you get all the cars and still have the money, would it be a mistake, now that you got the pickups, to support this?  

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion has five prayers. When you look at the prayer in paragraph (d), I think it is very critical; it says, “Accredit biosciences research laboratories to handle COVID-19…” 

I think, if Government is feeling uncomfortable with that issue of the funding from the COVID-19 fund, there are other aspects that do not even need money but just accreditation so that they are involved in this. I think we could be able to adopt that and also look at the aspect of utilising the services of those laboratories. I think that is what the mover of the motion is asking for. 

Yes, he has included the issue of the funding, but we can even go beyond that. We have just heard here about a supplementary request that is coming. Because this is an urgent issue, these are some of the things that can be included in that supplementary request. 

Unfortunately, when we looked at the supplementary request, it is about providing money for SACCOs, Uganda Development Bank - as if they cannot wait – yet these things we are talking about cannot wait because they are going to help us and save lives.

Therefore, Madam Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we could pick out those, if you are uncomfortable with the other ones, and consider them so that our people can proceed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether the Government is happy that samples are driven from the border to Entebbe. This motion is saying, “can you equip Gulu and these other institutions”. These are Government institutions. I am really surprised.

4.30
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion that some of the funds contained in the National Response COVID-19 Fund be used to build the capacity of biosciences research laboratories in diagnosing viruses in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, COVID-19 has been a wakeup call for this country. It has forced us to think outside the box and in some instances, it is making us learn the hard way. 

Our motion was drafted about five weeks ago and a few things could have been overtaken by events. We have definitely been handling issues of prevention and protection but we have not - and we want to go on record – handled the issue of biomedical research, research centres and places of excellence. I am thinking of institutions like University of Gulu, which already has a laboratory, Makerere University, Mbarara University of Science and Technology and we also have an existing Uganda Virus Research Institute. Therefore, we need to establish a sustained and continuous biosciences medical research laboratory in Uganda that is homegrown, home owned and a centre of excellence.

I suggest we come up with a plan on how Government can utilise these funds contained in the National COVID-19 Response Fund. We have heard you, Madam Chief Whip, and I completely respect what you had to say. However, like I said, we drafted this motion and now we have to think, and I am completely adjustable.

Madam Speaker, I wanted to also say that there is already political will. All we need now is to plan for the execution and the operation of these centres, especially to fund the health research component. Mine is really to give emphasis on funding for research, so that we are not caught unaware, so that the research informs us. We are preventing and protecting but we do not know what is about to come in two years’ time, like my colleague has said. We, therefore, need to produce and enable a conducive environment for an evidence-based research that will yield evidence-based governance in our health sector.

Madam Speaker, we do not want people to come and steal our research. Uganda should own and only admit and share research with those they must share with. It should not be open to anybody who will come to Uganda, steal our research and disappear with it and then we have no control.

We have to make Uganda attractive for researchers from all over the world. Let Uganda be the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) of the United States or the research centres of South Africa. We have to make the country attractive for researchers from all over the world and to our local researchers. We have so many well educated Ugandans but they do not have the facilities. Like the President said, they should also be properly and well paid. Uganda should be a place where the world should visit and exchange knowledge and also apply best practices and not steal our knowledge, monopolize and run away with it from our research centres as if it is their monopoly.

Madam Speaker, I support this motion. I still feel there is a lot of room for Ugandans to have these laboratories and centres of excellence for our children to come and show their skills and knowledge that they have acquired from various universities. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Bichetero. I just want to guide the House. The words which are important here are, “consider using some”. We did not say, “direct you”. People will go out there and say, “you were directed by the House” but “consider using” are the operative words in this motion. 

4.37
MR ABALA DAVID (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Lyandro Komakech, for the motion, which I support. 

Madam Speaker, you made a right statement by saying that we are not directing the Government of Uganda to use that money but we are just appealing and requesting them, because we know the relevance of research in Uganda and other countries. I want to give an example of the Johns Hopkins University in the USA. For everybody who wants to get updated information concerning COVID-19, it is only this university that provides and gives it to all of us, even when we are seated here. That is why I am in support of motion.

Secondly, I would like to say that the Bible supports this motion. If you read Jeremiah 9:21, it says, “Death has come upon our windows; it has entered our palaces to cut off the children from the streets and the young men from the squares”. 

Madam Speaker, coronavirus has killed people. There are so many viruses that have been disturbing this country and Uganda has done a wonderful job. I would like to thank the President of Uganda for a job well done. 

However, we are feeling that Uganda should build the capacity of all the research centres in this country. I will give the example of the universities. In the east, we have Busitema University. We need to build the capacity of Busitema University so that instead of waiting for results from Entebbe, we should be able to get the results from Busitema or Soroti universities. 

Since they are Government institutions, we should be able to support Government efforts in making sure that knowledge is disseminated. That is why I am of the view that we build the capacity of all these research centres, like Gulu in northern Uganda. Elegu has so many challenges, as we speak, but they have to wait for results from Entebbe. 

As we speak, Soroti is supposed to discharge four people who have recovered from COVID-19 tomorrow but they are waiting for the results of the others. If the centre was in Soroti, by now we would be able to know how many have recovered from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital such that we are able to discharge them. We might get the results tomorrow and then we have to wait until next week. It becomes costly for Government to keep such people in the hospital.

Madam Speaker, we all know that viruses exist and they change all the time. As such, it becomes difficult for us to understand the dynamics. It, basically, requires proper and well-informed research to ascertain the nature, structure and type of virus we are talking about. That is why this motion is timely; it will help us, as a country, in fighting so many viruses. In fact, Uganda would be a good place to get a vaccine for Ebola. 

Our appeal is that research should be done so that we are able to describe the virus and explain what it is all about. We must be able to predict it. 

About three or four years ago, the former President of the USA, Mr Barack Obama, said that within the next few years, there will be an attack from a virus. He read the research reports and he was able to predict this. He said, if America does not prepare in advance, many people are going to die. That is exactly what has happened in the USA.

I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip for giving us updated information. Madam, we support you and we shall walk with you no matter what challenges you go through. We request you to support this motion so that we are able to address the issue of research in this country. Thank you very much and I would like to request you to send my greetings to the big man and tell him that he is doing a wonderful job.

4.43
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I believe that the Government Chief Whip is not aware that there is very strong political will behind this motion. The President is the one who commissioned the research centre on 11 January - a giant infrastructure – (Interruption) 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Cecilia Ogwal in order to misunderstand me and impute improper motives about the information, which I gave you regarding the COVID-19 fund, which the motion is seeking to use? The information I gave was that this money is also committed. Today, we got Shs 32 billion. If we are basing our motion on this fund, we may not achieve what we want. Is she in order to impute improper motives about my innocent submission?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that if the Government is convinced that we need research centres of excellence and if this money is not enough, Government will find the money. They should find the money as it is necessary for the country.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, my sister, the Chief Whip, jumped to conclusions before I finished my sentence. What I was saying is that there is strong political will behind the giant science infrastructure in Gulu. Therefore, what we are doing is building the capacity of Uganda in as far as science research is concerned. That is the point I wanted to drive home.

There is no doubt whatsoever that there is strong political will behind the research centre in Gulu. In case anybody is wondering why Gulu and not anywhere else, when you look through the data, which is given to us by the Ministry of Health and other researchers, the entire Uganda has been attacked by Ebola, be it east, west, north or central. It has been attacked by Marburg, yellow fever and all sorts of diseases. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is my pride that when Ebola broke out in West Africa, Uganda was called upon to lend its experience. It was such a joy for a person like me who was then in the Pan African Parliament to know that my Uganda is being called to help her neighbours. As the Bible says, we are our neighbour’s keeper. It is our pride. 

For the first time, let Uganda rise and shine beyond the image that was painted by Amin. If anybody doubted Uganda, let us rise on the issue of research. I, therefore, would like to beg for support. What the mover of this motion has highlighted is thorough. I think we are just adding fire and I would prefer that we agree to conclude the debate. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is a practice in the House that after we have made a resolution, it goes to the Prime Minister. They are supposed to come back to say that on this one, we did a, b, c or we were not able to do this because of this reason. 

I do not know why these small words are causing so much excitement. As hon. Ogwal said, it would be good for Uganda to regain its position. Before Idi Amin, we were up there. We were really high.

4.48
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, thank you. This is a good motion and it shows concern. 

However, I think what is lacking in this motion in relation to what is happening in the Government is information. The people behind this motion do not know what is happening in Government; what the Government is doing with the money fundraised and the other monies. 

Therefore, it would have been better for this country – instead of splitting people, which keeps people back. The Government Chief Whip has said, and I would like to support that view that the pressure on Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to import machinery to support different scientists, to enable them to discover what is lacking is not known to anybody; not even to the mover of the motion.

Therefore, to me – (Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the acting Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, whom I keep referring to as a seasoned politician because he has been in all regimes and seen how governments perform, I rise on a point of order, on whether the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is in order to say that the movers of this motion are not informed? 

On top of his information, he goes to the extent of sympathising with us, the NRM ruling regime, yet we have enough resources to run this country. In fact, we are one of the countries with a stable economy in the COVID-19 situation in Sub-Saharan Africa. 

I, therefore, would like to ask whether the Prime Minister is in order to sympathise with the movers of the motion and whether they were not informed about the economy of this country before they could move this motion concerning research. He knows that every country, runs on its research as the backbone of innovation.  

Therefore, is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to sympathise with the income of our Government used to buy machinery for research, knowing that research is majorly scientific?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, can you substantiate?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the Speaker who has just left the Floor was not following what I was saying. He has misquoted and misheard me. If he heard that I said, the movers of this motion did not know what Government is doing with this money in the economy, then he is wrong. I did not say that. I said, what you do not know is what Government is doing on the efforts of helping the scientists to discover – and a lot of machinery has been imported already, not with this money, but with Government money. Madam Speaker, that is misinformation. I think we should be attentive. 

I would like to conclude that I have no problem with this motion because this motion is as a result of this COVID-19 problem. According to our own information, as the Government Chief Whip said, every Monday - the President is pressurising importation of different machinery to enable these scientists to discover new things. One time, he said, “Maybe, we could be the first country to discover the vaccine for this virus.” 

The President has recognised the need and he is aware of our – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I pray that we delay this motion for one week. This one week will give us chance to meet with the movers and tell them what Government is doing or what is in line with the President’s actions. We will then come back next week and move together with Government. If you lose somebody at home, you do not have to misinform people; we cry together. That is my position.

4.55
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support hon. Lyandro Komakech, for this very important motion that he has moved this evening.

We are dealing with the issue of research and research in medicine. Research is very important now that we are dealing with medicine and that is research on life. I would like to urge the Government side to support us on this. I feel we are moving together. We are trying to look for the solution together, for the problem that we are faced with. 

The President has been talking much about the scientists. Today, in Parliament, we are talking about strengthening laboratories. In this case, it will go a long way to help our scientists who have the brains but the only challenge we have is that we do not have money to strengthen the laboratories that we have.

Madam Speaker, I would like to urge the Prime Minister and the Government Chief Whip, that let us combine our efforts together. Let us look for money; if the COVID-19 money is what you are against, let us look for money and admit that COVID-19 is yet another awakening call for us to work on our laboratories. 

We have a number of brains in Uganda. We have scientists who are willing to work but because of the weaknesses that we have in our laboratories, they cannot do much. Madam Speaker, you remember when COVID-19 started, the western world wondered what would happen to Africa but by God’s grace, we have survived. They were wondering because of the weaknesses that we have in our facilities. 

As Parliament, this is the right time to stand together and make sure that we provide money for strengthening our laboratories. Let us start by strengthening the universities’ science laboratories and this will go a long way to help our people from running up and down.

Madam Speaker, in developed countries, the majority of medical decisions are made based on quality laboratory testing. If this is the case, in Africa, we still have a lot of weaknesses as far as laboratory services are concerned and I think that this is an opportunity for Uganda to shine and support the President to achieve the dreams that he has.

As Parliament, this is yet another chance to strengthen the capacity of our human resource as far as research is concerned. We have the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and this ministry has been lacking money. Isn’t this the time for Parliament to support this ministry by supporting the motion brought by hon. Lyandro Komakech? As Parliament of Uganda, our work is to appropriate money, to help where there is a problem; in this case, COVID-19 has brought a challenge. We had Ebola and so many other diseases disturbing us. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you.

4.57
MR ALERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the information I would like to give you is that in West Nile, we have Muni University. As I talk, Muni is a techno-science university and it has passed the international quality and safety standards set for qualifying as a centre for testing COVID-19 by the World Health Organisation. 
The second one is Adjumani. What we are requesting for is just some support from the Government. We have Muni Techno-science University and Adjumani as centres for excellence for testing COVID-19. Thank you.

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (MS Persis Namuganza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we all agree that there is need for us to support our scientists and the laboratories to do more research, just like the motion highlights. However, in his appeal to Ugandans and other well-wishers, H.E the President has been highlighting areas of the COVID-19 fund money and one of them is to have a fleet of vehicles and I am sure we have all been listening. 

Now, I propose an amendment to that motion that the Government of Uganda – there are even other efforts like the ones highlighted by the Prime Minister and the Government Chief Whip. We need to support our scientists but not from the COVID-19 funds because it is like we are saying that the Ugandans and well-wishers who have been contributing little money are the ones to come out and support our scientists. 

I think we should amend the motion and pass it after it is clear and Government finds the money. It will even help because this money is just about Shs 32 billion and I do not think it can do much, if removed from the COVID-19 funds, to support scientists to do research. We all know that research is very expensive and we are basing on this COVID-19 fund, which has come from different Ugandans and well-wishers. I do not think it is proper. I request for an amendment to the motion. Thank you.

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, I thank you for allowing me this opportunity. I thank hon. Ruth and the minister for bringing a lot of thinking into this process. I think that what is more important is, how do we walk together in a more resilient way? That is what we are seeking. 

Therefore, given that this motion is supported, it is also very important that it is time for reflection. In Kiswahili, we say, “Tafakari.” I know Kiswahili is our national language. The way we were hit in this country has been hard. Therefore, we should have what we call – in nuclear science – the “second capability response”. 

The second capability response now requires that beyond the COVID-19 fund, there is need to have provision for special funding that should support, across board, any other research on issues of virus and in any other outbreak that may attack this country. 

I agree to that effect and, therefore, it is just in order that we amend the motion to the effect that it gives us all the capacity in terms of prevention, protection, mitigation, response and recovery. I propose in the amendment under the second motion that instead of “COVID-19 fund”, we use “special fund” for biomedical research in Uganda. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be amended by deleting the words, “national response COVID-19 fund” and replacing them with “a special fund” and also amend prayers (b) and (c) in the same way. I put the question that the motion be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, the minister of state for lands was saying that the people who gave money may not be happy if it is used on research but we should encourage people to establish an endowment fund in the country for a particular research. Food is okay – the vehicles – (Members rose_) – No, we have finished. We have taken the vote. (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EFFECTS OF FLOODS ON UGANDA’S ROAD NETWORK

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister for works here? He is not there. Minister for energy? Minister for Local Government?

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are still finalising with the consultations and I know we shall be able to make our presentation as soon as we are done with the consultations.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I wish you could help me – hon. Angura and hon. Nyakecho are always on the Floor on that issue.

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, we are aware and we beg that you allow us conclude with those consultations because it is very important that we come with something that is conclusive.

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You may recall that on the 5th of last month, we raised here an issue and that is when the minister presented a motion for a resolution of this House for the creation of Terego District. Hon. Nyakecho – let me again add – presented an amendment to that motion.

Madam Speaker, you recall that the minister gave us 15 working days and 15 working days were the equivalent of one day per year ever since the matter of Tororo was raised on the Floor of this House many years ago. 

Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister who has made the statement here today really genuine enough, yet the people of Tororo are watching every proceeding of this House? From the time the 15 days expired, the people of Tororo have been on TVs and radios waiting to hear what the minister was coming up with? 

Today, again, the minister is telling us they are still in consultations. Our consultations ended up in London and the report from London came back. Are you, again, going back to consult in London or bringing here a motion for a resolution of this House and we get Tororo District divided into two and we get these districts prepared for the forthcoming elections –(Interruption).

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, I recall very well that the motion is not only about Tororo but alsoabout Namayingo District. It is about alteration of boundaries and the minister said that she would report back within two weeks.

It is good that the state minister is present. I recall one time, when appearing before Parliament, she said that she was going to report back to you, following the request that I made. That was in 2018. This is 2020. I brought here documents concerning the Sigulu issue. The Sigulu issue was in 2009. 

Even the Minister of Local Government reported and I presented the papers; that the issue of Sigulu - even the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had already cleared with the Certificate of Financial Implication. It defeats my mind that from that 2009 and this is 2020, they are still doing consultations. Sigulu has no encumbrances; it has no problems. I have met them; I have talked to them. They are even asking me, whenever I go to their offices, what has gone wrong with Sigulu. I have no answer; they have their answers.

If Sigulu has no problems, why? You even have the papers that the finance ministry cleared and said we have no problem. Why are you still waiting? What consultations are you doing? Madam Speaker, that is my question.

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much for the information -

THE SPEAKER: Are you still on it?

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, the matter of Tororo came to this Parliament in 2005 and that is why the minister gave 15 years. 2005 plus 15 is 2020. What consultations are we on again? We need these issues to be settled and rested at once.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the minister is just lying or she is telling us the truth that they are continuing with consultations, which ended. The sooner these matters are resolved, the better for all of us. We need development and we need to support the new districts that will be created when there is still an opportunity. 

5.11
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, for the record of this House, the future readers of the Hansard of this House should benefit from the fact that I am also here and I come from Tororo.

We all know how districts are created. It is a question of law, established both in the Constitution and in the Local Government Act. The evidence has been laid before you today that this matter has been here since 2005. Isn’t that time enough to know that there is a problem? Districts come and they create new districts. 

When it came in 2005, I was not in this House. Madam Speaker, you were and we thank God that you were. This House made a resolution and created a district. That district has never come to effect.

What my brothers and sisters on the other side want in Tororo is to come and state here and afford themselves the opportunity to say that Tororo should be divided into two - I am asking in this Parliament, who are they to decide for the people of Tororo? Who are they to say, “You shall divide it into two”. It is a question that needs consultations with the people.

When somebody said that we went to London - it has been a misrepresentation here – (Interjection) – a misrepresentation – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no! Please sit. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, we are not going to resolve the issue of Tororo through praising – in fact, I sympathise with you because in Tororo, you are a darling, you are a national leaders. If the Minister of Local Government does not bring here a motion, we are wasting time. The other day, a forged district resolution of 2004 was brought here. Districts are created properly.

Madam Speaker, the issue of Tororo should not continue to waste time for this Parliament. They should leave it for people of Tororo to resolve. The matter, after it came here, was also taken to the President and – (Interjections) – please, the war in Tororo is a matter that the Tororo people will find a solution for.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, minister, please - no, no, no! Honourable minister, please help us to put this matter to an end. Let us leave that matter for now. 

Let me invite the Minister of Public Service to answer the question on interviews in Ngora very quickly because we are almost caught up by curfew time.

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Order! Whip, please separate the Tororo people. Hon. Angura, go to the other tent. Hon. Waluswaka, have you taken over? Hon. Angura, come this side.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, this is a statement regarding the issue of interviews conducted by the Ngora District Service Commission on 8 May 2020.

This issue was raised by hon. Abala. By way of background, recruitment can be through external or internal adverts. It follows the clearance to recruit - advertising, receiving applications and shortlisting, interviews and appointments.

In the case of Ngora District, jobs were advertised on 7 December 2019 as follows:
    1. There was a position of a DHO - 1;
    2. Senior Agricultural Officer – 1;
    3. Veterinary Officer – 1;
    4. Fisheries Officer – 1; and
    5. Office Typist - 1. 

The district also received two internal submissions for the post of Accountant and Community Development Officer. The deadline for receipt of applications was 15 January 2020 and this was followed by shortlisting in mid-February 2020.

The successful candidates were informed and interviews were scheduled for March 2020. The lockdown found this process already scheduled but it had to be halted due to the presidential directives.

Madam Speaker, in scheduling the interview process, the District Service Commission considered the following:
    1. There was an imminent expiry of the term of office of the District Service Commission, which was due on 11 May 2020. Note that in accordance with the Local Government Act, Section 54 (2) (e), processing of a District Service Commission takes three months. 
    2. There was urgency to fill the critical post of the District Health Officer who was to coordinate COVID-19 interventions in the district. 
    3. One candidate from Busoga region who had already travelled to Ngora District for interviews had already been caught up in the lockdown.
    4. Finally, the possibility of integrating the Standard Operating Procedures during the interviewing process. 

Madam Speaker, on precautions, the District Service Commission proceeded with the following steps:
    1. They received authorisation from the RDC, the police and the District Internal Security Officer. 
    2. Three interviewing panels were considered and constituted in order to ensure social distancing.
    3. SOPs were followed during interviews, including social distancing.

On the validity of the exercise, after an analysis of all the circumstances above, it is evident that the interview exercise carried out by Ngora District Service Commission was valid due to the following reasons:
    1. It was undertaken legally in consideration of the Public Service Commission guidelines and the Local Government Act, Section 54 (2).
    2. All shortlisted candidates were informed and they turned up. These included one candidate for the District Health Officer, one candidate for Senior Agricultural Officer, two candidates for Veterinary Officer, two candidates for Fisheries Officer, five candidates for Accountants for internal submission, three candidates for Community Development Officer for internal submission and three candidates for Office Typist. The total interviewed candidates were 17.
    3. Authorisation had also been obtained from the RDC, the police and the District Internal Security Officer. 

In view of the above procedures followed, in addition to the need to save costs by also interviewing other positions that were vacant and the lengthy procedure of obtaining a new District Service Commission, it was deemed fit that the interviews were undertaken at the time they were. 

In spite of the apparent controversy, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Public Service appeals for calm to ensure that the results of the exercise are upheld as valid for continuity of the service at this critical time. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abala, you have one supplementary question. 

5.22
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for attempting to answer the unanswerable questions. We are talking about a situation of a lockdown. I have never seen anywhere where it is said that the District Service Commission are essential staff. I would like him to help me state when the President pronounced that the District Service Commission are part of essential staff.

Secondly, he is talking about the RDC’s clearance. When did RDCs become clearance houses for interviews? I need to be helped so that we are together. He also said that the term of the District Service Commission was expiring. I am also aware that this District Service Commission was there and that the acting District Health Officer (DHO) was acting since 2014. The same people were there watching, listening and working at the same table all the time. I need to be helped to understand that bit. 

At the same time, he is saying the exercise was valid – (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, hon. Abala, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Abala is that RDCs only give permission in their respective districts. If people were coming from other districts, it was supposed to be the Minister of Works and Transport to authorise. Can the Minister of Public Service lay on the Table the clearance permits from the Minister of Works and Transport, which allowed the other people to come? 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my very good friend, hon. Waluswaka. That question goes to the minister. All of us here used to get permission to move until the lockdown was eased. 

I would like the minister to tell us here – I do not want him to say someone came from a certain place and got stuck in the lockdown. Nobody was locked down in Ngora. Everybody who went to Ngora was taken to a quarantine centre at Ngora Nursing Training School. That is the reality.

Madam Speaker, we are not in agreement with the information that the minister has. We are going to lay evidence here and from that, you will be embarrassed. That is why I would like him to come and tell us - What he is talking about is not the reality on the ground. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Abala. I think the Minister of State for Public Service should not be shy to tell us that there have been challenges. It is not only Ngora District. For this case however, let us be specific to Ngora. This is where the Minister for Local Government should have come in. 

At that time, you could not move. There were people from other districts like Serere who had been shortlisted but they were not able to travel because the RDC of Serere could not clear them to go for the interviews. Interviews were not one of the priorities the President talked of. The President talked mainly about the issues of health and security. Therefore, for interviews to be conducted at that time - You talked of social distancing during the interviews. I do not know how that was observed. 

Madam Speaker, the minister should be honest because this issue is not only about Ngora District. There were other districts as well. At least for my district, they were able to stay the interviews because of those challenges. Why couldn’t Ngora District do the same since they had a bigger problem? 

This interview should be disregarded and cancelled because there are other candidates who could not afford to travel to that place from other districts. Thank you.

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, having listened to all that, those interviews were invalid and they must be nullified. 

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my statement, I emphasised the urgency at that time, especially in regard to one key position; the District Health Officer. I also talked about clearance from the RDC. This is because the COVID-19 taskforces in all the districts were headed by the Resident District Commissioners (RDC) and this was clear; and the guidelines were followed.

On the Issue of hon. Elijah Okupa, the distance from Ngora to Serere is only 28 kilometres and I can even walk the 28 kilometres if I really need a job. To say that I can fail to walk for 28 kilometres when there is a job opening, is not true - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the minister is talking of a distance from Serere; I do not know which part of Serere he if referring to and whether he even knows where the candidate I am talking about was coming from because he comes from the furthest point which is next to Nakasongola. From Kagwara which is in Kadunguru, it is 67 kilometres to Ngora District headquarters. 

Therefore, are you in order to say that it is 28 kilometres and that someone can walk, especially during this time of COVID-19? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question is; do the RDCs have authority to permit an assembly of more than five people?

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, safe guidelines were given by the President and in my statement, I said that they had three groups and the constitution of the three groups was aimed at following the guidelines by that time, which was not more than five. Therefore, the guidelines of ensuring that interviews are conducted safely were followed and the clearance from the RDC was sought.

Madam Speaker, there is an issue which I talked about that all those who had been shortlisted attended and we should look at that as being key because it eliminates the allegation that someone was discriminated. The process had started earlier than the COVID-19 and there were already candidates from other districts who had come for the interviews - (Interruption) 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I speak with a heavy heart. You have asked a simple clear question and I expected the minister to understand simple English. The question is, did the RDCs have authority to clear? If it were exams, that would have been a retake.

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to come and apologise. By the way, I do not want to present evidence here that is going to implicate people because regarding the issue of the kickback, if I was to tell you - so, as a Christian and as a Member of Parliament, I am uncomfortable with such people who conduct sham interviews – (Interruption)

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, hon. Abala represents the people of Ngora and he knows the procedures of Parliament. In his statement, he has said that there were kickbacks. Is he in order to make such an allegation without laying evidence at the Table or substantiating; is he in order?  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abala, can you substantiate or withdraw?

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry because today, I did not know that this matter was coming up on the Order Paper. I know that there were kickbacks, I am not talking about the minister and I do not want to deceive.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, if need be, I will present it - (Interjections) - I am sure of what I am talking about. For now, I am withdrawing it because the minister has presented it. By the way, I am still standing on the view that the interviews were a sham. They are talking about five people; I do not know what type of interviews those were. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. When you get it, come. Honourable members, I would like to adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. We are almost heading to curfew time. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.34 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 17 June 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)


