           
              Thursday, 17th June, 1999.                
(The Parliament met at 2.00 pm in Parliament House, Kampala)
P R A Y E R S
(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)
The House was called to order.

MR. AWORI:   Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Chair on a matter of pecuniary interest to the Members of this House.  Do I understand that there will be no allowances until next month?  Since we came back, we have not received any money, Sir,  and it is hurting.  I would like to know.  

THE SPEAKER:  Today is the 17 of the month, is it not?  Anyway the position is this.  I have been advised that there will be some payments this week,  and this week is this week.

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  This is the oral question for Ken Lukyamuzi.  On 5th June 1999, the Police,  while escorting a Liberian international footballer,  George Weah,  in an area between Namasuba and Najjanankimbi,  shot and seriously injured four supporters of Mr. Ssebaana Kizito,  one of the candidates contesting for the mayoral seat of Kampala.  

On the 7th June 1999,  in Makindye division, the Police fired gas canisters and in the process injured three supporters of the said candidate.

One;  could the Minister inform the House whether she is aware of these incidents.  If so, is Government responsible for the injury caused to the victims by those Police operations?

Two;  could she further inform the House whether a state of emergency has been declared in Kampala,  or cite any law which prohibits supporters of any candidate vying for a political office from expressing joy and happiness in honour of a candidate,  during a meeting?

Those are the questions,  Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Namusoke Sarah):  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  I would like to answer the questions in one statement,  because the two questions are connected.  

First of all,  'could the Minister inform the House whether she is aware of these incidents?'  Yes, I am aware of these incidents and this is what I want to give as an explanation in relation to the questions.

On the 5th of June 1999, supporters of Mr. Ssebaana Kizito,  after their rally at Ndeeba, Lubaga division in Kampala district,  started marching along Entebbe road.  On reaching Stella zone, Najjanankumbi, the crowd became rowdy.  They started throwing stones at the Police vehicle which was escorting Liberian player,  George Weah,  to Nakivubo Stadium. Consequently, the Police fired two bullets in the air to make their way through the crowd.  


Shortly afterwards, some officers from the Directorate of Military Intelligence,  with Detective Constable Balikowa,  who were on official duty,  also met this crowd at the same place.  They were proceeding to search the House of one Kavuma, a terrorist suspect from Para zone Namasuba,  in Mpigi district.  The crowd started throwing stones at motor vehicle registration number UAA 120A Toyota omnibus,  white in colour,  in which the security officers were travelling.  

Feeling insecure, the Directorate of Military Intelligence staff namely,  Kasirye Leonard and Tumusiime Rutagyemwa got out of the vehicle and started firing in the air.  Two people were injured, one of whom was identified as Swaibu of Para zone,  Namasuba.  It was not,  however,  the intention of the officers to injure any member of the crowd,  but to scare the people away.  

Security personnel noted that candidates' processions were becoming more and more rowdy and in some instances disturbing many businesses in town.  Consequently, the chairman of the Electoral Commission called for a meeting of all aspiring candidates on the 7th of June, 1999.  The meeting was attended by the Returning officer Kampala, all aspiring mayoral candidates,  security officers and the staff of the Electoral Commission. 

After thorough deliberations in this meeting, it was agreed that campaign processions be banned.  A press statement was issued to this effect and this is reference to the Electoral Commission press release reference EC/O/3 dated 7th June, 1999.

That afternoon at the candidates's meeting in Makindye division, the Presiding officer informed the gathering about the position that was agreed on during the meeting of the Electoral Commission.  Nevertheless, after this candidates' meeting in which people were informed that processions to and from candidates' meetings were banned,  supporters of some mayoral candidates defied this decision and started the processions.  The Police,  following the directive of the chairman of the Electoral Commission to enforce this ban,  proceeded to disperse the crowd.  

I would like with your permission, Mr. Speaker,  to read this press release in which the processions were banned,  and the action that the Police was requested to take,  by the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission:  "Electoral Commission press release:  After discussions with all candidates in the meeting held today 7th June 1999, the Electoral Commission informs the general public in Kampala area that with immediate effect, processions of candidates for Kampala mayoral campaigns are banned. The Police is directed to make the necessary steps to enforce the ban."  

Following from the above,  it is clear that whereas supporters of any candidate are not banned from expressing joy and happiness,  they are obliged to obey the law.  In this particular case,  the ban of processions was agreed upon by all the candidates,  a statement to that effect was issued by the Chairman of the Electoral Commission using the legal authority entrusted to him,  and the Police was directed by him to take the necessary steps to enforce this ban.  

While the Police and Ministry of Internal Affairs regret any inconveniences caused by this ban,  and in particular the injuries during the above mentioned incidents,  Government cannot take responsibility.  The procession was unlawful by virtue of the fact that it had been banned by the Electoral Commission.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have been listening to the statement by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs and I am surprised that a lot of what they report is a pack of lies and unrelated to what was at the scene.  Before the Government statement banning such meetings where supporters of given candidates assemble in support of their candidates, we did not have any law stopping them.  So, Mr. Speaker, I am surprised that the Minister has not answered the questions.  

I was on site when these incidents happened.  The candidates had just addressed a rally in my constituency at Ndeeba and I am surprised that the Minister has not said anything about three people who emerged from a vehicle UAA 122A and directly shot at the mob,  in my presence.  

THE SPEAKER:  What are the supplementary questions?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Is the Minister aware that on top of the report she is generally giving,  as many as seven people are now in hospital at Mulago, Lubaga and Nsambya?  I will ask about Kasakya Anwa, now at Nsambya, Willy Sengendo Lubwana who survived two bullets,  now at Mulago;  I will speak about Swaibu Wasswa who was knocked down by a police patrol car;  I will speak about John Ntare who had an eye injury due to being hit by a baton, now at Nsambya hospital;  I will speak about Sam Mukwaya who was shot in the stomach and he is now languishing in Nsambya,  and I will speak finally about Mutebi Absolom hit by a bullet on the head, now at Nsambya.  

Finally, I will speak about David Lwanga a resident of Kawempe who had his legs shot by two bullet and is now at Nsambya.  I would like to end by -(Interruption).

MR. KARUHANGA:  Is it in order for the hon. Member to stand here and confirm that he was participating in rally which had been banned by the Electoral Commission?  He is also saying that he was part of a mob where many of his own constituents were injured,  led by him in the process of breaking the law?  We know very well that the hon. Member has traditionally been involved in the Mayor's race in the past,  with the former Mayor Ssebagala who is now in some place outside Uganda,  but described by the current leadership as 'Mandela.'  Is it in order that the hon. Member confirms his participation in an illegal match which even stopped Weah from playing football at Mandela Stadium,  and they are the same people who would like to change it to Ssebagala Stadium?


THE SPEAKER:  My understanding of the situation is this.  The shooting,  which the Police admit did take place,  was for purposes of dispersing a rowdy crowd.  What the hon. Member is saying is that at that moment he came in,  and I take it that his attention was drawn to the crowd because of the shooting,  that is when he was able to witness it.  Therefore he was not really confirming that he was there or that he had joined a rowdy and unlawful crowd. 

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  That is exactly so,  Mr. Speaker.  Finally, aware of the fact that the shooting incident took place before the Electoral Commission's proclamation, may I know from the Minister whether the victims of those two incidents, their medical bills,  will be paid by the Government?

MAJ. KAZOORA JOHN:  Supplementary.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I am putting a question to the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs as to what steps she intends to take on some hon. Members of Parliament of this House who incite lumpens and hooligans to disturb public peace by leading illegal demonstrations?  I thank you.

MR. AWORI:  I am seeking further clarification from the hon. Minister on a matter of crowd control by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  Mr. Speaker, could the hon. Minister tell this House the procedures and principles of crowd control especially of an unarmed crowd?  Will she tell this House whether her Police force is sufficiently supplied with the rubber bullets which are generally used to control crowds which are not armed?  

Could she tell this House whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs has supplied the Police force with horses and dogs which are normally used to control crowds that are not armed,  such as it happened in hon. Lukyamuzi's constituency?

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  With due regard to the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, I would like to hear her views and opinion considering the recent insecurity and rowdiness surrounding the joint candidates's meetings and the fact that the joint candidate meetings are actually a legal requirement in the campaign in the electoral law.  Does she envisage that we may have to rethink the viability and safety of joint candidates' meetings as opposed to individual candidates organizing independent meetings,  which shields them from high potential of conflict?  I thank you.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU  (Makindye West, Kampala):  These rallies are organised with different groups.  When the Minister was passing the law in Parliament,  did he also provide for a method of groups of people of supporters,  in what way they should walk to their homes after the rallies,  to avoid being idle and causing commotion?  In any case, did the Minister think it appropriate to shoot at people when even the rearers of cattle could not use guns?  Was that the best way of controlling the public?

MR. NYAI:  Before I raise my point of clarification to the Minister, the hon. Member for Kashari Maj. Kazoora got off the Floor too quickly, because he was asking a very leading question.  In that question there was an assumption that hon. Members lead lumpens - if I am quoting him correctly.  Could he first of all give this House instances,  and substantiate when an hon. Member of this House led lumpens in a demonstration in contravention of our law?  It is a very serious allegation against Members of this House, Mr. Speaker!  

As I said,  I would like to ask the Minister of State for Internal Affairs - who very learnedly replied on the direction and guidance of the Electoral Commission about how people going and returning from rallies should behave.  Can the hon. Minister assure this House that since the Electoral Commission has declared that all Ugandans will be free as of July 3rd to canvass for or against the referendum, that she will give the necessary instructions to the Police that people are not unnecessarily molested?  I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Miss. Namusoke Sarah):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I want to thank the hon. Members for the questions.  

The first question,  if I understood it very well, was asking if Government was to compensate the people.  As I said in the statement,  the crowd was rowdy,  the crowd had not alerted Police about this route and so the Police officers that were there,  were there to defend themselves,  because - as I said - they were moving with a suspect.  They were not there to defend or to move with the crowd,  or to protect the crowd;  they just fell into this crowd.  And the shooting was as a result of protecting themselves as they moved through that crowd.  

One group was bringing the player to Nakivubo, so they were passing just like anybody else.  The other group was going with a suspect, to search his house.  Those were also not  -(Interruption)-  Mr. Speaker, may I be allowed to finish?

THE SPEAKER:  Will you allow the hon. Minister to respond to your questions?

MISS. NAMUSOKE SARAH:  And therefore, as I said in the statement,  Government is not liable to compensate these victims.  

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Point of information.

THE SPEAKER:  I would like you to allow the Minister to respond to the questions without your interruption.

MISS. NAMUSOKE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The second question was, 'what steps are to be taken on Members of Parliament who organise hooligans ...."  I think that is for the law, the law will catch up with them.  If anybody is caught in this kind of unlawful act, I think they will be dealt with,  like anybody else.  

The third one, 'is the Police able to control, does the police have the capacity to control crowds?'  We have limited capacity and we are soon coming here with a budget to be passed by this House so that we get as much of the equipment and the plastic bullets as we need.  I hope this House will give it all the necessary support,  considering that we are approaching a very difficult period where we are going to experience many of these crowds.  

And I think I have already answered the question about the procession.  I said that this procession was an illegal one.  The earlier one;  the Police were on their own business.  They did not have the equipment to control this crowd as they would have if they had been aware that there was a crowd.  These particular policemen were on their way on some other business.  
About the joint candidates' meeting, I think this is an issue that Parliament itself could look into.  It is a responsibility of the Electoral Commission and Parliament to see if we need to make a change in the law.  I do not think this is a responsibility of the Ministry of Internal Affairs,  for now.

Hon. Nsambu wanted to know whether Police prescribes the route.  I want to say that according to the Police Act Section 33(b), "any officer in charge of Police may issue orders for the purpose of directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads or streets or at places of public escort and the route by which and the times at which any procession may pass."  I think this can only be implemented.  Of course Government and Police have no right to prevent people to do or to carry out lawful acts, but the Police must be warned so that they determine the route for the security of those people who are involved,  also for the security of other lawful citizens in this country.  So, if you are organising a procession,  it is for your own good - but also for the good of the rest of the citizens - to have the Police informed.  They will advise you on the best way to go about it,  and they will ensure that you are protected.  But if the procession is not with the awareness of the Police and any acts of rowdiness take place,  then the Police cannot take responsibility of that,  because they were not informed in time.  I think that is all.  I thank you.

MOTION TO BE MOVED UNDER RULE 89(1) OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS BILL

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move the motion for the introduction of a Private Member's Bill under rule 89(1).  

Whereas the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees the protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms;  and whereas one of those fundamental rights and freedoms is the freedom of association;  and whereas subjecting a fundamental right and freedom to an automatic referendum is a contentious issue and amounts to a violation of that right;  and whereas the Constitution under Article 271(3) provides for the holding of an automatic referendum during the last month of the fourth year of the term of the current Parliament to determine the political system the people of Uganda wish to adopt;  and whereas once a political system has been adopted it is extremely tedious and difficult to change the political system as provided under Article 74 of the Constitution;  and whereas a referendum is not in the best interest of a country as it can cause division, polarisation and instability and undermines peace and security;  and whereas the costs involved in the holding of a referendum are exorbitant and quite prohibitive;  and whereas Article 1 clause (4) and Article 69 clause (1) of the Constitution provides that the people of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice through free and fair elections or referenda;  and whereas it is deemed necessary in the interest of peace,  unity,  security,  stability,  democracy and economy that the people of Uganda should choose and adopt a political system through free and fair elections rather than through a referenda;  and whereas the electorate is entitled to having direct elections to determine a political system to govern them,  now therefore this motion is moved that this House do accept the introduction for a Bill or an Act of Parliament entitled "The Constitutional Amendment Bill, 1999",  attached herewith,  and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its First Reading.  

The Constitutional Amendment Bill,  1999 reads as follows:  "A Bill for an Act to make provision for Amending the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda be enacted by Parliament as follows: this Bill may be cited as a Constitutional Amendment Bill 1999.  Determination of a Political System by election.  The Constitution is Amended in Article 271 by deleting clause 2 and 3 and substituting the following new clause.  At the end of the first Parliament elected under this Constitution, the Movement and Political Parties shall sponsor candidates for Presidential election which results shall determine the political system to govern.'  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded?  Hon. Member before you speak to your motion,  you proposed an Amendment there.  There is a phrase, 'which results shall determine the political system to govern.'  The last but one line,  if you are looking at it,  beginning with 'presidential elections,' was it intended to mean whose results shall determine?  Well, it is only a draft.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  It is drafting, and it is a draft.  The rule says you shall attach a draft of the Bill, the substances are there.

THE SPEAKER:  And secondly, if you look at the Constitution,  Article 271,  the one that you seek to amend,  the effect of your proposed Amendment is to delete clause (2) and (3) and I do not know whether you have looked at clause (4)?   Because if you remove 2 and 3, then you may find that 4 is really redundant.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  That is right.  

THE SPEAKER:  I am just drawing your attention to it.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  I agree with you.  I thought it would be consequential,  that it would follow automatically.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, you may now speak to your motion.  

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Before I go on to justify my motion as a mover of a motion of many people,  I want to recognise and appreciate the cooperation I got from many people on this very important Amendment.  I am grateful to you,  Mr. Speaker,  and the staff of Parliament for facilitating me in ensuring that this motion appears before the House.  I am also grateful to the positive attitude of Government which has welcomed this proposed Amendment.  You may disagree with it, but I am happy that in the spirit of the new political order, this Amendment has been seen very much in the positive sense.  And it is with this spirit that I wish to request Members of this House not only to give me an opportunity to give my views freely and let the argument flow,  but I also would like them to look at this Amendment with a free mind and in the total interest of this country which we all cherish.  

As you are aware Article,  94(4)(b) of the Constitution provides that every Member has a right to move a Private Member's Bill and therefore constitutionally I am perfectly in order to move this Amendment.  Furthermore, rule 89(1) of the rules of procedure of this House provides that a Private Member's Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion to which shall be attached a proposed draft of a Bill.  

This motion is asking that leave be granted for introduction of the Bill attached to this motion which basically seeks to amend the Constitution in Article 271 so that instead of choosing a political system to govern this country through a referendum, we do so by election.  

As I have said, this motion is brought in the spirit of constitutionalism and in accordance with the Constitution. Indeed those who are opposed to the referendum have been advised by friends in Government,  the Movement,  the Churches,  various civil organisations and the general population as a whole to do two things.  

1.  To amend the Constitution; or
2.  To go to the constitutional Court.

I, with many others, have chosen the political option of amending the Constitution as the best option.  It provides a healthy opportunity for us all to talk to each other, to hear each other out,  to tolerate each other,  to respect the views of each and at the end of it all, to agree on what is best for each other and for every Ugandan.  

The judicial option is narrow as you either win or lose the case as represented by hired lawyers.  The forum will not be as broad as this one.  If the case goes in a constitutional Court - which is proper - each side would hire its lawyers and in a rather restricted environment, the argument would be very legalistic and the judges would pronounce their judgement based purely on the legalistic provisions of the Constitution,  or whatever is relevant.  But for us in this House, we do not restrict ourselves to purely constitutional or legal arguments.  We go beyond that and look at the broader issues in terms of the society.  We are not necessarily restricted by what is provided here in the Constitution,  provided it is within the law.

What do I mean by the spirit of constitutionalism?  There are those who are seriously opposed to the referendum and because of the spirit of constitutionalism,  they would rather have this provision challenged in this august House rather than choose an unconstitutional method.  Mr. Speaker,  I think this is extremely healthy and that at the end of it all when a decision is taken by this House, we shall convince one another that for the time being this is the best option.  

I have said that this Amendment is brought in accordance with the Constitution and I particularly wish to draw the attention of this House to the following Articles which are relevant to the Amendment.  I want to start with Article 79(1) which deals with the functions of Parliament.  It says,  "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,  Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace,  order,  development and good governance of Uganda.  (2) Except as provided in this Constitution,  no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under authority conferred by an Act of Parliament.  Finally (3) Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda".  Mr. Speaker,  we have come here because we want to protect this Constitution.  We want to protect it by amending it so that the Constitution is stronger.


Article 1 clause (4) says, "People shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed,  through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda."  Furthermore,  Article 69 sub clause (1) also substantially repeats what is in Article 1 clause (4) that "The people of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice through free and fair elections or referenda."  

Article 258 provides for how the Constitution shall be amended.  "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,  Parliament may amend by way of addition,  variation or repeal,  any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this chapter".  In amending this Constitution,  there are about three methods of doing so.  There is the provision where you can amend by this Parliament,  and it has to go for the referendum.  You amend and then it is supported by the district councils.  But this is not an entrenched provision,  Article 271 is not an entrenched provision.  All it means is that Article 271, being a transitional provision, is not an entrenched provision which would require us to put it to a referendum or to the approval of district councils.  But Parliament alone,  with two thirds majority,  can amend that provision,  and that is provided for in Article 261 of this Constitution.

There are three strong arguments in favour of the referendum.  The first one,  which has been repeated over and over,  is that the referendum must be held because it is provided in the Constitution.  Mr. Speaker,  I agree with that argument,  but at the same time,  the referendum need not be held if the Constitution can be amended,  because it is provided for in the Constitution.  So,  the argument that the referendum has to be held automatically because it is provided for in the Constitution and if it is not held,  it will be a breach of the Constitution, is not necessarily a very serious argument,  because this Constitution provides for amendments.  If this Parliament did not see it fit in its wisdom that a referendum should not be held and it goes ahead and amends the Constitution,  it will be perfectly constitutional not to hold the referendum.

The second argument which I just would like to pass through very briefly,  and others may later talk about it,  is that political parties have historically been divisive and have been the cause of the problems of this country.  Mr. Speaker,  I do not want to enter into this rather delicate argument on this matter.  I am only appealing to the higher wisdom of this House that years back,  the history of our country may have been dark,  but we are now moving ahead while we bear in our mind what happened in the past.  We need not be held on strings,  tied to a rope, simply because certain aspects of our history were contributed to by political parties.  

Of course we are aware that a lot of institutions in this country have had their own share in causing problems for this country:  religions,  the armies,  the presidents and various other institutions.  But we would rather seek to reform and amend those institutions than abolish them altogether.  So,  let us not restrict ourselves too much to the past,  but let us look to the future and see how best,  in the interest of this country,  institutions like political parties can be reformed to be manned by new people,  for the good of this country.

Thirdly,  it is argued that in the spirit of Article 1 clause (1),  the referendum must be held because all power belongs to the people and the sovereignty of the people must be respected because if the referendum is not held,  it will violate the sovereignty of the people.  Mr. Speaker, yes, people are sovereign,  but holding elections to choose the political system to govern this country will be exactly respecting the sovereignty of the people.  It will be giving people that opportunity,  except by using a method not far away from the referendum,  and that method will be elections.  

The people would be voting simultaneously for the President of this country,  a President who will be coming with his manifesto,  with his programme and stating the political system that he supports.  The people will know that when I elect this particular President,  it is because he belongs to this particular political system which concurrently is offering the following programmes.  I elect him knowing very well that this political system is just not chosen in a theoretical way as will be done under the referendum,  but that choice will be attached to a concrete programme and to a concrete personality.  To me this is a much better choice,  and the people would still be exercising their sovereignty.


I think it is important for us in this House to refresh ourselves,  just briefly,  on how the referendum came to be in the Constitution.  The referendum came to be in the Constitution as part of the Constitution making process.  Mr. Speaker,  the recommendation by the Odoki Commission, when there was a complete stalemate in the views of the people on what political system to adopt,  the Commission - on their own initiative,  not arising from the questions put to the people - proposed that the best way to resolve this stalemate is to go by a referendum.  

At this juncture let me quote to this House paragraph 8.86 which appears on page 217 of the Odoki Report.  I will read directly from it:  "The Commission has therefore interpreted the wish of the majority of the Ugandan people to be that of wanting both political systems to be established in the Constitution,  and left to the sovereignty of the people to periodically decide,  through a national referendum,  which of the two systems they prefer at any particular time of their political development."  
The Commission interpreted a stalemate but the people were not originally asked that, 'in the midst of this stalemate, would you prefer a resolution by a referendum,  election,  or you would  want the two systems side by side, as it happened in Tanzania?'  I am arguing that the Commission preempted the issue and went beyond its powers to interpret the wish of the people of Uganda to mean what they did not wish.  

The interim report of December, 1991, of the Odoki Commission,  in paragraph 23,  which appears on page 10, had this to say: "The people hope for a new Constitution that can last,  one which is believed in by all Ugandans of good will and which will solve the nation's conflicts, establishing lasting peace, establishing a solid foundation for the flourishing democracy and be conducive to development.  Such a Constitution should not be levelled 'an NRM Document',  rather it should be seen as a people's Constitution,  a worthy one that can be fully respected by future Governments and generations."

The report of the Constitutional Commission,  page 195,  is extremely relevant to this presentation.  "The choice of the political system most suited for Uganda either temporarily or permanently has been a very hotly debated issue throughout the Constitution making process, since 1988.  Every section of society has submitted its views on the topic of the new Constitution,  and enjoyment by Ugandans of their human rights and freedoms.   The future political stability of the country, the effective implementation and realisation of other aspects of the new Constitution and enjoyments by Ugandans of their human rights and freedoms depend,  to a large extent,  on the choices of the issue.  Those choices will also determine all influence and decisions on the Presidency,  Parliament,  Electoral System and so on."  It went on to conclude that, "The issue has been one of the most controversial at all levels of society.  It has also attracted much attention from the outside world,  and representatives of foreign missions in Uganda."

I am quoting the Constitutional Commission report at length just to show this House how controversial the issue of a political system has been and how important to the future of this country this issue is.  It could not be resolved by the Odoki Commission,  which pushed it to the CA.  It could not be resolved by the CA,  62 Members of the CA,  because of this very issue,  disassociated themselves and walked out.  All because of this issue of the referendum.  

I am highlighting this for purposes of your sensibilities,  that we do not underate the issue of the imposition of a particular political system.  The issue is so controversial that even if this matter was decided by the Constituent Assembly some four or five years ago,  I am still inviting this august House to think again to revisit the issue and to amend that decision which was taken four to five years ago.  Is it still the correct decision which we must implement even at this point in time?  If it is, yes, you go ahead,  controversy will continue.

The Constitution of Uganda was never ratified by the people of Uganda through a referendum.  I am bringing this issue because the method of making our Constitution was through election of Members,  and the Members alone representing people as delegates,  confirmed that.  In other countries, that Constitution would have been put to a referendum,  to justify all types of future referenda.  However,  in our case we deemed it fit that the Constituent Assembly should stop at that stage of making a Constitution,  and never put it to the people for a referendum yet.  Mr. Speaker,  we are now entrenching in our Constitution a method which the people of Uganda never used in the Constitution making process.  You are now telling the people of Uganda to utilize the method of referendum to choose a political system.  You are now telling the people of Uganda that, 'even when you want to change that political system,  you must use a referendum.'  

In other words, Mr. Speaker,  we are using different standards,  different methods,  to resolve our political national problems.  You asked the Constituent Assembly delegates,  some 250 delegates,  to make a Constitution and decide on the issue of the referendum,  and that issue was never put to a referendum in the first place.  Now you are telling the people of Uganda that you must use that method of a referendum?  Mr. Speaker,  I think we are entrenching these provisions which give an advantage to one side but a grave disadvantage,  a grave injustice,  to the other parties.  

I have already told this House that let us revisit the issue,  after all revisiting the issue is part of the political process.  Mr. Speaker,  I would like this House to ask four important questions while deliberating on this issue.  One;  is it absolutely necessary to hold a referendum?  

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, those are rhetoric questions,  they do not call for answers.  You will be given an opportunity to say yes or no at the appropriate time.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  I am telling my distinguished Colleagues the hon. Members,  to think about this.  I am not asking you to think back immediately, it is a question to think back and fall on.  I am asking you as judges with great wisdom to hold onto your decision after you have thought about it very deeply.  

The second question,  Mr. Speaker,  is, if the referendum is not held what would the people of Uganda lose by not holding that referendum?  

Three;  if the referendum is held, will it solve the political problems of Uganda, or will it worsen them?

Lastly,  I want to ask this House to think very deeply of the advantages and disadvantages in holding or not holding of a referendum.  The advantages of not holding the referendum but using the method of elections which I support are the following:  
One; nobody is locked out permanently.  The effect of holding a referendum to choose between the political systems is that if a Multi-partyist win,  you are going to lock out my brothers and sisters in the Movement until the system is changed.  I would be the last person in this House and in this country to lock anybody from the Movement political system out.  I would like to see the very faces that I see here,  with whom I have worked, lived with and enjoyed humanity.  I would hate to lock anybody out of the political arena by using a referendum.  

The second advantage of holding elections is that it provides competition,  straight competition.  The leader goes with his programme saying, 'this programme will be under the movement or multiparty system.'  Chosen on that basis,  the person who loses expects that after five years he is coming back to re-offer himself.  He is going to hope,  and there is nothing greater in human life than a person who has hope.  Do not create situation of hopelessness in the political arena,  a situation in which somebody competes and he says, 'the decision has now been made, I am condemned to oblivion. I can only be resurrected if another referendum is held.'  God forbid!  The result of locking out a person permanently and creating a spirit of hopelessness is to build the spirit of unconstitutionalism in the people.

It is very practical that both political systems,  the policies and programmes and the personalities are concurrently chosen using the method of elections.  Mr. Speaker, if you hold a referendum,  and I have said it already although I must emphasize this,  the effect of a referendum is to lock out others,  and you can only unlock by using the provisions of Article 74.  I invite this House to look at Article 74 of the Constitution.  It is one of the most entrenched provisions in this Constitution.  Article 74 provides that a referendum shall be held for the purpose of changing a political system.  

In other words, once a referendum is held, you have to hold another referendum before a referendum is held to change that political system.  And in order to cause that referendum to be held,  the following conditions must be met:  (a) if requested by a resolution supported by more than half of all Members of Parliament.  Which Parliament?  The Parliament which belongs to that particular political system which you want to change.  I do not know whether that Parliament which is dominated by a political system they are enjoying,  a half of them,  would accept the petition to remove themselves out of power.  

This is a very serious issue,  Mr. Speaker,  I am looking at it from the point of view of human nature.  You have a Multi-party Parliament, which was elected by a referendum and they are enjoying the fruits of Parliament.  Now you are telling them to go for a referendum to remove themselves?  Is that sensible, is that practical?  Mr. speaker, I am bringing this point out just to tell how difficult it is to implement some of these provisions which have been entrenched in our Constitution.  To change a system which is adapted, you say, 'if requested by a resolution supported by the majority of the total membership of each of at least one half of all district councils.'  

Again that district council would have been elected under that particular political system and you are now asking the same council enjoying power under that political system to pass a resolution to cause a referendum which is likely to take away power from them?  I appeal to you,  hon. Members, to think again.  I am saying we are revisiting this Constitution which was made four to five years ago in a different environment.  I am asking you four to five years later to rethink and to revisit the issue.  If it is correct, go ahead,  it is fine.  Please, think,  revisit the issue, look at it, is it fair?  This is all I am appealing,  is it fair,  that method of changing the political system?  It is so entrenched!  

And the third method, 'if requested through a petition to the electoral commission by at least one tenth of the registered voters from each of at least two thirds of the constituencies which representatives here are required to be directly elected under paragraph three.  Mr. Speaker,  I am really saying that the political system which we shall adopt will be next to impossible to change.  And because it will be next to impossible to change,  it is in-built with a lot of controversies and dangerous consequences for this country.  

It is obviously cheaper and financially more sound to combine the choice of political system with that of political leaders in general elections.  Mr. Speaker, let me touch on this issue of the argument that is the freedom of association absolute?  If it is not absolute, how far can the freedom of association be derogated?  We who support this Amendment argue that the holding of a referendum would violate my freedom,  my fundamental right of freedom of association.  But those who support the referendum are saying, 'no, the referendum is fine because no freedom,  no human right is absolute.'  But in deciding on this issue,  I want Members to look at Articles 43 and 44 of our Constitution.  Article 43 of the Constitution is entitled "General limitation on fundamental and other human rights and freedoms."  I think very many times people have gone to the public and said, 'you know,  freedom of association is not absolute,  we can derogate it as we want.'  

But the Constitution provides to what extent that freedom can be derogated.  It says in Article 43(1), "In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this chapter,  no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others,  or the public interest.  (2) Public interest under this article shall not permit - (a) political persecution and; (c) - which is more important here,  "any limitation of the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed by this chapter beyond what is acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society,  or what is provided by this Constitution."  We have to ask ourselves,  is this the demonstrably justifiable?  Is it in public interest?  If it is in the public interest,  is it for purposes of good governance,  for public morality,  for the common good,  and so on?  This is where one should direct his mind to.  

And since we are discussing a very fundamental issue of our human rights,  I invite Members to also look at Article 29.2 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights from which our Constitution basically derives Article 43.  The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,  to which we are signatory,  has this to say:  "In the exercise of these rights and freedoms, everyone shall be subject to only such limitations as are determined by law,  solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others,  and of meeting the just requirements."  And this is really what is relevant here.  That if you are to lock out political parties,  this is the question:  if you want to lock out political parties,  is it to meet the just requirements of morality,  public order and general welfare in a democratic society?  That is the test, Mr. Speaker.  

But when the Universal Declaration was being written, a number of very respected authors gave some interpretation of how far you can derogate human rights.  And I think it is important for this House to really know this question without a blanket answer that you can derogate human rights.  Yes,  I am one of those who accept that you can derogate human rights and that human rights are not absolute.  But the bigger question is,  how far can you derogate human rights?  Can you derogate my human rights to the extent that all attributes of those rights are removed?  

I give you an example: if I were a Bishop,  and you know very well that my rights as a Bishop,  my functions as a Bishop includes being in charge of the Diocese,  controlling my priests,  conferring confirmation,  ordination,  visiting my priests,  parishes and so on.  If you are to say, 'yes, your Lordship Omara Atubo Bishop of Otuke,  you are welcome to be the Bishop.'  The Government definitely,  being represented by the President who will attend my consecration no doubt as it is the practice.  If not he will send the Prime Minister whom I will welcome to my constituency,  and others,  and all Members of Parliament would be invited,  and Ministers too.  But after my consecration as a Bishop, then you tell me that,  'thank you for being a Bishop but stay in your church, stay in your headquarters in Otuke,  you are a Bishop,  nice cassock and nice mitre there but Bishop,  you see in the interest of public order,  public morality and welfare,  please do not visit your folk nor say mass.  Do not visit your priests,  do not carry out confirmation do not attend funerals,  but you are Bishop and we respect you.' 

This is exactly what the referendum is going to do;  this is exactly what my friends in the Movement and what the law on parties have said in Article 269.  It has said, 'thank you very much political parties,  UPC and DP,  you remain in existence.  No,  Uganda is not a one party State,  we have even provided it in the Constitution,  no law shall be made that Uganda shall be a one party State.   And when foreigners read it they say, 'this is a great constitution,  you see these are very democratic people,  they have even said in their Constitution that Uganda shall never be a one party State.'  But what do you do with UPC and DP?  You said, 'stay in your headquarters,  no recruitment of members,  no delegates conference,  no sponsoring candidates, no collection of funds.  But Mr. Ssemogerere and others,  you see you are great political leaders,  you stay in Kampala.  When you go to Pallisa you are beaten,  when you go to Mbarara you are locked up,  but we are a democratic State,  we are democratic country.'  Mr. Speaker, are we serious about the future of this country,  to build it as a democratic country which protects the rights of others?  

Let me just read to you this book on the Universal Declaration of Human rights,  what one great author said on this issue of derogation of human rights.  It is published by UNESCO,  with various authors,  and also articles by Glen Johnson and Janusz Symonides.  It is an official publication of UNESCO which can be quoted even in courts of law.  In this case it involves an expression of the limitations on the rights outlined in the earlier article, and it says this on the question of derogation of human rights:  "Limitation,  it was a delicate matter to find language which would annunciate the social needs which all delegates recognise,  without going so far as to justify improper social or State infringement on the rights of individuals,  and this is really what is important.  It was pointed out that it might be questioned whether an individual owed such a duty or loyalty regardless of the characteristic of the State.  In considering a Bill of Rights,  it was argued that men had first to be told that their freedom is limited.  If this was done,  it will be a Bill not of human rights but of what men owe to society.  It was precisely because a balance had been tilted against the individual and in favour of society,  that human rights had bee violated." 

This is a very important quotation and I really urge this House that when we are talking about derogation of human rights,  let us not derogate human rights to an extent that the right is meaningless.  And I go ahead,  Mr. Speaker,  on this issue, it may appear academic but it has had a number of interpretations and fortunately me wearing the other hat of a lawyer,  I have come across some of these interpretations.  It is still a contentious issue,  how far human rights are absolute and how far human rights can be derogated.  

I thought I would  bring to the attention of this House some very useful authorities on this matter,  and I have already quoted you the UNESCO publication on this matter.  I also wish to quote you a well known professor on this matter,  Prof. David Bethem.  In his book entitled, Introducing Democracy,  on page 101,  he had this to say, "the principles concerning the justification of an interference or with restriction of a right are well established in international jurisprudence.  These are that the restriction is provided for by law,  that it pursues a legitimate aim,  in other words the purpose of the limitation is clearly one permitted by international standards, and that the decision for the interference or restriction is made out according to the concept of the democratic society."  

In practice this means that the Government must show that its actions in limiting a right of freedom are proportionate not excessive.  And I would say that restricting and getting the political parties out of the political arena of competition is, in fact, very excessive.  It is not proportionate and if any law is to be made on political parties,  it is the law we are waiting for,  to govern the functioning of political parties,  not to make a law on referendum which is going to lock out political parties permanently or at least for a long time.  That would not be proportionate.  

Mr. Speaker, I think that the question of -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you -

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, let me try to wind up.  I have just got one page left, but you know this issue of justification is very complicated because amending the Constitution is not a simple matter.  

I happen to have been on the political scene for some time,  I would also call myself a leader but above all I am a lawyer who is trained to respect law and moreso the Constitution.  I would say that for a House of this nature to be moved to amend a Constitution or for consideration to amend it,  it must be convinced that it is really important.  I may take a little bit more time than your patience may justify,  but it is because I really feel that in order for this House to pronounce itself,  it must be convinced by me and those who are supporting me that it is absolutely important.  I feel in my own conscious that this matter is important and I have decided to take some time to even do a bit of research so that when I talk on this matter,  I am talking from a position of authority,  I am talking from a position of conviction so that even those who are going to support it will support it because they have listened and those who are opposing it will say that, 'we have listened,  he was right,  but I think we shall oppose him.'  I think this is really the issue and that amending a Constitution is not a simple matter.

I am not moving this motion as a matter of simplicity.  This motion was conceived months back,  I have not ambushed anybody.  When you were going for recess I circulated this notice.  I even asked you to consult your constituents.  We published it in the press and we had a lot of seminars on this matter.  So, Mr. Speaker,  we are now about to come to the end,  to pronounce ourselves,  and I would just ask that you give me a few more minutes on this matter.  It is a very important matter for this country.  It is the first time that a Member is moving a motion to amend a Constitution,  a private Members' Bill call,  and I think I am ready for it.  

I wish to argue that the issue of the freedom of association,  whether it is absolute,  and to what extent it can be derogated,  is closely related to the rights of the minority.  The process of derogation is normally done by the majority and they tend to decide for the majority and ignore the rights of the minority.  Bear with me, Mr. Speaker,  and I want to quote again from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,  a very important declaration to us Members.  I am quoting it because this declaration was made after the second world war,  it came directly as a result of human rights violation,  and I see ourselves going back and back without really knowing the history of some of these rights.  Where have we got these rights from? Why are they being respected?  

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights has this to say in its preamble:  "Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom,  justice and peace in the world...."  I am arguing that absolute derogation of the rights of the people who believe in multi-parties undermines the foundation even,  at international level,  of freedom, justice and peace.  It further says, "whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscious of mankind;  and whereas it is essential that if man is not to be compelled to have recourse as last resort to rebellion against tyranny and oppression,  that human rights should be protected by a rule of law."  

What I am driving at is that internationally now,  the issue of respect for human rights is the foundation of peace and stability.  If you look around at where these human rights are being violated,  it is causing suffering.  I am just bringing it to the attention of this House that people who believe in this freedom of association will feel so hurt that their rights and freedom of association are violated.  It might undermine the peace and stability of this country,  let us bear this point in mind.  

The issue of the rights of the majority or the tyranny of the majority has also been well catered for.  I want to say,  and I think that professor Nsibambi as a political scientist has taught this at Makerere University,  we will remember what John Stewart Mill said in his essay on liberty.  This was way back in 1895 and I really feel that this essay on liberty which liberal scientists tend to quote may be of very important relevancy to us.  In my conclusion on this issue of the rights of minority and the tyranny of the majority,  John Stewart Mill wrote:  "The will of the people,  moreover practically,  means the will of the most numerous and this is what we always say, 'we are the majority, we are they majority!'  Right,  you are the majority,  all the most active part of the people the majority, all those who succeed in making themselves accepted as the majority.  The people consequently may desire to oppress a part of their number and precautions are as much needed against this as against any other abuse of power.  And in political speculations,  the tyranny of the majority is now generally included among the evils against which society requires to be on its guard.  There is a limit to the legitimate interference of collective opinion with individual independence,  and to fulfil that limit and maintain it against encroachment is as indispensable to a good condition of human rights as protection against political despotism."  

I wish to say this as I wind up that this House as the supreme political body of the people of Uganda should take into consideration the voices that are crying for justice for this political right.  I want to take into consideration that this referendum is opposed by all political parties and they do not have few members.  They have been opposed by members of the Uganda Law Society and they are opposed, Mr. Speaker, by a number of civil organisations.  So when I speak here and plead with you on this issue,  it is not a small matter coming from dreams of Omara Atubo and a few others.  It is an extremely serious matter which needs your serious consideration.  

I have read the letters of even those who support the referendum like the joint letter of Uganda Joint Christian Council which I have here,  but I will not be able to read it for lack of time, Mr. Speaker.  The letter of the Joint Christian Council - they support the referendum,  the Catholic Episcopal Conference also support the referendum,  but if you read their letters carefully,  they raise two fundamental issues which to me are conditions to be fulfilled before a referendum is held. One of them which to me is really fundamental in their support because it is provided for in the Constitution.  But in supporting it they raised the following issues: 

1.  How will the referendum guarantee the rights of the minority after that?  They say it in their letters.  They also raise the issue which to me is very important in their letter,  a sort of conditionality,  is it fair to hold an election in an atmosphere in which one side is a prisoner and the other one is free?  And they say after fulfilling all these conditions which we have enumerated,  go ahead and hold a referendum.  I am telling you this was a polite way of saying no,  as far as I am concerned.  This was a polite way of these representatives of God,  saying no.  

Finally let me not tire in thanking you and everybody who has listened to me and allowed this motion to be tabled.  As I said, I appreciate this spirit and culture of constitutionalism and all of us in this House have had the experience of the last 20 to 30 years.  I do not think anybody would like to go through those repetitions again.  What we are doing here is basically for a better Uganda for our children and our children's children.  

I do hope that in taking these decisions,  you will move beyond mere temporary advantage and the vision of what you want Uganda to be,  but beyond your life,  beyond your political office, beyond your being here in Parliament.  I am one of those who is looking at this motion as setting the correct direction for sustainable peace,  permanent unity,  co-operation,  tolerance among us all.  Mr. Speaker,  I ask everybody in this House to support this motion for the good of our country.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NYAI DICK (Ayivu County, Apac):  I must first commend my Colleague the mover of the motion on his sentiments about which way forward for Uganda.  His has been an omnibus presentation, very learned,  very legal and fully researched. Mine, Mr. Speaker, is an address to my Colleagues in this House,  an address from the heart.  

What he said is that we are about to reach the year 2000, we the people of Uganda who are now learning to co-exist.  I think those of us who were in the Constituent Assembly vividly remember that when we first went to the Constituent Assembly in 1994,  there was very limited scope for interaction and for saying, 'good morning hon. so and so.'  It was very clear that there were two sides, 'I belong to this, those are enemies.'  And I want to go on record here that those of us who survived the Constituent Assembly still owe hon. James Wapakhabulo gratitude for allowing us time at the beginning of the Constituent Assembly to let off our steam.  Every day we let off steam and following that,  we begun to greet each other.  My Colleague who has just walked out of here, hon. Severino Otafiire!!  In fact some of us were not human beings,  we could not be heard.  Things were very extreme, Mr. Speaker.  


At the time of writing the 1995 Constitution,  there is no doubt that feelings were hard and why were feelings very hard, Mr. Speaker?   I believe it is necessary for this House to reflect on the genesis of the 1995 Constitution.  The NRM/A came into power and the first thing they did, they said, 'this country has been so polarised, let us put politics aside, let us go together. We shall give over power in about two years.'  Then after that they said, 'no, no,  two years is very short,  we need time to write a Constitution.'  And the question of drafting a new Constitution for the country of Uganda became an excuse for buying time to remain in power.  But if it were for a good end, let it be.  The time was bought, they remained in power and then what happens?  The CA takes places.  

Many delegates who came to the Constituent Assembly on the Movement ticket came to that Assembly with only one view.  If my interpretation of that view is wrong, I beg for their forgiveness in advance.  A lot of people came to that Constituent Assembly with one view that, 'we love our Movement and we must make sure that we entrench it in the Constitution.'  Mr. Speaker, I am saying this because I have also ever been a supporter of a very popular football team.  When your football team is winning, you do not want any other person to waste your time about these other teams which cannot score quickly.  

But the other night when I was watching Manchester United against Bayern Munich - and I am a professed supporter of Manchester United - I nearly had an attack, Mr. Speaker.  There came a time when I believed a match of that standard can only take place because there are two teams of that standard.  You cannot have such a scintillating match with one team against no other team.  If the referendum wants Uganda to watch a match where there is only one team, I pity it.  

I am not going to argue the merits and demerits of the referendum Bill, that will come separately.  What I am saying now is,  is there a programme by which we can say that whereas in 1995 it was necessary to nurture,  protect and entrench the Movement,  it has now blossomed, it is collecting money from public funds,  it is every where - mchaka mchaka.  Even the National Political Commissar can go to Bushenyi and say, 'even if people do not like our opinion very much,  we shall buy LC bicycles.'  But that is a robust organisation!  Why are we afraid?  I would like us to go to elections, but once we elect a President and that of a political organisation wins,  then that should become the governing organisation.  

By governing I mean you do not go and kill off any other opinion.  I say this as advice because I think some of my Friends who are in this House recall that at the time the late President of Kenya, the late Jommo Kenyatta,  was nearing his end,  the question of succession in Kenya became a very emotional issue.  The Kenya Parliament went ahead and passed a law which said that for any Kenyan to imagine the death of Jommo Kenyatta,  he commits an offense of treason.  How do you get somebody - you are a lawyer Mr. Speaker - in for imagining?  How do you pin Dick Nyai for imagining?  You go to a referendum, the Movement system wins, then you say, 'for five years, all other opinions must cease!'  Legislating about opinion,  thinking and freedom of association is dangerous.   

You can say, Mr. Speaker, that, 'when I say I adjourn the House, everybody must stand up and wait for me to walk out first.'  But that is cohesion.  Do we want cohesion in our system of Government?  Do we want to say, 'you Ugandans, if you want to pray then you must go to Mbuya church?'  I want to say that let us re-focus our minds,  because in the English language, the word referendum has another equivalent.  The equivalent is a plebiscite,  and plebiscite comes from a Greek word that 'every body decides'.  But everybody cannot decide about Dick Nyai's thinking.  My mind was given to me by God, I can crack jokes with the Speaker and we may not do the same things with other members of society.  

In my experience,  I have known of plebiscites or referenda being held about territories.  Do we need our sovereignty?  Does part of Canada still want to remain under Canada or declare itself French?  Does Australia still want the Queen to be their head of Government or do they want their Prime Minister to be the one?   These are territorial issues,  they do not derogate the freedoms  of individuals to associate and think. Therefore, I am pleading with this House that intelligent people normally revisit issues in light of new circumstances.  

While we are debating this motion, our nation is getting polarised.  Our nation is not getting polarised because people do not want Movement or people do not want political parties.  People fear being shut out.  I am a very happy Member of this Parliament,  fully knowing that my political thinking,  ideology and philosophy is not the same as that of my good Friend, hon. Prof. Mondo Kagonyera, but that we meet and talk.  There must be accommodation.  

So, what is the purpose of this referendum?   I find it is only going to divide the people of Uganda.  If we are really serious and are all committed to developing Uganda and we are all serious that we want a united Uganda, then we say, 'it is true,  in 1995 it was necessary to protect our beloved Movement.  Now that our Movement grown, we are prepared to take on all comers.  Let us go for elections, we win, and let the others - the Dick Nyais live in hope.'  And hope lives eternal in the human breast.  Intelligent people revisit earlier decisions.  I want to say that the argument which is going around this country is so misleading that I wish we could lay it to rest.  

The argument goes as follows:  the people of Uganda must vote in a referendum.  They must vote in a referendum because the referendum is a provision of the Constitution.  You make that passionate argument and you forget, temporarily,  who made that Constitution.  We wrote that Constitution and we are now saying that Constitution is sacrosanct,  that it must be obeyed,  every letter of the way?  And yet in 1995 when we were introducing a Constitution to replace another Constitution,  why did we not think that Constitution was sacrosanct?  Why was that Constitution not sacrosanct?  


It is like a father saying, 'I have now posted rules on the door.  Anybody who comes after 8.30 p.m. will have no dinner.'  Then the son who has been held up in school,  not because of his mistake,  arrives at a quarter to nine.  He explains to the father that, 'there was a problem in school.  We left late and also because of traffic jams, I arrived late.'  And the father says, 'but I cannot help you,  because the rule on the door says you cannot have supper after 8.30 p.m.'  Mr. Speaker, I believe that is unreasonable.  We are very good parents, we love Uganda and I can see hon. Makubuya is agreeing with me entirely on this matter.  We must focus on what keeps us together as a nation and let us forget about these small differences.  

It is true one political organisation will win the elections.  But today - those of you who listen to BBC, there was a very small news item but the BBC carried it every hour on the hour.  A certain Lord Bull, he was born Adam Bull, became a leader of a Party called the Loonies.  He insisted that people must vote one man to Parliament because it makes sense.  He stood in every election in Britain for the last 30 years and you would only choose one constituency,  and where the Prime Minister is coming from is where he was standing.  But when he passed away this morning, Tony Blair, the British Prime Minister,  sent his condolences.  I think we should have that freedom in Uganda,  freedom of association and freedom of everything.  We should not say that because I support the ruling party of the majority - the winning football team,  therefore no other football team should exist.  


I am quite sure that these here are all hon. Members,  very reasonable Members,  they do not want to polarise this nation, and they will quite overwhelmingly support this motion.  I thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Members of Parliament, I have a problem.  Supposing someone, a doctor, were to diagnose my condition, a certain ailment, possibly correctly, but gave me the wrong medicine as prescription.  Should I take it?  I can repeat the question:  supposing I have got an ailment X,  a certain doctor diagnoses the condition, possibly correctly,  but gives the prescription the wrong medicine. Should I take it?

HON. MEMBERS:  No.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I said these are rhetoric questions.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Let me answer my question; I would not take that medicine.  You see, I as a person,  as Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I stand for cheap none costly ways of implementing the Constitution.  These ways must be authentic.  If my honourable Learned Friend says he brings this motion in the spirit of constitutionalism,  what does this mean? It must surely mean that he wants to go by the rule of law.  

Second, if there is a document,  it is a Constitution or a law in existence, he wants to go by that.  That being the case,  I oppose this motion in the spirit of constitutionalism.  You see, this is a problem.  We are dealing with a problem which the report of Justice Odoki failed to solve.  My honourable Friend says so.  We are dealing with a problem which the Constituent Assembly failed to solve.  I was a Member there, he was too.  The Constituent Assembly failed to solve that problem.  And by this Constitution, the Constituent Assembly - I think I am right in saying - even precluded this Parliament from solving it the way he is suggesting.  

Let me read Article 79(1) "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace,  order,  development and good governance of Uganda."  It is all subject to this.  The issue being raised now is the issue of referendum.  We are being asked to say that there should be no referendum,  not only this one coming next year, but ever.  If that is the position, then I am asking the question, how does the Amendment, the abolition of 271(2), 271(3), 271(4) solve the problem?    

Article 69(1) says, "the people of Uganda shall choose a system...."  You amend 271,  which is part of the temporary, if you like the abnormal leading to the normal.  That will leave you saddled.  I am talking about the prescriptions for a disease.  This is not quite a good prescription.  It will leave in place Article 74.  You may go ahead and amend 259,  but that may probably solve the coming referendum only.  But anybody can stand up in this Parliament and say, 'I want a referendum under 74 and you will not be able to stop him or her.'  My question then is this:  if you want to go the way he wants to go, specifically amend 271,  will that solve his problem precisely?  
Let us then go the whole way.  The motion should then propose to amend 69(1) and amend 74 which is entrenchment under 259(2),  then that problem will be solved.  In fact I am saying nothing about the merit of referendum or whatever.  I am simply saying, 'if I am sick and I am not being given the correct medicine,  then I say no!' In fact I am putting a burden of proof on him to perhaps go back and give me a better medicine.  

There is another problem which to me is conceptual.  An election is about candidatures and programmes, about a person and what he says he wants to do,  or she wants to do.  But that is not about the philosophy of what she or he wants to do.  And systems to me go to the root of the matter.  It talks about the philosophy.  This is why you see some ethicists have supported the ethics of Christ, but rejected christianity.  I can go ahead and vote for President Museveni,  at that time he will be simply a man -  Mr. Museveni was a candidate for Presidency - without also supporting Movementism.  If this is so, how can the question of systems put in this Constitution be solved by putting forward candidates? 

My intellectual thinking is it cannot.  Then if it cannot, what do we do about this Constitution?  I said I was in that Constituent Assembly myself,  we lost,  but we came here and swore to support this Constitution and uphold it.  And you see, the morality of the situation is,  you must support it.  To me this is an unfinished job of the Constituent Assembly.  They said for now,  in 1996 under Article 271, the Movement system will be the operative system.  But we cannot choose for the people of Uganda all the time.  So, in the forth year of that term, you go and ask them.  This is my problem.  This Constitution said to me, 'go and ask them.'  Who are they,  the Principles, prince powers?  We are just the agents here.  If we wish to close the principles out the whole thing, we agents arrogate ourselves the task of being the principles.  Yet the when the contract says the agents stop here,  come to us only when it comes to fundamental issues.  We shall not be acting constitutionally.  

Again I am saying that I am not talking about whether it is good or not,  but I am simply saying, if we are going to act constitutionally,  then we have to follow the whole thing here.  This is the problem.

There is another conceptual problem.  The hon. Mover says,  and I will try to be as clear as I can in this one, the referendum is about my right,  his right,  her right,  she will not fear any more,  it is her right of association.  I am saying, a referendum is not about the freedom of association,  it is about the results of so associating.  Shall I repeat this?  A referendum is not about my right to associate,  the Constitution says you may associate as you want,  but having so associated, what about the governors of Uganda?  If Mr. Mayanja Nkangi, Mukasa or whatever,  goes in a corner and forms a party,  if people say yes,  he becomes President.  The other system says, 'no, everybody is part of us, you go and speak, if they elect you, you become President.'  

Now I am saying, I can associate.  But what is worrying the people down there is the result of your doing certain things a certain way.  That is all.  To me, this is how I see it.  While I support the principle of association,  how are we going to solve this problem of pluralisation?  De-pluralisation was there in 1995, de-pluralisation has continued here, co-pluralisation is outside there, so how do we in a democratic system, solve issues of pluralisation?  The only way is to go and ask them,  ask the people.  The people are there,  although they are in the minority as of now,  the most they can ask for now is unimpeded and unrestricted chance to canvass only,  subject to the law.  They are asking for a chance to put their case to those people who control this country.  The people in Kinkizi,  the people in Arua,  and the people in Kalungu west.  This is how I see it.  I have always been among the minority in this country both physically and otherwise,  but I do not support taking up arms.  Of course I will take up arms if another country attacked my own country.  But I am saying,  here we are among the minority.  

If we are going to act constitutionally,  let us go and talk to the people and say, this is unfair.  The way my honourable Friend is doing.  It is unfair to lock out this group.  I guess, and I think I am right, the people of this country do not all think the same way.  They like justice.  If you told them that short people with moustaches should never have lunch every Friday,  they will say you are wrong.  I am appealing to their justice,  I think those people outside there are just.  

As it is now,  I am saying there is a problem which Odoki failed to solve, he gave it to the Constituent Assembly.  The Constituent Assembly failed to solve it and only met it half way tossing it out just like a hot potato.  Then the Constituent Assembly made a Constitution precluding Parliament from solving it by putting there Article 69, by putting there Article 74, by putting there Article 259(2).  So I might ask this question, are we really empowered by this Constitution to solve issues of political systems?  Even if there were no conceptual problems as I have put them, to me isms cannot be solved by candidates' programmes.  

Hon. Atubo and hon. Dick Nyai raised socially and politically very important issues which must be pondered.  They are not very easy questions, they are weighty questions.  Who wants to go through the generations of war?  I have not used that word, let me use it.  If they are shut out,  I do not want it for one and I do not think he wants either.  But the question is,  how do we then move?  Do we move by blocking the Constitution we made, by blocking it without going to the people to say, 'here is a problem people, solve it?'  How do we move?  I for one would choose to say, 'let us go and ask them,  upon our Constitution.' Let no man or woman be stopped from putting the case to the people of Uganda.  Let everybody support this when the Referendum Bill comes to be debated.  Let us convert minorities into a majority position.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.


MR. BAKU RAPHAEL (West Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me opportunity to contribute on this very important motion.  In making this contribution,  I am going to use two arguments,  one is legal and the second one is political.  This is because it is not enough to jump to a political conclusion without a legal basis,  as we sit here in Parliament.  

I would like to concur with the Minister of Justice on the issues which he has raised.  I would like to also stress that the objective of this motion is noble -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I would like to draw your attention to rule 64 of our rules of procedure,  which deals with the manner in which you should conduct yourself when your fellow Member is contributing on the Floor.

MR. BAKU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was saying that the motion is well intentioned,  but the objective which it seeks to achieve cannot be achieved through Amendment of the provision of Article 271 alone, for the reasons which have been already stated.  I would like to say that the operational Article for changing political systems within our Constitution is Article 74. Article 74 is derived from Article (1) of the Constitution which gives sovereignty on taking decision on political systems,  to the people of Uganda.  

It is also based on Article 69 which empowers the people of Uganda to make a decision on a political system of their choice, through referenda or elections.  

When the provision for referenda or elections is made in the Constitution, the way it is operationalised is provided under Article 74.  Article 74(1),  which gives the procedure on how a referendum to change the political system would he held and how it can be requested,  says  "A referendum shall be held for the purpose of changing the political system -(a) if requested by a resolution supported by more than half of all members of Parliament; (b) if requested by a resolution supported by the majority of the total membership of each of at least one half of all the districts councils;  (c) if requested through a petition to the Electoral Commission by at least one tenth of the registered voters from each of at least two thirds of the constituencies for which representatives are required to be elected under paragraph (a) of clause (1) of Article 78 of this Constitution."  This portion talks about the changing of a political system through a referendum.  

Section (2) of the same Article talks about how the political system can be changed through elections.  "The political system may also be changed by the elected representatives of the people in Parliament and district councils by resolution of Parliament supported by not less than two thirds of all members of Parliament upon a petition to it supported by not less than two thirds majority of the total membership of each of at least half of all district councils."  I bring this up because what hon. Omara Atubo is trying to do is to shift from changing the political system by elected representatives of the people in district councils and Parliament,  to election of the President,  which is not provided for as a means of changing the political system.  This is the innovation he is trying to bring up.  

I would also like to take into account that when we elect the President, there are a lot of factors which go into the elections of the President.  That could be one option if it was contemplated seriously.  But when we are electing the President, as it has been mentioned by hon. Minister of Justice,  there are a lot of things which go into the elections.  I am sure if you get a very popular President and he stands for election under a Movement System,  he could win the elections because of the confidence people have in him as a person.  If he stands for political parties, he could also win.  That possibility is there depending on the personality of the President,  especially now that we have already promoted individual merit as a system of being elected in public offices.  People will look more to the integrity and credibility of the person rather than the political system the person stands for.  This has been well demonstrated in the last elections we have had.  

In presidential elections in many constituencies - if I can take the example of Arua - where the President of Uganda, by then Yoweri Museveni, was not seen to be a credible candidate for purposes of the interest of the people of Arua,  they voted against him.  But at the end of the day, they voted for the Members of Parliament who represented the same system as the President stood for.  What did that mean?  It meant that they had confidence in the people they knew better,  who were their sons,  their brothers who stood for the Movement, whom they had confidence in,  who could be able to deliver in the capacity of Members of Parliament - but they did not have such confidence in the presidential candidate.  

That goes to prove that candidates can have the same political affiliation, the same political ideology, but people's regard for them would differ,  and they will vote more for the integrity of the person,  for the confidence they have in the person,  than for the political system.  So for us in Uganda not to leave any room for confusion, we must put the issues separately so that people know that this time we are addressing the issue of political system, and they vote for it as a political system.  On another day they will say, 'now we are voting for presidential candidates', then they will vote for presidential candidates,  because the interests of the people can be catered for in that manner better than when you confuse the two.  

In manifestos for presidential candidates,  you would find the political system is only one item among maybe 20 to 40 items.  So,  I would like this to be very clearly separated.  And that is why I oppose this motion which tries to mix up the election of President with the determination of the political systems.  

My political argument is that the Constitution which we are following has empowered our people to determine the political system of their choice.  They have been empowered to elect their leaders from local councils I,  up to the President;  and they have tested this power, they found it sweet and they would like to exercise it further.  We have put it in the Constitution that the political system is going to be changed by a referendum,  and this Constitution has been popularised already.  People are now eagerly waiting to decide on the political system of their choice through a referendum.  

As hon. Omara Atubo pointed out earlier,  he gave notice of this motion,  and we have been on recess.  I have personally done a bit of consultation in my own constituency and beyond.  What I found in my constituency is that the people of West Moyo appreciate the sovereignty vested in them by the Constitution. They have enjoyed the political rights they have exercised so far and they would like to continue to enjoy these rights to the extent of determining a political system of their choice through a referendum.  People of West Moyo support the principle of the referendum as a means of settling controversial political issues like this one of the referendum.  I have no reason to doubt the gravity of -(Interruptions).

MR. NYAI:  Is the hon. Member in order to very flippantly refer to West Moyo as if there is East Moyo?   We know,  Mr. Speaker,  that there is only one Moyo district?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think it was a slip of the tongue.  The Member very well knows the administrative units in that part of the country,  and I would like to think that it was a slip of the tongue.

MR. BAKU:  I wish the point of hon. Nyai came as a means of seeking clarification.  I would like to state in this House here that I am an MP for West Moyo,  that is the capacity in which I was elected and that is the capacity in which I continue to sit here.

In conclusion,  I would like to state that legally,  I find it not possible to achieve the purpose for moving this motion.  It is misconceived as a way of trying to avoid the referendum.  I find that the political atmosphere in Uganda,  and in my constituency in particular,  is that people are looking forward to exercising their right to determine the political system of their choice through the referendum,  and they are waiting for it to be implemented as soon as it is possible.

Thirdly, I would like to state that according to my legal interpretation,  the first referendum which is provided for in this Constitution under Article 271,  is a mandatory provision that must be held.  As it is stated,  this is unfinished business of the Constituent Assembly and the provision in the law is to give us an opportunity to go through this exercise;  at least the first one,  and the subsequent ones may be avoided.  According to me the first referendum is unavoidable.  It is better we talk to people to prepare for it by mobilisation,  than defend either of the two sides.  Thank you very much.

MR. EKANYA GEOFREY (Youth representative, Eastern):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Members of Parliament, I would wish to appreciate that without the Movement System,  I would perhaps not be in this Parliament,  because it is the first time that the Constitution provided for the interest groups.  But this does not mean that when you are seeing light, you do not see dark things in the same environment.

Today I decided not to have any meal - I did not have breakfast, I have not had lunch - to enable me reflect perfectly on Jesus who died for mankind.  Therefore, I decided to fast today to make sure that there is a good understanding of this motion -(Laughter).  

My position since the aspect of the referendum came up has been very clear.  I decided during the Movement Caucus, I stood up and put a question to His Excellency the President of Uganda and I told him why I do not support the referendum.  I put my question very clearly, he knows my position since then,  and I am sure most Ugandans and most MPs know my position.

Before I go any further, I would like to quote very authoritative writing of a great scholar,  John Steward Mill,  the author of Liberty,  1859.  He argues that,  "To silence an opinion,  we may silence the truth.  If all mankind minus one were of one opinion,  mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one person than he,  if he had the power, would be justified in silencing mankind.  If the opinion is right, they, the people, are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth.  If wrong, they lose what is almost a great benefit,  the clear perception, the livelier impression of truth produced is great".    


Why do I stand up to say that this motion,  according to me,  is good?   The people who may have moved the motion and other people in it,  may be having their own historical background,  but I, as a youth, what do I see in this motion?  This is the key question.  I know hon. Omara Atubo was in the past Government, he was a Minister in the Movement, he is now opposing the Movement.  But I, as Ekanya Geofrey, what good do I see in this motion?  This is the key concern.

I have good faith,  and others may be having good faith, but as we listen, let us ask ourselves,  'what does the silent person in you tell you about this motion as you listen from outside?  What does the silent person in you tell you about this motion?  I have interacted with various youths, but allow me to quote some youths,  or just to give their names.  Nafuna of Mbale told me to support this motion,  Akiteng of Soroti gave me the green light to support this motion,  Kabuzire in Bushenyi gave me the green light to support this motion,  Opio of Kumi gave me the green light to support this motion,  Bagenda of Mukono gave me the green light to support this motion,  Wanyama of Busia gave me the green light to support this motion,  and others that I cannot mention here.  

I am quite sure that most of you are informed by the press.  We had a conference of all the youths in Uganda,  from 15 districts.  They resolved not to support the referendum,  they did not resolve not to support the Movement.  There are two distinct aspects.  Not supporting the referendum does not mean not supporting the Movement.  They resolved so because it is a kind of protest and because of their own reasons.  Among the key reasons that most of the youths gave for not supporting the referendum is the cost.  

If you look back to the last three financial years - and I really appreciate the position of His Excellency the President, he has moved all over this country saying that the youth are going to be given Entandikwa.  He named it the Youth Credit Scheme,  but some people in Government have decided to frustrate it.  For the last three financial years,  Shs 1.9 billion has been budgeted for,  but up to this very day,  the youths have got nothing.  What do you expect them to say about this referendum?  The Government tells them, 'there is no money, and we are going to spend about Shs 40 billion to conduct an exercise that we have an opportunity cost for!"  We could do this through elections.

Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to state the same question that I paused to His Excellency the President.  'Suppose in 1996, Ssemogerere or Mayanja had won the election, what would that mean?'  It would mean that the people of Uganda would have supported multi-parties theoretically and practically though under the Movement.  The candidates were professed multi-partists.  That would mean that the people of Uganda would have wished Uganda to go partyist and therefore, His Excellency himself, if I can remember said, that he would have supported Ssemogerere in initiating the Amendment of the Constitution to return Uganda into partyist.  Therefore, why do we not wait for 2001,  go for elections,  Ekanya stands,  Peter stands, whoever stands;  I stand for Movement, another one stands for parties and then if the one of parties wins, then Uganda goes partist.  If the one of Movement wins,  then Uganda goes Movement and we save this Shs 40 billion and the more cost that the people of Uganda are going to incur within a period of one year.  

By the way, hon. Members, a period of one year of conducting campaigns, elections, rallies, what impact will it have on the economy of Uganda?  The majority of the people of Uganda who engage in agriculture will be obliged to leave their economic activities, mothers and parents will leave gardens, they will be forced to go and attend rallies from July to July - one full year.  Why will we not have the economic slump, why will we not have inflation?  What shall we export?  Because the people will be running up and down in rallies - 'I support the party', 'I support the Movement.'  What impact will it have on the economy?

MR. RWABIITA:  I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that there is a recent example in the States, where multi-partyism is practised.  They elected a President who is a Democrat, and the Congress and Senate were dominated by another party.  So, it is not correct to say that if we go for elections with one candidate for movement and another for parties, we will reflect the wishes of the people as to which system we should use - Movement or Multi-partyism.  Thank you.

MR. EKANYA: Thank you, for your information.  By the way,  Mr. Speaker,  the hon. Member who has just given me information is one of the hon. Members whom I normally consult,  and I thank him for that information.  But we have to take note that at the end of the day,  whether Ugandans resolved to go partyist during this coming referendum in case it takes place,  they will first see who the leader of that party is then support it.  It is not just supporting a policy, philosophy, a theory, a statement, a system;  they say, 'Ekanya is the one I want and I will support him.'  Or, 'hon. Obedmoth is the one I want and I will support him,  period.'  They will not support a theory or a statement on paper.  

That is why I will tell you here that so many multi-partysts voted His Excellency the President,  Yoweri Kaguta Museveni not because he believed in parties,  but they believed he was the right person for this country,  and they will continue supporting him.

Most people have said that parties bring conflict.  Well,  that may also be true.  But does not the Movement also create conflict?  It is debatable.  Allow me to refer to one district where His Excellency the President sent a team to see how to resolve conflicts - and I thank him very much for doing that -  Ntungamo district.  There was serious conflict, people were carrying pangas against each other,  cutting plantations because there were two candidates and both of them were Movementists.  Was that the party?  So, it is the individual,  the greed within humanity that causes us problems.  

There is this document,  Vision 2025.  It is titled, "Prosperous people, harmonious nation, beautiful country, a strategic framework for national development".  Mr. Speaker, this is a document of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, and it is signed by the Minister of Finance.  Allow me to read page 30,  under the heading, 'Politics and Governance:'  "To realise this aspiration,  that is to realise good governance and politics, entails ensuring stable, sustainable and fully functional democratic governance characterised by justice, transparency, accountability, full observance of human rights, freedom of association, politics,  political consciousness, maturity and harmonisation of co-existence among political groups."  Allow me to emphasize this, "and harmonisation of co-existence among political groups,  free regular open elections and smooth transfer of power."  

I wish to appreciate that history is a good teacher.  I for one can say that we have had smooth transfer of power in South Africa,  and everybody will agree with me - apart from those who are not informed - because Mandela has smoothly accepted to transfer power to Thambo Mbeki.  I can say there has been smooth transfer of power in Nigeria. Did Abdu Abubaker require 13 years to transfer power?  No.  He did not require 13 years to transfer power.  

One elder gave me this information that, 'young boy,  if you are sent on a mission like the youth of Uganda have elected you to Parliament,  and your term of five years elapses,  will you tell them that no,  I think I am still the right person to represent you?  Or when you have completed the mission you go back to the people?  What do you do?'  Do I remain here in Parliament and wait for the next Parliament to come and say I am still a Member of Parliament?  I will go back to the people!  Therefore, the movement system, they fought for freedom which I am enjoying, they brought the freedom to the people of Uganda.  Why is it that they do not see that it is good to give the people of Uganda an easy way to decide?  

Why do I say that the referendum is not the easiest way for the people of Uganda to decide?  Because the movement has a well structured system,  well structured from the grassroots.  The people on the other side,  whom I have sympathy for,  do not have a well structured system from the grassroots.  They do not have a well structured system.

As I wind up this debate, I would wish to say that in the spirit of saving us the huge cost that we are to incur,  the time that is going to be wasted,  and to serve this country,  it would be fair enough to have the system of change of governance done through elections,  not through a referendum.  Thank you. 

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda North, Mbarara):  Mr. Speaker, what we are discussing today - although you were not in the Constituent Assembly,  you must have been following the argument in 1994/95 - is a business which we really discussed and resolved after a reasonable amount of debate and consultations and going were made.  I very well recollect that it is true we even went for a recess to consult.  And this is where I agree with hon. Omara Atubo that the issue of changing political systems was such a contentious issue even then,  that we had to go for consultations once or twice in order to ask our constituents and come back to the Constituent Assembly  -(Interruption). 

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the speaker for giving way.  Noting that the Constitution of Uganda to which the speaker is referring is not supposed to be static -(Interruption).

CAPT. GUMA:  I have not referred to the Constitution of Uganda.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Noting that the laws he is referring to are not supposed to be static,  they can change with the times unlike the Bible or the Koran,  is it in order for the speaker holding the Floor to imply that we cannot revisit the laws and change them accordingly?  

THE SPEAKER: I do not think that is what he was implying.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was saying that there was a lot of debate, there were adjournments of the Constituent Assembly to consult so that whatever we finally agreed on was something that was fairly representative of the views of the majority of all Ugandans;  the views of the majority of the adult Ugandans.  I do also correctly recall that about 60 Constituent Assembly delegates went out.  It is 62,  the former chairman is informing me.  62 out of 284 walked out.  But at the end of the day, what finally came out was a position that had been given sufficient time,  energy, focus and resources.  And what finally came out is what is in the Constitution.  

Of course I agree with the views that the Constitution is not sacrosanct, it is not.  It has to be revisited, it has to be amended from time to time as the material circumstances of our society demand.  Nobody is saying it is a static document.  Earlier on I had said that I agree with hon. Atubo that the change of the political systems is a very controversial matter and that is why I think it is very correct that it should be taken to the highest political court in this country for judgement.  Not just representatives to make a decision,  to make a verdict on behalf of the people.  That is why I think that the adult Ugandans above 18 years should make a decision.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker,  I thank hon. Guma for giving way.  I think it is important to inform hon. Guma and this House that nobody,  not even this motion seeks to deprive Ugandans from exercising their sovereignty in deciding the political system that should govern this country.  Let me emphasize again that what the motion is doing is to decide on the method to use in exercising that sovereignty.  

The Constitution very clearly states in Article 1 clause (4) and Article 69 clause (1) that the choice of a political system can be either by elections or referenda.  The transitional provision in the Constituent Assembly, those people decided that let it be by referendum.  We are now saying, can we now revisit the issue and see if it can be decided by election instead of referendum? It will still be the people who will be choosing the system.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA:  I agree with hon. Omara Atubo,  as I said earlier on.  And I respect him because he is my former Minister of Defence.  But in his submission he has narrowed down his argument of democracy to matters that in my view are for electioneering purposes,  he has limited matters of democracy purely to focus on electioneering.  So, this is where I think that the choice of a referendum rather than an election becomes extremely paramount,  that there must be sufficient doors open for the campaigns in the country beginning 3rd July this year,  the year of our Lord;  and that people  should be properly informed that it is an election for this and that.  This,  with no intentions whatsoever of manipulating the thinking of our Ugandans who may not be fully in the know.  

I am saying that the change of political system is a serious matter, that let it go to that political court,  the highest court in this country,  for the sovereign Ugandans to say yes or no.  

Hon. Omara Atubo paused four questions, one, two, three, four. But for me I want to single out one interesting question that was number three.  "If a referendum is held, will it solve the political problems of Ugandan society," he asked.  Hon. Members, there is an intimidating message in this question.  It may, it may not.  Because for sure I know Ugandans in this country who will never accept and respect any political decision, they are there and they will be there.  So nobody is saying that the holding of a referendum is going to stop people who are throwing bombs;  it may, it may not.  Someone legitimately loses an election but goes to Kampala road and throws a bomb or a grenade!

Let me inform you that the interests of the majority of the elite are diametrically opposing the interests of the majority of our peasant society.  So our aspirations are definitely to that extent,  different,  because when you are thrown back from the front bench,  you will start arguing otherwise.  For those who have been to school,  definitely there is a big message in number three.  If it is held, will it solve the political problems of the people of Uganda,  or worsen them?

I want to also say that in my view democracy is a very wide social phenomenon.  It should include among others freedom of the press, freedom of movement, rule of law,  proliferation of civic societies, all these are integral aspects of democracy.  Also medical workers,  to which hon. Lyomoki belongs.  

May I finally say,  Mr. Speaker,  that it may be true that because democracy also has its own internal weaknesses to the extent that where there is a controversy a decision must be made by way of election,  the verdict of that process must be respected.  Uganda is,  in my view,  moving on a fairly democratic path,  a few shortfalls not withstanding.  Yesterday you would not meet Captain Guma in uniform,  today you can fairly talk to him.  So, more of the democratic aspects are being developed, and it should be our effort and intention to promote that effort.  

A referendum,  while it infringes on the fundamental right to associate,  it is also very,  very necessary for the majority to so decide,  because that is part of democracy.  It is part of the democratic process,  although hon. Omara Atubo may not support the movement system,  but he has to live with the decision of the majority,  and it has to be respected.  

I would therefore ask,  what is in the Constitution?  It is true we can amend the constitutional provision if the material circumstances in the society so demand.  Hon. Atubo said that it takes two thirds of Parliament and another portion of the district councils to change a system.  And he said that, 'how can a Parliament that is dominated by movement Members of Parliament,  support a change of a system?  I do not know whether he was talking about this Parliament or the future Parliaments.  That is very interesting.  How did the majority of the Members of Parliament here come to support a given line of political system?  That one is a reflection of the wishes of the majority of the voters in the country,  so this is what should really be respected.  

I would urge Members to shelve and oppose hon. Omara Atubo's motion of amending the Constitution,  to have an election of candidates standing for political systems.  Because as hon. Baku explained - I think his explanation was extremely educative - that it may be possible for people to elect someone on the basis of his personality not necessarily for a given system.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I recognized hon. Lukyamuzi and the Speaker Emeritus.  I am also about to take a certain decision, but before I do so, I would like the two hon. Members to indicate how long they are going to take.  Will that be alright?  Ten minutes will that be sufficient.

MR. LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala):  Mr. Speaker,  I want to persuade the Members to first of all comprehend this seemingly understandable motion.  What hon. Atubo is saying simply is that we have not exploited the electoral programme - the programme of good elections - to the maximum.  And according to Article 69,  elections are seen to be the best avenue through which the people can change a system,  and the referendum is given as an alternative.  

In fact with reference to the Constituent Assembly deliberations,  I am surprised that aware that the referendum was given as an alternative,  we have so many provisions in conflict with or referring to it.  This is why I would like to commend and thank hon. Atubo for having pioneered a democratic exercise to reframe the Constitution amicably.  Mr. Speaker, Uganda's elections,  much as they are improving,  have shortcomings about the electoral order.  Elections here are characterized by rigging and intimidations.  See what is going on in the Mayorship elections in Kampala?  There is confusion because the candidates have only one avenue of addressing the people, and that is collectively.  Suppose they had avenues of addressing people independently,  maybe we would not have that chaos.  I am talking realistically because I as a Member of Parliament in Kampala,  I know what is happening on the ground.  
Turning to hon. Mayanja Nkangi,  he said he is in great support of the referendum,  and I am not surprised.  Hon. Nkangi opposed the motion because at one time when he was so committed to party governance he could not have done that, but there you are  -(Laughter).   

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I want to thank hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way.  I do not want to say it,  but let me say it:  I stand by my principles,  ever.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, with humility I would like to propose that Ugandans should not deceive themselves,  we are sitting on a time bomb.  The Movement has been in power for a whole 14 years;  some successes are there I agree,  but we are living in a scientific age,  an age of challenge, an age of order and an age of orderly ambition.  The Political Parties were not formed to trade in bogoya,  they were formed to contest Government in a peaceful manner,  and you should think about that - I humbly beg you to think about that.  And when you think about it,  you do not commit any crime,  you think about the  scientific and best way of political challenge,  other than eliminating others and sending them away to limbo so that they do not resurrect again.  

I have not received any response to the challenge which is seen in Article 69(2) which talks about the alternative,  or any other political system.  Where do we get the moral authority to confine Ugandans in a referendum of only two political systems? what about the socialists and the federalists?  Do they not have the right to contest in the coming referendum order?  This to me is a challenge, Mr. Speaker,  which I want the hon. Members to look at.  It calls for a realisation that if we put in place a good political order where free and fair elections can take place automatically,  those that will contest will come from various ideologies and when we elect them the appropriate political system will emerge.  

Right now we have so many problems:  we have the problem of poverty,  there is abject poverty on the ground, there many young people looking for employment, some have been loitering in the streets for the last five years,  it has become chronic for them not to be employed,  is that not a problem which would also necessitate a referendum?  Suppose whatever problem emerged warranted the application of a referendum,  how many referenda would we have?  You have the problem of Congo, we have been talking since time immemorial that the President should pull away the forces from the Congo,  Uganda is spending astronomically on war while many people die in hospitals without medication,  the roads are in shambles,  the schools cannot be attended to, all these are issues that would necessitate a referendum.  Government has unilaterally sold off parastatals,  many of these parastatals were the main stay of Uganda's economy especially in the 60's.  All the roads you see,  the basis of those roads is drawn from what was made out of parastatal bodies.  These have been unilaterally sold off, sometimes at give away prices!  Ministers have been forced to resign because of that crime,  and as look on people are getting poorer and poorer.  Would that not necessitate a referendum?  

Developing that point further,  the army here has had fascist leaders for a long time:  Idi Amin, Lutwa, name them.  The army has caused a lot of chaos in this country,  so many people have lost their lives,  should we call for a referendum so that the army goes?  The Police is being probed and President Museveni recently said that at one time he wanted to get rid of the Police.  Should we call for a referendum so that Police goes? 

These are issues which hon. Members should seriously look at.  Parliament was elected in 1996 on the basis of no party politics.  That is how Lukyamuzi also came in,  because I softened my tongue.  But now,  Mr. Speaker,  Parliament today is generally multi-party in nature.  This membership is based on a multi-policy of conceptions with reference to women,  the youth,  the disabled, the multi-partysts,  the young Parliamentarians conception,  to mention just a few.  The point I want to make here is that if you are to calculate the yardstick of quality in politics you should not base it on a referendum or the politics of referenda.  

Before I end my speech,  Mr. Speaker, I would like to get married to history and the results of history.  The Baganda have got a proverb that "you cannot judge anything without reference to history,"  (Ogw'emabega gwe gusala omupya).  What is the history of Uganda's referenda like?  The only sound referendum we have had so far in Uganda was held in 1964 over the lost counties.  Many political analysts associate the 1966 crisis to the lost counties.  Just recently when we were discussing the Land Bill,  it is on record that a crisis was building in Kibaale because the people in Kibaale said that, 'the Baganda who have got land here should leave it to us.'  So, what did the referendum of 1964 solve if up to now they are still problems?

MR. HASHAKA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way. Last year I categorically said it in this Parliament that the people of Kibaale were not against the Baganda,  we were against mailo land. I hope hon. Lukyamuzi were here when I was saying it.

THE SPEAKER: Can you now conclude?  Your ten minutes are over.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  That information does not answer the issue I am raising.  

I am concluding by saying that much as we tried to solve the problem of Kibaale by applying a referendum,  up to now there are developing problems related to the same phenomenon.  Therefore, a referendum may not solve a problem, especially when it is of a framework like the one we are discussing.

Finally,  I would like to quote one prominent constitutional scholar by the name of Professor Ivon Jenis in is book - which I think is well known to Prof. Nsibambi and others - Prof. Jenis had this to say about elections: "If people's endeavours cannot be reflected in an electoral programme,  then something is wrong with that programme."  And he is a distinguished constitutional scholar who many Ugandans should endeavour to consult.  

In conclusion I would like to say that if the people are supreme as Article 1 states,  let us be seen to consult them through meaningful electoral orders.  There is no evidence on the ground that Ugandans have been fully consulted through the elections,  because as I speak now there are many, many, pitfalls in the electoral order.  This Parliament owes an explanation to the people of Uganda whose status is constitutionally supreme,  for having invested as much as Shs 3.8 billion to streamline one programme - the Movement programme - which programme has an alternative in the future,  while ignoring the political party programme.  I beg to end here, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAPAKHABULO JAMES (Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.  As I promised,  I will be brief because most of the arguments have been well covered by hon. Mayanja Nkangi, hon. Baku and others.  But,  I would like to thank hon. Omara Atubo for a very well prepared and spirited argument in presenting his case before this House. 

I wish to say right from the outset that I do not agree with his submission,  and I will deal with only one aspect of it.  The purpose of the motion is to get authority from the House to introduce a Bill to amend the Constitution,  the effect of which would be to avoid the automatic referendum due next year,  but that is not all.  It is actually to avoid referenda on governance with the argument that referenda on governance impeach,  and are unfair to the rights of association.  

Let us then assume that Parliament approves this request and hon. Omara Atubo brings his  Bill here; and let us assume that that Bill is carried and Article 271 is amended in the manner he is proposing.  The question was asked earlier of what effect that would have on governance - if that is really the main objective of this exercise.  

My answer is that it would have no effect, for two simple reasons;  to amend Article 271 the way it is proposed does not affect the independent existence of Article 74.  In other words, even this very Parliament today,  having voted to agree to the motion and to go ahead and amend 271,  the same Parliament is empowered by the Constitution came the year 2000,  the fourth year of this Parliament - look at Article 74(3) or (4)  -Interruption)-.  Thank you, hon. Prime Minister, it is 74(3), the resolution or petitions for the purposes of changing the political system shall be taken only in the fourth year of the term of any Parliament.  

The proposal is to remove Article 271 and change it to say that "the system of governance should be decided by presidential elections in the year 2001."  That is what the Amendment is all about.  But Article 74 will continue to exist in its independent right. And because of that,  this House,  come January, February or any time,  will have the power under the Constitution,  to call for a referendum on governance.  And the Electoral Commission will have no choice but to hold it because 74 will have been invoked.  Parliament under Article 74 is empowered to call a referendum,  if more than half of the Members of this House so decide.  

Next year will be the fourth year of this Parliament.  Should we think that we do not want to look stupid and now support hon. Omara Atubo,  and then turn round and call for a referendum next year,  the district councils can do so under Article 74, independent of us here.  Article 74(1)(b) says, "a referendum shall be held for the purposes of changing a political system,  if requested by a resolution supported by the majority of the total membership of each of at least one half of all districts councils."

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  Is the hon. Member on the Floor correct to say that this Parliament has no chance of changing the system,  and go on to mislead the House by misinterpreting Article 74(2) which reads,  "The political system may also be changed by the elected representatives of the people in Parliament and district councils by resolution of Parliament supported but not less than two thirds of the Members of Parliament upon a petition to it supported by not less than two thirds majority of the total membership of each of at least half of all the district councils."  That means that the whole thing starts here and then gains strength from the districts.  It is therefore very wrong to say that it is the districts to originate it.  Is he in order to mislead us to that extent - he a former Chairman of the CA?

MR. WAPAKHABULO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your ruling.  If there is anyone misleading the House it is hon. Nsambu ­-(Laughter)- I have not read 74(2) into this microphone.  I was quoting 74(1)(b) "a referendum shall be held for the purposes of changing the political system,  if requested by a resolution supported by the majority of the total membership of each of at least one half of all district councils."  For purposes of 74(1)(b) Parliament may as well not exist.  In other words, there are situations where this House is powerless on the question of the referendum.  But if hon. Omara Atubo would like to avoid all referenda on governance,  then he must call for Amendment of 271 to delete the automatic one and also amend 74.  But to amend 74,  you need a referendum -(Laughter).

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Thank you very much, hon. Wapakhabulo. This is a matter of interpretation of the provision of the law and really,  I would also like you to assist me in possibly understanding these provisions more.  Do you not think that the import of Article 74 is really in changing the political system already adopted?  In other words you only apply Article 74 when a system has already been adopted.  For example if a referendum is held next year and a system is therefore adopted,  when you want to change the political system adopted next year then you apply Article 74.  But you only do that during the fourth year and it is not compulsory that you bring it every four years. If nobody moves successfully under any of the methods provided in Article 74,  the system can continue for four, five, ten, twenty, thirty years.  

The calcification I am seeking from you is this,  if this motion goes through so much because of the wisdom of this House rather than because of its lack of wisdom, that means that every five years when an election is held, it will actually be simultaneously adopting that system,  and a political system which is adopted by election can still be changed.  I am not saying it should not be changed.  You can still use Article 74.  If for example the adoption is made next year,  in the year 2005, you can use Article 74 to change the political system which was adopted by election.  I have no intention, Mr. Speaker, of tackling Article 74.

MR. WAPAKHABULO:  Thank you.  Yes, in other words you are creating a complication for us,  because if you remove 271(2) and (3) you create real confusion.  I agree 74 was intended to relate to an adopted system of governance,  but that adoption starts with 271.  If you remove 271 (2) and (3), you leave us with only 271(1) and (4).  Article 271(1) is talking of the first public elections after the coming into force of the Constitution.  The language was put that way because it was presumed that there was going to be the first automatic referendum to which Article 74 would apply.  But if you remove the automatic referendum, the only other thing left for us to fall back to is Article 74,  and that is the only way we can decide the governance.  Otherwise how else do we decide on governance?  We have to go to Article 74 which will be the only operational provision of the Constitution.

I am saying that if you want to avoid a referendum on governance at all costs, then amend Article 271 to avoid the automatic one, and then amend it as well.  But to amend Article 74,  you need a referendum.  So, it will be a referendum on a referendum. The question arises, should we go through a referendum to decide whether we should go to a referendum?  It becomes a difficult question.  That is why I am saying that I find it very difficult to recommend to this House that we should adopt the path which hon. Omara Atubo is suggesting.  

Let me also comment on one or two little things which he suggested.  One;  can the right of association be so derogated that the attributes of it are totally destroyed?  My answer is yes, in some cases, because there is nothing more sacrosanct than the right to life.  But our laws say, if you kill a person, they take away your right to life through the court system, they kill you.  In that case, the right to life is prejudiced and derogated 100 per cent,  but in this case no one is derogating the right of association 100 per cent.  The Constitution and its provisions are saying that the right of association exists,  except the right to organise is restricted.  We are not restricting the right to associate, we are restricting the right to organise.  When time comes, the imposition on the right to organise shall be lifted.  Otherwise, you can form all associations that are lawful including associations called political parties.  That is why Article 270 continues in existence,  for the existing political parties,  but their right to organise - for historical reasons - is restricted.  I thought I should clarify on that.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from hon. Wapakhabulo,  with the reference to the statement he made that the rights of people could be restricted due to historical reasons.  What are those historical reasons?

MR. WAPAKHABULO:  I do not have to repeat them, you all know them.  But I think I am running out of time.  Let me put it this way:  the restriction on the right to organise was necessary,  in the public interest,  to enable the people of Uganda enjoy their right to peace,  that is it.  It is for historical reasons and it was stated that the case of Quebec and Australia are territorial issues upon which you can rightly hold a referendum, this is not a territorial issue.  For Quebec, the argument in Canada is about the right of association, whether those Canadians who live in a geographical description called Quebec should continue to be associated with the other Canadians who live in the other province under one citizenship called Canada. It is the right to associate over which a referendum is being held regularly.  

The right of monarchy in Australia is not territorial. There are those people who like monarchy and those who do not.  The referendum is on a state of mind and belief.  I believe in monarchies,  as my Friend Lukyamuzi believes in kingdoms and because I am a republican from the mountain, I do not understand him, but those are our minds, our beliefs, and not territorial claims.  Actually, you can hold a referendum on a state of mind,  like it is has been regularly held in some of the countries.  But the Quebec case, like the one of the European Union,  and Norway, is whether the Danish or the Norwegians should associate with other Europeans in an association called the European Union.  In Uganda here,  we are associated under the citizenship called Uganda and when you want to break away,  you are breaking away from an association of Ugandans.  An association can be at a level of a football club, it can be at the level of a nation.  You cannot therefore say that referenda can never be held on the right of association,  that is my argument.  

If it is argued that referenda is divisive, what is more divisive than elections?  If you are going to elect a President, you must be divided.  Today in Kampala, people are carrying razor blades to cut others over mayoral elections.  So, you cannot say that referenda is more divisive than presidential elections and therefore we should decide the governance of Uganda through presidential elections.  I would not believe that we should tamper with the present arrangements.  We have implemented the various transitional provisions of this Constitution.  Right from 1986,  we set up a transitional court of appeal,  now there is a permanent one.  We put in place a transitional Electoral Commission, now we have a permanent one.  We have moved on to implement parts of Article 271, on presidential, parliamentary and Local Government elections.  As we widen the horizon of our democratisation,  all that is left is to hold a referendum on governance.  


Then in comes Article 74.  The Councils are there,  the Parliament is there, the question of whether or not we should vote in a referendum on governance will come up as regularly as people of Uganda should wish.  I would therefore wish to urge Members of the House that there is no case,  particularly for the reason I gave, that passing this Amendment does not actually take us far in terms of the constitutional amendments as they are.  I therefore oppose the motion, Mr. Speaker.

MOTION

MS. EGUNYU:  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I believe the hon. Member is moving this motion under rule 63 of our rules of procedure.  This particular rule reads as follows:  "After a question has been proposed in the House or in a Committee of the whole House and debated,  a Member may move 'That the question be now put',  and, unless it appears to the Speaker that the motion is an abuse of rules of the House or an infringement on the rights of any Member, the question 'That the question be now put'  shall be put immediately and decided without amendment or debate."

The subject matter of this debate is very fundamental to our efforts in promoting constitutionalism, democracy and good governance.  While I would not say that the motion is motivated by ill-will or that it amounts to an abuse of our rules,  due to the importance of the subject matter, I cannot put the question now.  I have some Members on my list who would like to contribute but who cannot contribute now because we have passed the time limit that I had set for this matter.  For this reason, I am reluctant to rule that the motion amounts to abuse of our rules of procedure,  and I suggest that we give time to these other Members who would like to contribute.   I do not know whether the hon. Member still insists on the motion.  
 
MS. EGUNYU:  I do not insist on the motion,  but I would like to point out the lack of quorum,  Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, given that we still have to move ahead and conclude this matter, I will adjourn the House to tomorrow 10 o'clock.  The house is adjourned.  But as I rise, I would like to make this announcement - which means you are all to sit down again.  

All Members of the Public Accounts Committee, Committee on Economy, Committee on Commissions,  Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and all Chairpersons of all Sessional Committees are required to attend the seminar on legislative budget review and oversight.  The seminar will take place at the Sheraton Hotel starting on Monday 21st to 24th June 1999,  and the sessions will commence at 9.30 a.m and end with lunch.  That is important, 'end with lunch', 1.00 p.m. to 2.00 p.m,  daily.  All Members are urged to attend this important seminar and keep time.  It is good for us.  Thank you.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow 10 o'clock.


(The Parliament rose at 6.09 p.m and adjourned until 10.00 a.m. on Friday,  June 18th,  1999).
