Wednesday, 18 June 2008

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we should give ourselves some ten minutes so that we start at exactly a half past. Isn’t that better? Okay, proceedings suspended to half past. 

(The proceedings were suspended at 2.20 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.30 p.m. _)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: I had something to say - (Laughter)- I think in a way he is right. I was here before, but the only communication I made was to suspend the proceedings for ten minutes. But I had something to say. 

I welcome you, honourable members, and as I informed you yesterday, there was a meeting of the Business Committee which looked at the kind of business we have and actually allotted time to handling it. I do not know whether you have received the copies but I think I will put it on record. This is the business between 18th June and 28th August. 

Between 18th and 19th, we should be handling the Uganda Road Fund Bill and other small businesses. Then, between 24th June to 3rd July there will be a debate on his Excellency, the President’s Address to Parliament on the State of the Nation. And then on 8th July, presentation, consideration of the report of the Budget Committee on medium-term framework paper. 

Between 9th and 23rd July, committees meet in the morning and afternoon to discuss budget proposals with the sector ministries; between 24th and 31st  July, motion that Parliament do resolve itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of the revised revenue expenditure estimates for fiscal year 2007/08. The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for fiscal year 2008/09; then between 5th August and 28th August, committee of supply. 

Those are the main items that we will be dealing with in that period, but there will be other matters; bills and motions and so forth.

Again during the meeting, an important matter was raised; that was about cotton. There is a report which is supposed to be tabled by the committee on Agriculture and this one should come as soon as possible because I think this is the planting period and therefore we should also resolve ourselves on that. 

Another issue that was also considered were the reports on Nakasero Market, the report on Bat Valley Primary School and land sales at Port bell or Silver Springs. As we remember, honourable members, we set up special committees to deal with the legal aspects of these reports and we are waiting for these committees to submit the report so that we can comprehensively debate these reports. So, I appeal to the Members concerned to expedite the process so that the matter can be handled. 

2.35
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to take this opportunity to inform you that tomorrow, I will be opening a conference in Gulu on the educational system which is required under the recovery programme normally known as PRDP. I shall be opening it at 10.00 a.m. sharp. I had already informed hon. Prof. Latigo about it and I had requested him to inform other people because as you know, this is a very important matter. We want to ensure that the Northern part of Uganda recovers completely. I thank you. 

2.36
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, and this is to do with the control of Malaria in this country. We know that our government is extremely committed to eradicating Malaria and one of the methods the government is using is indoor residual spraying using various chemicals including but not limited to the use of DDT, and Kanungu District which I represent is one of the districts that benefited from the spraying exercise using icon sometime back, and it was due for a second round of spraying this June. 

A few weeks ago, I read in the media that the Ministry of Health had started spraying using DDT in Northern Uganda, particularly in Apac and Oyam districts. But I also saw that some farmers had petitioned court and court halted the exercise of spraying with DDT. I have also been informed by the district leaders in Kanungu that the Ministry of Health has also halted the second round of spraying in Kanungu and that has created some tension within the district because Malaria is a very big problem. So, I just wanted to raise this matter and request the government, specifically the Ministry of Health, to clarify to us what the way forward is in terms of fighting Malaria using the indoor residual spraying in view of the fact that court has halted the process. So, I wanted that clarification from Government. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister.

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Baryomunsi for raising this question. However, for the last two weeks, I have been away so I do not have an update on this matter. I will, when I get back to the ministry this evening, try to find out and tomorrow I will be in position to inform the House what the position is. I thank you. (Mr Dombo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Are you supplementing what hon. Baryomunsi said?

2.39
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, I will beg your indulgence because the Prime Minister has just stood before this House and given very important information about the PRDP programme and education programme in Northern Uganda. But, you know and as Members of Parliament we believe that the successful implementation of the PRDP programme depends on the security situation in Northern Uganda. 

Until now, we have been receiving assurances about the security situation in Northern Uganda. However, this afternoon - and I did raise it with the Minister of Internal Affairs - I heard information on radio about pronouncements being made in Nairobi by the chief negotiator on the issues relating to Joseph Kony. Specifically he did say that he does not support the use of force or regional force to pursue Kony. Secondly, he said that until the ICC lifts the ban then Kony cannot peacefully get engaged in this. 

I wanted to seek clarification from the Office of the Prime Minister or a relevant minister, how successful is the PRDP programme going to be, given the current development? And, what exactly is happening about the security situation of Kony and the peace process? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.41
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Dombo for raising the question of the progress of the peace process. As colleagues know, the negotiations were concluded, agreements all signed, except the final peace agreement which is awaiting signatures of Joseph Kony and Yoweri Museveni as key leaders both of LRA and of Government of Uganda. President Yoweri Museveni has been ready all along to append his signature but Joseph Kony as you know has been elusive. 

The Government of Uganda has been reviewing this matter and did decide that we should first of all get a report from the chief mediator on the matter and Government yesterday did receive a copy of the report from the chief mediator. We are also awaiting a copy of the report by the special envoy of the UN Secretary General, President Chissano, which is due to be received soon. After the receipt of both reports, Government is going to review its position, take a decision on the way forward and Parliament will be accordingly informed.  

With regard to the PRDP, I am happy that the Rt hon. Prime Minister is going tomorrow to open a conference on issues to do with PRDP and education in Gulu. This is eloquent testimony that Government had earnestly embarked on a programme to rebuild the North. Government is of the view that the peace which is now prevailing in Northern Uganda is going to remain; Northern Uganda is going to remain peaceful and therefore the time for rebuilding the North is now.

So, I would like to take this opportunity to ask the political leaders in the country, especially the colleagues from Northern Uganda, to really come in full force and support the programme of PRDP, of rebuilding Northern Uganda and also of ensuring that our people who have been in camps all go back to their villages to rebuild their homes. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much.  Hon. Opange before you come in. we have in the public gallery, debating club students and teachers from St Joseph’s Secondary School Naggalama in Mukono District. You are welcome to Parliament. Yes, hon. Opange.

2.44
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank you for availing me this time to make a statement of national importance in this august House. 

Mr Speaker, while I was carrying out my duties in Pallisa County, I was informed by the director of health services that there was a Cholera outbreak in most parts of Pallisa District and as we talk, 17 people have so far lost their lives because of the outbreak of Cholera. These areas which are affected are in Kasoddo Sub County, Kokonyo Sub County, Gyelekura and Angule in Pallisa County, as well as Nanoko in Kibuku Sub County. 

Mr Speaker, when the health practitioners went and tested the water, they found that most of the water ponds which the people are using were infected by the bacteria which cause the Cholera. What is worrying is that while the medical practitioners are doing their work in Pallisa, you find that there are so many things lacking in the Pallisa hospitals. The medical equipment for testing is not there; the drugs, including the gloves for examining the patients are not there; the fluids - when people are dehydrated they need fluids - are not there. It is a very appalling situation for which my people are calling for serious intervention from the government. 

When you visit Pallisa Hospital, which is the district hospital, the sewerage system has broken down; the toilets are non-functional and the patients help themselves on the verandas. When you go behind the hospital you get faeces on the veranda, which is actually a very appalling situation. 

Mr Speaker, we really call upon the Ministry of Health to intervene and deliver the necessary drugs and the necessary fluids and clothes to the district so that the situation can be calmed down. Thank you very much.

2.46
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I too rise on a matter of national importance. In Manafwa District, for about two weeks now, we have been having the problem of people having diarrhoea and vomiting and dying 

The initial tests showed negative, but it has now been proved that it is Cholera. So far 16 people have died in the sub counties of Bugobero, Sibanga and this morning I heard that two people in Buwawala sub country, Bubulo East, died. It is a problem in the whole area. It is affecting Mbale, Manafwa and Butaleja districts. There are two centres that have been set up, one at Bugobero sub county and another at Busiu in Mbale.

The cause is the unhygienic conditions in the area. There is very low latrine coverage and water is contaminated. It is true that initially we did not know what the cause was. However, that has been established and everything is being done by the districts to ensure that people are safeguarded.  

The number of patients is increasing every moment, but with victims having apprehension of going to health units for treatment. It is actually only three out of those who died who had sought medical assistance; the rest died in their homes.  

I would like to report that we have the problem of the community, including leaders, not accepting to take people who are sick to the health units because they have the feeling that the units do not have drugs. There are usually not enough drugs and this has made many patients not to respond quickly by going to the health centres for treatment. That is the problem.

There are very high incidences of Malaria over and above normal to the extent that drugs have become insufficient. This information has been brought to the attention of the Ministry of Health and in fact the respective district health officers had even talked to the minister about this problem. I also this morning was at the ministry to give the same information. Mr Speaker, it is my prayer that the Ministry of Health responds by providing drugs.  

The good news is that patients who are in the health centres are positively responding to the drugs being administered. This means that if people keep accessing treatment, there will be an improvement. But because we have only a few health centres, this very bad disease is likely to spread with our people dying at their homes. It is on this note that I now call upon the Ministry of Health to rush to our rescue because as of now, nothing has been done on the ground. Though a district team has been put in place and some little money released, it is not enough to handle the problem. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.49
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi):  Thank you very much. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think you will agree with me that there is something fundamentally wrong with the Ministry of Health. This problem is not only localized to Pallisa or Manafwa, the sector requires a more sustainable prescription. In fact, I was prompted to suggest that we need to find time and allocate a special session for us to discuss the Ministry of Health as a whole. You can allocate say, two or three hours in one of the sessions and handle the health sector. 

I am so saddened that it is over three weeks ago when reports about people dying of vomiting and diarrhoea in Pallisa started reaching Ministry of Health as if –(Interjections)- the hon. Minister of Health is actually from Pallisa. But that besides the point, I thought that he would have probably even got this information much earlier as he toured his constituency before it went to the press. 

I am saddened that the local population now has responded the way those in Manafwa have done. People have lost confidence in going to the health units because of lack of supplies. In fact, my colleague from Manafwa first said that even the local leaders are discouraged of taking patients to the health units for lack of drugs though he later on reported that patients are positively responding to the treatment.  So, I think we require to deal with Ministry of Health in totality and not just about a single disease x and then finish off only to wait for another epidemic. There is something fundamental.  

I would like to wind up by saying that before that debate starts, the Ministry of Health owes this House an apology for some of its laxity. Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter; today it is Pallisa and Manafwa, tomorrow it might be Masaka. (Laughter) That kind of stuff should not be allowed. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  We are aware of the outbreak of Cholera in the districts of Mbale, Butaleja and Pallisa and our people are already on the ground.  As I speak, the Minister of Health, hon. Mallinga, has travelled to that region. He is going to be there attending to this very matter with one of our directors up to Saturday. 

With regard to the hygiene and sanitation, I would like to say that as Members of Parliament we have got a role to play.  We should not just leave it to the Ministry of Health because people who get Cholera definitely have eaten faeces or food or drank water that is contaminated with faeces. That is what I mean. 

When the hon. Member of Parliament mentions that the latrine coverage in his constituency is very low, we should not blame the Ministry of Health alone. It is part of our duty, as leaders, to mobilise our people together with the local leaders in the local governments to ensure that our people dig latrines; that our people boil water before they drink it; and that our people wash their hands with soap after visiting latrines.  These are very simple practices, which if the people practiced we would do away with things like Cholera. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS 

2.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In accordance with the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on Table the annual report of the Auditor General for the year ended 30 June 2007 Volume 3 of the local governments. I beg to lay. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee take it up for study and report.

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2007 VOLUME 4 LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

2.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr John Odit): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the annual report of the Auditor General for the year ended 30 June 2007 Volume 4 on statutory corporations. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee take it up, study and report to Parliament.

BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW US$ 100 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE KAMPALA INSTITUTIONAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (KIIDP)

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on Table a brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow US$100 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development programme.  I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee take it up and subsequently report to us.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.59
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a short statement to Parliament on incidents that recently took place which involved public order management issues.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, on 12 June 2008, this august House passed - (Mr Otto rose_) - the statement is already submitted to the Clerk.

MR OTTO: Mr Speaker, I thank the minister for anticipating what I was going to say.  But since this is a very important statement, we would prefer to have the copies before he even proceeds.

DR RUGUNDA: Hon. Otto, there is immediate response to your concern.  So, Mr Speaker, on 12 June 2008, this august House passed a motion to set up a select committee to investigate, among other things, the conduct of the Uganda Police Force, following incidents that involved three honourable members of Parliament namely: hon. Nabilah Sempala, hon. Susan Nampijja and hon. Sam Lyomoki. 

It is routine for the Uganda Police Force, through its professional standards unit, to investigate all incidents including incidents such as this. In the meantime, Police have given me a preliminary report of their findings, which is the basis of my presentation to this august House this afternoon.

Mr Speaker, honourable members will note that the reported incidents and attempts by the Democratic Party leadership to hold a public rally at the Clock Tower on 7 June 2008, took place soon after the Constitutional Court issued a ruling on the petition that was filed in 2005, by a one Muwanga Kivumbi. The ruling nullified Section 32(2) of the Police Act. This section provided the Inspector General of Police with powers to prohibit assemblies in cases where there is likely to be a breach of peace. 

Honourable members will however note that the ruling left intact Section 32(1) of the same Act which provides for regulatory powers of the Police over assemblies and processions. In addition, the ruling did not affect Section 35 which empowers the Minister of Internal Affairs to gazette where it shall be unlawful to convene an assembly without a permit from an unauthorized person. It is on the basis of Section 35 of the Police Act that the Minister of Internal Affairs issued the Statutory Instrument No.53 of 2007.  

Related to this, honourable members are aware that the court ruling did not affect Article 212 of the Constitution.  This Article provides for the functions of the Police force. These functions include protecting life and property, preserving law and order, and detecting and preventing crime.  

Honourable members will in addition note that the ruling did not affect Article 43 of the Constitution. Article 43 provides for enjoyment of rights and freedoms of individuals provided they do not infringe on the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.  

In view of the above, it is not true, Mr Speaker, to say that the ruling gives unregulated freedom to hold rallies and demonstrations.  It is also not true that the Police have no more role in managing public order.  

Having been guided by the Learned Attorney General in clarifying the legal issues connecting with the Constitutional Court ruling, let me take this opportunity to inform the august House about the circumstances that surrounded the incidents in question.

The first incident was the attempted rally at the Clock Tower by the Democratic Party. Mr Speaker, it may be on the basis of the mistaken interpretation of the Constitutional Court ruling that leaders of the Democratic Party attempted to organize a rally at the Clock Tower grounds.  This was in violation of Section 35 of the Police Act. 

As mentioned above, Statutory Instrument No.53 of 2007 obliges organizers of assemblies in gazetted areas to apply for, and first get permit from the Inspector General of Police or his authorized representative, before convening such an assembly. In the case of the DP rally, this was not done. The Police only learnt about the rally from the media, where the DP leaders declared that they would not be bound to seek permission from the Police in spite of the fact that Kampala is a gazetted area. 

As a sign of goodwill and in a bid to assist the Democratic Party, the Police wrote to the President General of the Democratic Party advising that Clock Tower grounds were not suitable and that they should get an alternative venue. The following were the reasons the Police gave:

•	Security reasons; The proximity to the Kampala-Entebbe highway, and the nasty experience with Mabira forest demonstration on the 12th of April 2007.
•	Sheikh Kakeeto, whose sect claims ownership of the grounds, informed the Police that they had not given permission to the DP to hold a rally there.
•	There is a court order stopping holding of any function on these grounds because ownership of the grounds is a subject of dispute in court.

Honourable members will remember that DP leaders continued their campaign of defiance in the media. Police made a pre-emptive deployment at the Clock Tower grounds and surrounding areas as well as the rest of the city.  

Although, the rally at the Clock Tower did not go ahead, the DP leaders resorted to addressing the public for most of the day from their offices at City House along William Street using a pre-installed public address system which they had locked in their offices. 

Mr Speaker, they had not sought clearance from Police to use the public address system in a public place as required by Section 40 of the Police Act. This act not only violated Statutory Instrument 53/2007, it was also an offence of common nuisance under Section 160(1) of the Penal Code Act. In addition, it violated Section 80 of the National Environment Management Authority -(Laughter)- on noise levels.  

Mr Speaker, definitely there is a rule of law in the country. The business community had earlier on lodged a complaint about noise levels. The complaint was registered at Nakasero as SD/07/07/06/08. Therefore, working with NEMA inspectors, the Police, acting on authority granted by Section 80 of the NEMA Act, were forced later in the day to enter into the building, arrest the operators of the public address system and equipment. Four suspects have since appeared in court in relation to this incident.

Mr Speaker, I will now make a few comments on the incidents that involved hon. Susan Nampijja. On the 7 June 2008, hon. Nampijja organised a bicycle rally and a football match at Kitebi Primary School in Nateete. This was done without reference to and support of the Police. As a consequence, no security was provided for the rally and there was no extra traffic and crowd control measures put in place for the race. In case of motor rallies or marathons, there is notification which is given to the Police as a routine so that the Police can play their role. 

Absence of security and crowd control measures resulted in one of the cyclists, a one James Kaliisa, a boda boda rider who was participating in the race, being knocked by a trailer along Masaka road. He died instantly. I pray that organisers of such events learn from this lesson. May the soul of the deceased rest in eternal peace.

Mr Speaker, the DPC Katwe having been informed about the rally, alerted the anti-riot Police about the unlawful assembly that had been convened at Kitebi Primary School in Nateete and instructed him to disperse it. 

At Kitebi Primary School, the commander of the anti-riot police informed one of the organisers, one Ken Lukyamuzi, to disperse the crowd. Mr Lukyamuzi complied; unfortunately the crowd ignored his compliance. Soon thereafter hon. Nampijja arrived with a larger crowd and entered the compound. On being informed to disperse, the crowd became rowdy, prompting the Police to disperse it. Hon. Nampijja was assisted out of the grounds by the Police –(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, honourable members will note that this rally was organised on the day of the attempted DP rally at the Clock Tower grounds. This created suspicion that the two assemblies were connected, especially as Police had got information suggesting that the DP, in order to overstretch the Police, planned to concentrate crowds at different points in the suburbs of the city and then move on to the Clock Tower grounds. 

Mr Speaker, in another incident, on the 9 June 2008, hon. Nampijja was rescued by the Police when she was caught up in chaos between two rival groups in a market in Ndeeba. Members of the Twegatte Ndeeba Women’s Group Limited went to clean the market and to collect dues from traders at the market. A rival group, led by an LC3 Councillor, Mr Sekidde James Ssalongo, confronted the women’s group over the ownership of the market. In the ensuing clash, 13 persons were injured. 

Members of the women’s group apprehended councillor Sekidde. He was however rescued by a bigger crowd. Both groups became rowdy and engaged in running battles, throwing stones at each other. The Police called in reinforcements and contained the situation. 

Mr Speaker, the honourable member of Parliament for Lubaga South, hon. Susan Nampijja, arrived during the scuffle between the two groups and was reportedly assaulted in the process. She called the Police to her rescue and she was indeed rescued by Police. Investigations into this case are continuing. (Laughter)

The incident that involved hon. Sam Lyomoki

Mr Speaker, on the 9 June 2008, hon. Sam Lyomoki, Member of Parliament for Workers went to Mbale Hospital and informed the Principal Hospital Administrator, Mr Henry Lwigale, that he wanted to tour and acquaint himself with the problems of the hospital. The principal hospital administrator referred hon. Lyomoki to the medical superintendent who denied hon. Lyomoki permission to tour the hospital. Honourable Lyomoki insisted that he would tour the hospital whether authorities wanted it or not.   

The hospital authorities requested the assistance of the RDC and Police to persuade the honourable MP to leave the hospital grounds as he was interfering with the hospital’s operations. Hon. Lyomoki refused to leave; he spent the night in the female ward (Masaba Wing) of the hospital. (Laughter) The following day, the RDC summoned hon. Lyomoki and cautioned him that he would be arrested if he did not leave the hospital. Honourable Lyomoki went back to the hospital after the meeting with the RDC; he was arrested and charged with disobeying lawful orders under section 117 of the Penal Code. He was released on bond. (Laughter)  Thereafter, hon. Lyomoki proceeded to Tororo Hospital where he acted in a similar way. The Police were called in and hon. Lyomoki was removed from the hospital.  

The incident that involved hon. Nabilah Sempala

Mr Speaker, on 10 June 2008, the divisional police commander, Old Kampala got information that hon. Nabilah Sempala was addressing a rally in St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market. He sent the OC Police Post, Owino Market to cross check the information and if correct, stop the rally, as it was illegal to have a rally in a market. Indeed, the officer found hon. Nabilah Sempala addressing a rally using a public address system. The Police officer approached hon. Nabilah Sempala and inquired from her whether she had obtained the necessary authority to hold a public rally in the area. In addition, the officer wanted to know whether she had been cleared by the Police to use the public address system. (Laughter) 

There is evidence that hon. Nabilah Sempala responded by striking the Police officer with the microphone -(Interjections)- and hitting him in the chest. Subsequently, the DPC Old Kampala arrived at the scene, and upon confirming that hon. Nabilah Sempala was not only contravening the law but also struck a Police officer on duty, ordered for her immediate arrest. It was in the process of effecting the arrest by female constables that a scuffle resulted when the hon. Nabilah Sempala resisted arrest. Eventually, hon. Nabilah Sempala and six others were arrested and taken to Old Kampala Police Station. They were later released on Police bond as investigations continue.

Mr Speaker, there allegations that hon. Nabilah Sempala was undressed, brutalised and humiliated. The Police are studying the video footage of the incident and other evidence to establish whether indeed the Police officers used more force than necessary to effect the arrest and whether the allegations are true. In the event that the investigations establish any wrong doing on the part of any Police officer, appropriate action will be taken.

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure this august House that the government and indeed the leadership of the Uganda Police Force does not condone indiscipline or unprofessional conduct in the performance of Police duties. To ensure that the Police always act professionally, the leadership of the Uganda Police Force set up a professional standards unit (PSU) to fight professional misconduct. In the last ten months alone, the unit has received and investigated 1,089 cases out of which, action has been taken in 586 cases and 503 cases are still under investigation.

Alleged disruption of the FDC Mbarara training workshop

Mr Speaker, this was a point raised in this august House yesterday. There have been allegations that the Police disrupted the FDC training workshop in Mbarara. This is not true. The fact of the matter is that, when Police received information about the planned two-day workshop at Westland Hotel in Mbarara, the Police met the organisers of the workshop; it was explained that the event was to take place indoors. Indeed, the workshop took off well. 

On the second day of the workshop at around 12 noon, a group of youth claiming to be FDC members from Mbarara University of Science and Technology went to the venue wanting to participate in the workshop. The organisers of the workshop did not allow them in because they said they were NRM supporters. The youth were thus sent away. 

Fearing that the workshop would be disrupted by the youth who had been sent away, the organisers decided to close the workshop. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, they decided to report the matter to their headquarters in Kampala. The FDC leadership contacted the Police and the matter, again, is being investigated. I have actually spoken to some of the FDC leaders during this time as we try to establish the facts.

FDC Consultative Meeting in Naguru

The FDC organised a consultative meeting at Naguru Community Centre. At the time of the meeting, they could not enter the building because they did not have keys to the place. (Laughter) One of the organisers to the meeting, a one Sarah Eperu, became furious thinking that the Police who were on routine duty in the vicinity were behind eminent failure of the meeting. The matter was drawn to the Inspector General of Police’s attention and he assured her that the Police presence there was not intended to disrupt the meeting. Eventually, someone who had the keys appeared and opened the premises and the FDC meeting went on uninterrupted. 

On alleged closing of the DP offices at City House, William Street, Kampala, Mr Speaker, it is not true that the Police took over the DP offices at Kampala’s City House. When the Police entered the building and arrested the suspects, a record of what the Police took with them was made and signed by both parties -(Laughter)- and the parties I am talking about are the Police and the DP leaders. 

Mr Speaker, since the rest of the occupants had abandoned the premises, the Police could not simply walk away leaving the premises and the properties unguarded, -(Laughter)– a responsible Police of course. The Police therefore remained outside the building and have been allowing other users of the building, e.g. Uganda Prisons Aid Foundation and other residents, to freely go in and come out. 

It is worth noting that some leaders of DP have been in contact with the Police over this matter. It is also true that I have been in contact with hon. Lukwago, who fortunately is in the House, and Mr Sebana Kizito, President General of DP, on this very matter. They have been assured that they are at liberty to take over their premises. The Police’s presence there is purely to secure the properties at DP offices while waiting for the DP leaders to come and take over. I am sure that DP would complain if they found all their properties vandalised if they were not properly guarded by the Police.

Mr Speaker, on challenges in public order management; since 2005 when the multiparty political dispensation began, the Police have faced serious challenges in managing public order and security. First, there is the excitement associated with opening of the political space created among some political actors; the impression that rights and freedoms under Article 29 of the Constitution are absolute, to the detriment of public order and security. Secondly, there are the lingering effects of a violent history affecting the functioning of a peaceful and democratic society as people enjoy the protection of the Constitution. Thirdly, there is the lack of respect for the law by some political leaders, and by extension lack of appreciation of the role of the Police in maintaining public order and security. Fourthly, there is inadequate human and non-human resource to respond effectively to violent situations.

Nevertheless, during the period, Police managed to deal with 139 incidents that required management of public order. Out of these, five were quite violent after the organisers either defied the law or disobeyed lawful orders. 

Mr Speaker, I want to assure this august House and the public at large that Government is committed to maintaining law and order. I request all of us to co-operate and assist the agencies that are mandated to do this. In this connection, I want to record my appreciation for the understanding and co-operation that Police received from hon. Sebuliba Mutumba when he organised a rally at Mulago. The rally was originally planned to be held next to the Uganda Heart Institute, next to the heart patients at Mulago Hospital. When advised, the venue was changed to another place where it went on very well. If all organisers of rallies, assemblies and demonstrations would emulate this example, there would be no problems. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, Government welcomes Parliament’s decision to set up a select committee to investigate the reported incidents. We will fully co-operate with the committee because we believe their findings will be for the good of our country; a good that will be promoted if we all enjoy our freedoms and rights without infringing on those of others as well as the public interest. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a ministerial statement. It is quite involved and I see that it raises a number of issues. According to our rules, we should debate it in less than an hour but it is an important statement. I do not know what you feel. Personally, I think we may need to read it over and pick up points. If it is your wish that I give you time tomorrow to debate this statement, I think it is a better way rather than just standing now. I do not know, but that is what I think. (Applause) I will give you an hour tomorrow and you will just start debating tomorrow so that we meaningfully handle it. I would also request that tomorrow we promptly report here; if possible, we should start at 2.00 p.m. prompt and we shall start with this statement. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA ROAD FUND BILL, 2007

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Uganda Road Fund Bill, 2007” be read for a second time. 

The policy behind this Bill is to establish a road fund as part of the strategy for commercialising the roads sub-sector by transferring the burden of maintaining roads from the general tax payer to the road user. In so doing, adequate, stable and sustainable flow of funds for road maintenance will be guaranteed and strong oversights and demand for value for money by road users will be enhanced. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the maintenance of national roads through allocations from the national budget has for the past several years been beset by inadequate funding, the consequences of which include an accumulation of maintenance backlog and a high transport cost. The establishment of the Road Fund will facilitate the financing of routine and periodic maintenance of public roads to create an environment that is conducive to the efficient and effective maintenance of public roads. Further, it will promote a potential for the continuous improvement of the reserves provided by the funds. In the budget speech we did refer to this Road Fund. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.37
MR GAUDIOSO TINDAMANYIRE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker and honourable members –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do we have copies of the committee’s report?

HON. MEMBERS: No. 

THE SPEAKER: I also do not have.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Speaker, all reports were distributed at 10.00 a.m. this morning. We were all outside and everyone –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I did not get a copy anyway, but it is okay. Can you get us extra copies or check where they are? (Interjections) Okay, proceed then.

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Mr Speaker, the Uganda Road Fund Bill was laid before Parliament for the first reading on 28 September 2007 and committed to the committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for consideration. The committee jointly scrutinised the Bill with the committee on Physical Infrastructure and do hereby report its findings to the House.

Method of Work

The committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Uganda National Road Authority and European Union representatives. 

The committee also had briefs from the members of the Road Fund boards of Kenya, Tanzania and Zambia. Study tours were also made to the Road Fund offices of Tanzania, Zambia and Kenya to learn about the experiences of the practices of general operation of second generation road funds.

Background to the Bill 

The maintenance of national roads through allocations from the national budget has for the past several years been beset by inadequate funding, consequences of which include an accumulation of maintenance backlog and high transport costs. It is against this background that international best practice and experience has been sought on the effective modalities of managing road maintenance. 

Uganda is moving towards the second generation of the road fund, whereby road users contribute and participate in the management of the fund for the maintenance of the roads so as to have an efficient road system, which will reduce the cost of motor vehicle maintenance and travel time for people and prolong the lifespan of the roads as a critical national asset. Therefore, the creation of this dedicated road fund will greatly improve the financing and management of road maintenance.

Object of the Bill

1. To finance the routine and periodic maintenance of public roads in Uganda.
2. To ensure that public roads are maintained at all times.
3. To advise the minister on: 
i) 	the preparation, efficient and effective implementation of the annual road maintenance programme referred to in section 23 of this Bill 
ii) 	the control of overloading of vehicles on public roads. 

Observations

Commencement

Mr Speaker, the establishment of the Road Fund is long overdue given the backlog of road maintenance occasioned by inadequate funding from the national budget allocations. It is therefore important to expedite the commencement of this Road Fund Act.

Interpretation

The committee noted that the definition of public roads is not comprehensive enough since it excludes community access roads among others.

The proposed main source of the Road Fund will be a fuel levy on petrol and diesel.

Object of the Fund 

There is need to expand the object of the Bill to include the financing of road safety activities. The establishment of the Road Fund and its implementation will require an inter-ministerial approach for purposes of enhancing technical competence and timely service delivery. This calls for a collaborative effort between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Local Government. 

Composition of the Board

The proposed representation of the private sector on the Road Fund is not specific and therefore subject to abuse. The private sector in Uganda is so broad and represented by four apex bodies that include: the Private Sector Foundation Uganda (PSFU), Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry (UNCCI), Uganda National Farmers Federation (UNFFE) and Uganda Manufacturers Association (UMA). It is therefore imperative to clearly spell out the specific body to be represented on the board in view of the above.  

For purposes of enhancing the autonomy of the board, it is important for the chairman of the board to be appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the board. 

The proposed board should take into consideration gender concerns as provided for in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

The representatives of the various bodies as shown in clauses 8(2)(d) (e) (f) (g) and (h) should be nominated by their respective bodies and forwarded to the Minister for appointment. 

Finances of the Fund 

The committee deems it important to have the fines payable under the Traffic and Road Safety Act as one of the revenue sources for the Road Fund. This is in line with the policy and principles of the Road Fund Bill whereby the burden of maintaining roads is being transferred from the general tax payer to the road users. 

The committee noted that for purposes of streamlining and ensuring efficient management of the funds, the remittance of the monies from the fuel levy by the collecting agencies should be done on a weekly basis. 

All funds as appropriated or received for the purposes of financing the Road Fund from (b) to (g) as stipulated in the Act should be remitted immediately to the Road Fund account. 

Purposes for Which the Fund May Be Applied

There is need to broaden the scope for the purposes for which the fund may be applied by providing for research in road works, which is a key area in the roads sub-sector. This will enhance the development of appropriate road structural designs and the prioritising of annual work plans. 

The requirements for roads in different parts and regions of the country will scientifically be determined and worked on the basis of these studies hence better returns for the road users’ contribution. 

Road Maintenance

The committee noted that the derivation of plans should be participatory with the involvement of all key stakeholders. The committee therefore recommends that a district roads committee be instituted to bring on board the participation of relevant representatives of the population. 

Investment of Surplus Funds

The committee noted that given the backlog of road maintenance in the country, the issue of investing surplus funds does not arise. The proposal also defeats the purpose for which the Road Fund is established and it is subject to abuse. 

Allocation of Funds

The committee noted that there is need to allocate revenues generated by the Fund for road maintenance under this Bill to the various road categories and agencies for purposes of equitable distribution of the funds in the country to ensure the effectiveness of this Fund. 

The committee therefore recommends that the revenue from the Road Fund be allocated as follows: 

·	Administration of the Fund, which will include the agencies and all bodies that will be contracted to run that activity, will take 10 percent. 
·	The national roads will take 60 percent. 
·	The district and urban roads will take 20 percent. 
·	The constituency roads will take 10 percent. (Applause)

As I conclude, the committee requests the House to adopt the report and pass the Bill with the proposed amendments as will be deemed fit by this House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairman and members of the committee for the report. 

3.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Works and Transport for this Bill, and the chairman of the Finance Committee for a very well considered report. 

I note in this report that the primary concern of the committee was to strengthen the Bill in such a way that the agency would carry out its functions very smoothly. We are obviously concerned that this agency will get a lot of money. We are equally concerned that this agency should be made to do its work as independently as possible to ensure that rush political decisions do not influence their work. I think there has been an attempt in the Bill to ensure this, but I find two grey areas: First of all, how this road agency relates to government and its programmes and policies of road maintenance; secondly, there is a grey area on how this agency will relate to Parliament. 

I will illustrate two points; it is provided that the agency’s report will come to Parliament, but it is also provided that the minister will receive their reports and approve them. If, for example, the minister received this report and approved it, what purpose would it serve by coming to Parliament? I will show the specific amendments, but that was my immediate concern. The presentation to Parliament is a completely separate clause. The minister receives and approves, but it is your Bill! I think clause 28 is where it talks about tabling before Parliament, and it says within 28 days after the plan is received by the minister and the draft approved by the board. 

When you look at the subsequent report, the bigger one, there is no provision for it to be tabled before Parliament for consideration; that is in the Bill. You will check later. The point I am making is that yes, we want the Road Fund to be autonomous and not be interfered with, but as Parliament we also want to be mandated to ensure that things are okay, that we are able to scrutinise for accountability purposes and not simply because of routine because this is a very specialised body.

Secondly, there is a provision that the Fund can borrow money and it is an organ of the state. If it was seeking a foreign loan, what would happen? Would it not require that Parliament approves? The way it is put here, the right to borrow is given to the Fund without recognition that Parliament will have to approve. 

Concerning the last letter on money, I do not agree with the committee that monies collected from traffic fines should go to the Road Fund. On the contrary, if there was a way of ring-fencing that money, we would use it to ensure that the traffic Police have the equipment and facilities to do their work rather than this money going to the Road Fund. 

I would also like to suggest that the recommendation that no investment be made is not correct. You can approve money at the start of a financial year and such monies will be disbursed throughout the financial year. If half of that money, by your planning, will be disbursed in eight months’ time, if you bought treasury bills with that money, you would earn interest. So, to deny the Road Fund that opportunity on account of accountability would not be right because once you can account, there is absolutely no problem. If your fear is accountability, let us put in place mechanisms to ensure that such monies that come from outside are accounted for and nobody pinches because there are going to be big problems. 

We had this road toll some years ago and the guys manning it eventually printed their own receipts. You come as a traveller and all you are interested in is paying the toll, like we do as we are entering Entebbe, and get your receipt and we have no way of knowing that these are genuine receipts. That is going to be a big challenge to the Road Fund. How will you ensure that receipts that the passengers pick are genuine? You have got to think about this right from the beginning. I see the chair looking puzzled. People have even printed fake poll tax tickets or fake notes and they will pay you with them. Unless it is fully computerised, where you insert and it is recorded, that will be okay.  

Lastly, I think you will have to include in the sources of money not only those revenues accruing because they have been given the right to investment. It is not reflected that revenue from there is part of the Road Fund. If they are going to put the money in the bank and earn interest, that should also be part of the income of the Road Fund. Otherwise, I think the purpose of this Fund is good. We want to eliminate all other excuses so that we can deal with management where there are failures and not cry for money. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.55
MR SAMMY LOOTE OGWEL (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to appreciate the report of the committee. It is quite precise and straightforward. I just want to seek clarification from the committee. On page three, sub-section (c) (ii) talks about the control of overloading of vehicles on public roads. I wanted to find out whether the committee also examined the types of vehicles that impact damage on our roads; for example, you have four-wheel and three-wheel trucks. If you moved along our roads coming from Busia or Malaba, there was a time when they pressed the road and deformed it and they are now reconstructing the road. 

Why I am saying this is because they said they visited Tanzania and they have already outlawed four-wheel heavy vehicles on their roads. If you moved from Mbale to Soroti in those days, there were no heavy vehicles passing along that road. However, since peace returned to Southern Sudan, heavy vehicles are now getting through to Nimule and there is already a big impact on that road. 

I thought that they should examine these four-wheel vehicles which are bringing a lot of destruction on our roads. That is the clarification I wanted; whether they examined those possibilities, how Tanzania handled that and what the impact could have been on these roads. 

3.58
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to thank government for this Bill and I thank the committee for a report well prepared. It is timely, or maybe it is a bit late. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda may be among the countries which are late concerning this issue of the Road Fund. As we have been told, we have been getting allocations from the national budget where funds allocated were being diverted to other issues. However, here we are going to get a road fund, ring-fenced and strictly put to its right use. 

It is also very good to see that you pay for what you use. So, the thing is fair on both sides. If you do not use my road, you do not pay; if you use the road, you pay because as we have seen in the report, most of the funds are going to come from fuel levies. So, if you use the road using fuel, you are paying. If you do not buy fuel, you do not pay.  So, it will be pay as you use. To me, this is a very good principle and it is going to help us. The people that will be paying are also going to participate in the selection of the roads to be worked on and in the disbursement of the funds. So, Mr Speaker, I think this is a very nice Bill which has been brought. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, as we have seen in the report, with the funds available, our roads are going to be in very good –(Interruption) 

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, thank you for giving way. I want to find out how the people who are expected to pay will be participating in the decision making on how the money should be spent. Also, I want to find out whether this fund implies a road toll or not. If it does, is it going to consider the decisions of member states in the region, so that there are no barriers in the movement of goods and people within the region? 

What is the implication vis-à-vis the prior road tolls that existed, for example in Jinja and at Lukaya? Are we introducing road tolls? I am trying to find out what a road fund would be and about what hon. Byandala is saying, that actually everybody is going to participate in the decision-making as far as the use of money is concerned. 

I would also like to believe that it would be very difficult to make everybody pay - whoever is passing is paying - and then there is a general meeting deciding on the funds collected to find out how they are going to be used. Thank you. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, my sister. I will leave most of the clarifications to the minister and the chairman. (Laughter) However, as you saw, most of the funds are coming from fuel levies, so when you buy fuel you are contributing. It is not that you are going to walk on the road and pay; no! You talked about road tolls; I presume that would be one of the sources which would contribute to the fund as and when the minister will decide. 

Mr Speaker, I was talking about the good roads. With money, we are going to have roads in very good condition. That means we are going to save on time because you can zoom; we are going to save on vehicle maintenance as there will be no potholes; and we are going to reduce on accidents because as you know, we have had so many accidents because of bad roads. With this, we are going to have good roads and things will be okay. 

Mr Speaker, having said that, I think we need to put a lot of emphasis on some issues. I need to see a lot of emphasis put on road safety because so many people are dying on our roads and it is not well captured in this Bill. I want road safety emphasised. The leader of the Opposition talked about the Police; Police can access some of this money for road safety. 

I want the issue of research thoroughly looked at because we need to look into new materials to cut on costs. Research on safety needs should be emphasised. 

I also need the issue of training to be emphasised in this Bill. We need to retrain our people who are going to work on these things. We are changing the method of work from bureaucratic to businesslike. They need to be re-oriented and retrained. 

I think for the purpose of getting our local people in the business, we need training and support from our local contractors using part of this money so that it can assist in reducing the costs that we suffer. This training that I have talked about will assist us in the issue of supervision and in timely and cost-effective products. At the end of the day, these issues of overpricing will be tackled under the training. I think it will assist a lot also on the issue of absorption; time and again, we have been told here that money has been given but it is not being used. With this training, I think the issue of absorption will also be looked into and things will go on very well.

Mr Speaker, it is not in the Bill but I think the minister needs to tell us what is going to happen to the funds that we will get from our development partners for road maintenance. In my view, I think they should also be brought to this Fund for effective use.  That issue needs to be looked at and negotiated with our development partners. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I totally agree with the leader of the Opposition that this issue of stopping investment is wrong. The reason given here is because we have a backlog, but a backlog is a temporary issue. With the funds, we shall handle the backlog, but what happens with the surplus? So, I think the Road Fund board should be authorised and allowed to invest. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I appeal to my colleagues to support this motion. 

4.06
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. I also would like to thank the chairperson for the committee report. I have some observations and clarifications that I wish to seek from the minister and the committee chair, to enable me appreciate the import of the setting up of this road fund. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at page 3 under the object of the Bill, we are restricting the Road Fund to only routine and periodic maintenance of public roads. The problems in our road sector are not only restricted to routine and periodic maintenance; we need to open up new roads. I thought that the Road Fund would be able to have money to enable us open up new roads and not only maintain. 

There are a number of roads which require upgrading from murram to tarmac. I prefer having a road fund set up to be able to address the issue of upgrading of our roads from murram to tarmac roads. I do not see this in the Road Fund. Who is going to cater for this? I would prefer that we set up a fund to address the road problems in this country so that we know that the centre is addressing road concerns. This is better than having some section of the road problem addressed by the Road Fund and then run to the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Works for the other. Mr Speaker, we should have one centre to address all these problems. (Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, hon. Yiga, for giving way. This fund is the beginning; we are all saying we must go in to maintain what we already have, but we will have the Uganda National Road Authority which will be for development. It will be the Uganda Government and donors giving money for development. This fund will be ring-fenced strictly to maintain what we have already had because the situation is very bad. I thank you.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, that may sound good when you are talking now, but we are all Ugandans and we know how difficult it is to introduce changes later. We would rather have a broad fund which will also cater for funds for those other activities. Much as it is not there right now, we could create a road fund which is going to capture that money which you have earmarked somewhere else to cater for the upgrading and other activities. Otherwise, if you miss it at this point then we have missed it completely; we shall come back to this Parliament and lament like we usually do. I would prefer that that issue is addressed. 

On page 5 of the committee’s report, there is a statement which is vague; when it comes to appointment of the chairman of the board. According to the committee, they want the minister to appoint the chairman on recommendation of the board. There is no board; the minister has to appoint the board. You want the board to recommend somebody to be the chairperson but I do not see how that can work now. Who is going to convene the board to discuss the appointment of the chairperson and then forward that name to the minister to appoint that person? I think we need to revisit that clause so that we are clear. 

I see no problem with the minister appointing the chairman of the board directly rather than having to refer to the board. When it comes to other civil servants on the board, they can be appointed by the minister on the recommendation of the board. I have no problem with that. 

Mr Speaker, I support the view that these monies which are collected from road fines should go to the Road Fund. I support that view by the committee, although the leader of the Opposition had another view. If our people hear that that money from the fines is going to improve the remuneration of the Police, they will not be happy. However, if you tell them that this money you are paying as fines is going to work on those potholes on the roads which have been causing some of you to behave contrary to what you should, they would be very glad to pay that money. They will pay the money willingly knowing that the money is going to improve the conditions of our roads. 

I also support the setting up of a district roads committee that includes MPs as members because very often when things go wrong, MPs are held responsible. If we are members of the district roads committee, we can even assist our district authorities to prioritise and also to follow up on value for money afterwards when money has been spent on these roads. I support the setting up of the roads committee. 

I am concerned with the allocations given, that is, how the monies are going to be utilised. We are saying that 10 percent is going to go for constituency roads. I know some of these national roads pass through our constituencies, but these district and urban roads are also in our constituencies. I need to be educated on what constituency roads are about. Are we talking about community roads or new roads which we may wish to be constructed or opened up? We need to be educated more about that.

On the investment of surplus funds, I would like to concur with the committee. I do not support the idea that money from the Road Fund be allocated elsewhere for other purposes. Let all these monies be spent on roads. Otherwise, if we have this clause where money can be invested elsewhere, then the Fund is going to be abused. Let all the money, even if there is surplus, go to roads because our roads need to be improved. Let us spend all the money on roads.

4.14
CAPT. EMILY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for this very good report. However, I have some concerns. 

When you look at page 4 – interpretation - the committee has done very well to include community roads in the definition of public roads. Community roads are a very big component of road networks in our local areas, particularly districts, and they form the longest mileage of roads I know in any district. Unfortunately, when you look at the allocation of funds, the community roads have not received any funding. I do not know whether the committee looks at constituency roads as the community roads or they are something else, but I would like to commend the committee for including community roads in that bracket.

On page 7, on road maintenance plans, I would like to comment that instead of the committee forming just one district roads committee, we have district road committees so that each district has a road committee. This is because each district has a different plan for their roads in their districts. I look at a district roads committee -(Interruptions)– It should therefore be district roads committees so that there are many -(Laughter)- but if we have one -(Interruptions)- There should be a district roads committee per district. That is okay because when I read this, I thought it meant that there should only be one district roads committee for all districts - (Interruptions) - that is good.

On the issue of allocation, I mentioned that when we look at feeder roads and at community roads, the biggest mileage of our roads is in our rural settings. When I look at the allocation here, national roads is 60 percent, but when I look at district and urban roads, I look at feeder roads. I used to be a district chairperson and I know that district roads basically are feeder roads and urban roads are also feeder roads. Now, the community roads therefore lose out. I was proposing that the committee looks at the allocation they have made. I would probably think of national roads taking 50 percent, district and urban roads remaining at 20 percent and then instead of constituency roads, we replace that with community roads and give community roads also 20 percent. If we ignore community roads, we shall be doing a disservice to our local communities because no other transport reaches them; ambulances cannot reach there. When we complain about –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving way. I did not want to interrupt the debate, but I thought that on this issue of sharing, it is better I give some information at this stage. Although the report is proposing some percentages, what we have been discussing with finance is that the sharing should be scientifically done so that there is a formula in the schedule or regulations, which can be adjusted from time to time rather than amending the Bill; it should be scientifically done and let me explain what I mean.

At the moment – by the way there are no constituency roads and what the hon. Member was saying is correct - we have classified our roads in four categories: national roads, district roads, urban roads and community roads. That is the naming of our roads in the country – (Interjections) well our constituencies are part of the community really. A road is a road. It does not matter because in the constituency there are both national and district roads that pass through. Some constituencies have got urban roads. So, sometimes a constituency can have all the categories of roads or three of them. So, it is better to have national, district, urban and community roads.

Currently, the national roads are 10,800. The district roads are 27,500, the urban roads are 4500, and the community roads are estimated to be about 35,000, all in kilometres. But as you recall some months back I wrote a letter to all chairpersons of districts and copied to all Members of Parliament saying that we wanted to upgrade and have a neat and functional national road network. We shall, in the next policy statement, be listing all the roads. We are raising the number of national roads from about 10,800 to almost 20,000 so that we can hand them over to the Uganda National Road Authority. This means that the country is covered in all respects.

So, you will look at the cost of maintaining a tarmac road; the cost of maintaining a murram road of national standard; the cost of maintaining a district road; and the cost of maintaining an urban road. In fact we are moving that all urban roads should be tarmacked. You cannot have urban shops with murram roads all over; we are moving to tarmac in all the urban areas. 

We will then look at the amount of traffic they carry because currently about 80 percent of the traffic in Uganda is carried by national and district roads. We will also work out a proper formula like we did in the Constitution for the money that is passed on to the districts in form of equalisation grants. That formula will change depending on the length and quality of each road such that any time the minister can change it rather than all the time come to Parliament to seek an amendment. 

So, I would like to appeal to honourable members to leave that formula; it will be worked out scientifically and each will get money that is proportional to the length of the roads you have in your district and the community. So, it should not be fixed in the Bill to require the minister to always come to Parliament to seek an amendment whenever there are adjustments to be made. It should be fairly distributed and relative to the functions of that road and the maintenance costs. I thank you for giving way.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I just want to give information. Of course the hon. Minister is right about the clarifications of the roads and so forth; that is okay. But this issue of constituency roads is not a classification of a road; no. We put it there for purpose of ensuring that each constituency of Uganda receives some money – (Applause)- that was the purpose. I am saying this because there is a scenario – you can take money to Luweero District, but the chairman can decide to work on the roads in one area leaving the others out. That is why we are saying that each constituency gets its own money each year and when it is used then they can juggle around the district - [Hon. Members: “That is a point”]

MR NASASIRA: Honourable member, I am a member of Kazo Constituency. So, I have an interest in my constituency and definitely I am also talking as a Member of Parliament. But the money for community roads will not go to the districts; it will go directly to the sub counties and the constituency is composed of a number of sub counties. So, each constituency will get money, but leave us with our classifications of the roads the way we have done it.

MR OTEKAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his clarification particularly on the allocation formula. I would like to appeal to the Members that though the minister has given us the scientific formula, we should think about the reality on the ground. The reality on the ground is that community roads are very bad and our communities are not able to access services. So, I still appeal that whatever it means, let us adjust the formula to take care of community roads. 

In that regard I would like to propose, and it is again up to the House to decide, that because of the importance of national roads, instead of having 60 percent, they should get 50 percent. District and urban roads –(Interjections)– fine they can remain at 20 percent, but we should also put emphasis on community roads and give them 20 percent. That is my appeal because we all come from communities that require roads. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and members of the committee for this report but urge that we keep in mind that our communities need good roads to access services. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the hon. Member for Tororo Municipality before we come to the others.

MR SANJAY TANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek a couple of clarifications. On page 7, the report says that there shall be district committees. I hope that municipalities shall be included –(Laughter)- because there is a tendency, like the previous speaker has said, to have municipalities isolated by districts in their planning.

I also would like to request, the minister having given clarification because that is one of the issues I am supposed to have raised, that the request on that scientific formula, be formally presented to Parliament so that we all know what is going to be taking place. I am saying this because the fears the other members have allayed are very similar to those I hold. This is because on page 8, the committee recommends 10 percent as administration. I think that really this is a fund that is going to be in excess of Shs 200 billion. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that committee revisits that particular 10 percent for administration because every agency should have a budget that shall be approved and this money strictly goes for the job that is meant to be done. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, the other issue – when you look at the four categories that the minister has talked about and the mode – I am trying to drive towards whether we are going to allow the fund for other investment, when there is excess. I would like us to desist from giving that leeway because world over infrastructure needs to grow. Uganda’s population is growing and our urban centres are growing. Therefore, we should not allow the money to be invested somewhere else. Today, traffic is unmanageable in Kampala, we need flyovers and I believe our needs are going to grow by multiple folds.

Therefore, the fund should be kept and ring-fenced like the honourable members have said – particularly for the maintenance and expansion of the road network. Thank you.

4.27
DR BAYIGA LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with the honourable minister on a scientific formula to be employed on the administration and allocation of funds for this. But the arbitrary figures that have come out so far indicate the importance of the national roads as well as the district and urban roads; and the minister put it categorically that most of these national roads are the ones which handle big traffic. 

But consideration that most of the national roads would be handling big traffic is because they fear to go to community roads which are in a dilapidated state all the time. There must be a scientific rational on why traffic does not go to the rural areas and why rural areas have remained in a backward state with low productivity and poor access to markets. We should reconsider the allocation of funds to those roads, using that scientific formula. 

It is in that regard, therefore that I would like to ask the minister and the committee to have the community roads take the lion’s share of 60 percent other than going on the maintenance of national and district roads, because they are already tarmacked; unless you are talking about roads which were poorly constructed like those done during the pre-CHOGM era. Mr Speaker, I submit. 

4.30
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, District Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I what to start by thanking the committee for bringing this report which has been long awaited for. I want to, first of all, give information that if there are any funds being abused, then it is the funds on road maintenance. 

The funds which are released through the Ministry of Works to the districts through central works departments, which are always housed by district headquarters, are absolutely abused. Some times, the roads that are budgeted for are never worked on. I wanted to hear the committee talking about control, which is a very important area. For a long time, we have paid for ghost roads in terms of maintenance and that is how many people make their money in the department of works at the district level. 

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. I want to give you more information on that issue. You said that some times the roads that are budgeted for are not worked on. But other times, the roads are budgeted for and worked on, but shoddy work is done, and therefore it is as good as not done. Therefore something should be done to make sure that the roads are properly made. Thank you. 

MS AMUGE: Thank you for the information. On the composition of the board, the most difficult area always comes through the people we put on boards. These people always end up becoming a problem to us. I want the Parliament of this country to have a hand in appointing these board members so that we can over see them –(Interjections)- I know why I am saying that. 

Mr Speaker, when the minister talked of a scientific way of allocating those funds, I got very worried because some times they are manipulated. I want to be assured that those funds will not be the source of marginalisation some people. How are we going to make sure that all districts receive the money? Honourable minister, you have to assure me on how the people of Lira will benefit – give me scientific assurance which I can understand. 

Mr Speaker, the community access roads are a very big problem; if we are talking of increasing production in the rural areas, then we must look at the community roads. I am submitting that the percentage for the community roads be increased and that on the administration of funds be reduced. 

Mr Speaker, in any programme, when you hear words like workshops, capacity building and research, then you have a reason to worry. In the area of research, I wanted us to look at institutions. There is one I saw in Mbale, it is under DANIDA; why don’t we put a clause where we can train our human resource on road management, that has been lacking, probably that could be looked at. I know we have engineers, but I also believe we need to build more capacity by training them further. 

The people of Lango - especially those in Lira have been asking me that the roads built in the 50s, where those materials different? Because we have some roads which were built in 1958, they call them Italian roads, I think; they are still very strong up to now. But these ones, two or three years and they are gone. So, can it be the problem of human resource? What is the problem? Mr Speaker, I support this motion but I want these areas to be looked at scientifically. Thank you.

4.36
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr speaker, for giving me the opportunity.  I would like to thank the committee for compiling this report and I would like to thank the minister for bringing the Bill. 

Mr Speaker, this Bill has been overdue for several reasons. The most fundamental problems we are realising in this country are due to poor road network and if there is poor road network, poor maintenance of the roads prevails. The report has been well compiled but there are grey areas which I would like to get some clarification on. 

The first one is on page 2 that the road users contribute and participate in the management of the fund. I do not know the mechanism which will be used to allow the road users to participate effectively in the management of the road funds.  

The honourable minister has actually clarified on the categories of roads in this country. I would like to emphasise the importance of community roads at this stage of our development. Eighty percent of our population is in the rural area, and Uganda is an agricultural country and of course we cannot do meaningful agriculture in cities or towns. 

I would like to suggest that what the minister has called community roads should be looked at very carefully for several reasons: for health reasons, for agricultural reasons, and for many reasons. Most of our mothers are dying during pregnancy because of the poor community road network and of course children too are dying. 

Now honourable minister, you may not be aware that in the community road network, heavy vehicles are actually going - particularly in Apac District where they go and collect produce from the farmers. And these heavy vehicles have completely destroyed the community roads in Apac District; they are impassable. So for me, I will have allocated 50 percent of the road development fund on community roads at this stage of our development; we need them.  

As far as the board is concerned, the private sector has been defined here, represented by four institutions. Now, I do not know where the civil society is put in this because actually the civil society organisations represent the bulk of the people of this country and I think they should have a say in the administration of this road funds. 

The other point I would like to comment on is on page 7: District Road Committee. I think, Mr Speaker, through you, I would like to learn from the hon. Minister because the Uganda government has gone down to the sub-county as the nucleus of development, and it would be wrong to put a road committee at the district and leave it there. I think there should be a sub-county road committee in all the sub-counties in the country so that the overseeing of the road or road maintenance is effectively done because the sub-county, as you see it at this material time, is actually the seat of development in Uganda. Let us not leave this committee at the district level; it will not be effective.

The other point I would like to raise is on the maintenance itself. The area where there is no value for money in this country is the maintenance of roads. Roads are maintained and within three months they are back to square one, and this is because of shoddy work. And I would like to suggest that when this fund is put in place and is being used, the supervising engineers should be monitored very closely so that they do good work – they oversee the maintenance of the roads. At this material time they are not doing that.

I would like to support this Bill and with the scientific formula of the minister, I hope everything in road maintenance and road construction will be scientific. Thank you.

4.43
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would want to start with the issue of the scientific formula. We have had a problem with the abuse of formulas that we have always applied in the allocation of resources. Unless I get assurance from the minister that the formulas will not be abused (Interjection) We have had a case with local government funding where last time we attempted to constitute a committee because we did realise that the allocation of monies based on that formula, in which we were using population as part of the variable, was being abused. Unless I get assurance from the minister, I will not be party to supporting that formula. But to us, we believe that the most equitable way is to give a flat percentage to the constituencies just like it is done in Kenya. Kenya gives 20 percent of the road fund to the constituencies, and it is given equitably. So, I am of the view, and I support those who think of increasing the percentage that goes to the community road or constituency roads, whatever name you decide to call them.

On the issue of administration costs, the 10 percent is quite high because even Uganda Revenue Authority just takes three or four percent of the collections as the administration costs. So, we cannot afford to have 10 percent of the road fund going for administration.

When we come to the Board, honourable minister, in the accountability committees, we have found a problem where some of the board members are permanent secretaries of ministry of finance, ministry of trade, and I can talk specifically for Uganda Revenue Authority where those permanent secretaries are board members. Out of the 62 meetings they held, the permanent secretaries only appeared 12 times, and yet they represent Government. They left it to the private sector and other members who represent the private sector, and Government was left out. That is why we are even having a problem between URA and the Tax Appeals Tribunal because Government is not fully represented in the Board.

So, I would appeal to the minister that when it comes to appointment of the Board members, the permanent secretaries be excused because they seem to be overloaded with work. We could have any senior members within those ministries representing Government in these boards.

I come now to membership. The issue of gender, especially women representation on the Board should be taken seriously because we have seen, and in most of the boards that we have met, you find that there is no woman. The only nearest we have come to was having one woman out of the many men. So, that must be taken seriously. We should not marginalise women on this board. 

Then we come to the regional bias in the appointments on these boards. That one must be taken note of. We do not want regional bias, and in the recruitment of staff, because already we have heard cries from the ongoing recruitment or which has been completed, in the Road Authority. So, hon. minister, I want you to take this seriously. We do not want to come back here and say, “Kasilo people have been marginalized”, we do not want to hear that honourable minister when you appear here; or that the people of Busiro or Kyanamukaka are not represented in some of these bodies –(Laughter) Honourable minister, I would be happy to see that this board is fairly represented. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I must say I am very grateful for those who care about my constituency – (Laughter)

4.47
MR SERUNJOGI KATENDE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion and to thank the committee for the report. Where I need clarification from the report is that I see a lack of emphasis on the mode of collection. The honourable leader of the Opposition alluded to this. If we say we are to use the road toll as a mode of collection, in many circumstances it is quite expensive, for example in constructing these tolls and also operationalising them. And one would wonder now that we are going to share this fund across all levels of the road, if one went for this option of road tolls, where one would even install road blocks at community road levels. 

But the other option, Mr Speaker, on the collection, would be levying it through the fuels and fuel pumps, like we did for the road licenses. Except here I am a bit sceptical on that option; how do we discern the other use of fuel, for example agricultural implements such as tractors or power generation like generators for light and power or industrial use? So, what I am saying here is that we need some additional fine tuning on how we can effectively do the collection.

My second and last concern, Mr Speaker, we are aware of the regional cooperation, that is, the East African Community. How are we, from this Bill, going to harmonise this road fund so that there is no disparity in the rates as we move across Uganda, Tanzania, Kenya and so forth? I think this needs to come up. 

I am grateful that the Bill recognises the allocations to various levels of the roads, from the national right up to the community roads. And I believe that this scientific formula that we are crying for in the allocations can be catered for in the regulations, which will definitely be there for implementing the Act once it is in place. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.51
MR BYANYIMA NATHAN (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to my colleague’s to thank the committee for the good work.

To me, I feel right from the start that this is our contribution. Over the years the roads have remained in a bad state because the government has been financing both routine and periodic maintenance. But I think it was a very brilliant idea that the minister of works, together with other stakeholders, thought of people contributing. Since it is the people contributing through the fuel, I feel nobody should touch this money. I am happy that in the Budget Speech, we got a good amount of money for the roads. Let the government continue financing its activities. But this is people’s money and it must be strictly ring-fenced for road maintenance. Before we can put up this structure for the Chamber –(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to stand on a point of order because I think the Chairman of Infrastructure is playing on people’s –(Interjection) I beg your pardon. The former chairperson of infrastructure is playing on people’s intelligence. Is it in order for him to make us believe that whatever money Government is using is not people’s contribution? Is it in order? (Laughter) Yes, because I believe that all the money that is collected by Government is either collected from people’s activities – so I do not see –(Interjection)- So, is it in order, Mr Speaker, to make our people believe that actually Government has not been doing its job well because people have not been contributing towards road maintenance? Is it in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the spirit in which the term was used is that this is a special collection for a purpose.  The other money you are talking about is general taxation.  I think that is what we are trying to interpret.  

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, what we are saying is that we always pay money on excise duty on fuel.  But this was done this financial year that we pay an extra shilling in order to maintain our roads. And I think this is an opportunity for Ugandans, all Ugandans, especially the grassroots people.  

The minister was talking of a scientific formula, we all know that all roads in Uganda are supposed to be made but they are not made at times because of little money.  What we are saying is, let us have equal distribution to each constituency.  We have 215 constituencies.  Let us have this money trickling down to every constituency.  Mr Minister, you will be one of the proud ministers because your money will have reached every Ugandan.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am happy we are talking of road safety.  We need to put some money for road safety; the chairperson of the committee had mentioned it.  Where we are, we are losing a number of people in accidents.  So, we feel that this is an opportunity that 2 per cent of this money goes to road safety, which I would request the minister eventually to bring a Bill here introducing a road safety agency to handle accidents and to be accountable to this Parliament.  This money could help to buy big breakdowns and you station one in Kampala, Lugazi, Masaka, Mbale and everywhere so that these big trucks that get stuck on the road can be removed immediately because they cause several accidents.  

We want to improve our roads and that is why I do not support anybody giving money to UNRA.  UNRA is an autonomous body with well-educated people.  Most of the engineers are there; I can see them behind there.  Government must pay them and not this fund.  This fund is strictly for road maintenance.  Let us maintain what we already have because we have had a bad name because of the road maintenance.  Let us first maintain so that in case after 10 years our roads improve, then we can think of developing because the development –(Interruptions)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to seek a clarification from hon. Nathan Byanyima where in his opinion and all these years in Parliament, he thinks that the state of roads in the country where several roads are bad, of a poor standard, poor quality work is as a result of shortage of the fund?  Because in his debate he assumes that with this fund the roads will be in good condition.  I want him to clarify to me whether with this fund now, the Ministry of Works will have the necessary capacity to absorb all the monies.  

Because, Mr Speaker, as you are aware in the Auditor-General’s report for the last three years, the Ministry of Works has been causing this country to lose billions of shillings to the World Bank and international organisations. And if you look at the Auditor-General’s report further, you will realise that every year, the ministry only uses 60 per cent and less of the money that is budgeted; the rest of the money is rolled towards the next financial year.  So can you clarify, what miracle will happen with this money?

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker and colleagues let us open a fresh page for the Ministry of Works.  They have the capacity, but always, for example, this financial year, you passed Shs 127 billion for them, they only got Shs 66 billion.  What did you expect them to do?  So, what we are saying is that now let us give them more money and they maintain our roads because the capacity is there. We are trying to open a fresh page.  I had never seen a Budget where almost like 30 per cent is going to one sector.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way.  Mr Speaker, I thought this statement by hon. Ekanya should not go unchallenged.  You see we must separate two things; there is road maintenance and road development.  There is upgrading roads from murrum to tarmac but there is money for road maintenance.  There is no year except the year 2000, when the Ministry of Works had got enough money for its budget, and I have it on record.  

I passed round a document and I will pass it again.  We have been getting about 55 per cent on average of what we need.  And what hon. Byanyima was saying, if you read the last Budget statement, not the recent one, we were supposed to get Shs 127 billion for road maintenance; we ended up getting actually Shs 68 billion.  By the time the financial year ended, we had certificates paid, debts of contractors, worthy Shs 30 billion.  We had contracts which were ready for critical roads which need to be maintained, which are in a bad shape, which we could not award.  How can then someone turn round and say, “We have no absorption capacity!”  Thank you.

MR EKANYA: What I have said is a fact and backed by the report of the Auditor-General, which is a public document that I can lay here.  Mr Speaker, we have lost money to the World Bank.  Tororo – Busia - Majanji road has been worked on for the last four years.  As we speak today, if Kampala-Bugiri-Malaba road is not completed by December, the Government of Uganda will forfeit a lot of money to the European Union.  I have facts, I can lay them on the Table and they are public information.  

5.00
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the terrain in Bunyole makes me one of the serious beneficiaries from the Ministry of Works because of the nature of roads.  But honourable minister, I want to inform you of one thing. Although we shall give this money to the Ministry of Works, most of the work is going to be tendered away because it is going to be done by the private people, like it has always been done.  But the quality of work by many private contractors leaves a lot to be desired. And this really calls on us to ensure that the supervision of this fund, once you make it available, must be strengthened so that we can prevent the problems currently happening. 

I will give an example of my constituency where there is a road on which they put one of the best contractors in Uganda, and he was almost recovering all his money being paid for work almost not done. It is not until I had to intervene as a Member of Parliament and relate with the engineer at the district and officers from the Chief Engineer’s office in Entebbe.  So, can we be assured by the honourable minister that the Ministry of Works’ supervision capacity is going to be enhanced to ensure that when we provide these funds and we use the private contractors, that they will go to the field to ensure that the money does the work that it is supposed to do? I thank you.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, hon. Dombo. I feel that since we have the Uganda National Road Authority starting on 1 July 2008, which is composed of qualified engineers who will be well paid to do the designs of our roads, let us give a fresh page to the honourable minister and his team. The issue is to ensure that it is not a job for the Ministry of Works alone but a joint effort for all of us. That is why we want money to trickle down to constituencies. Members, let us support this. 

With districts, since we are going to buy road equipment for districts, I think this money will help the districts to ensure that they can reduce the problems of roads. Honourable minister, PYD gangs should be introduced so that our local people on the roads near the villages can maintain the roads and we have better roads.

Finally, I expect the Minister of Finance - this is your Bill - you are well known for taking the lion’s share of all the money we approve here. This time this is your Bill because it involves money, but let it go. You are fond of presiding over a big empire but this time this empire is not yours. Give it to the right people to do a perfect job. God bless you and thank you.

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, in the Budget Speech we made it very categorically clear that there will be a Road Fund and we are waiting for this Bill to be made into a law to enable us ensure that the funds are managed. We have identified a total of Shs 240 billion in addition to the Shs 35 billion in the budget and this is going to be available. So, I do not know what the former chairman is talking about. (Laughter) I thank you.

5.05
MS PHERRY KABANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on clause 21, which is finances of the fund, on page 6. My fear is about the funds payable under the Traffic and Road Safety Act. I remember when Graduated Tax was abolished; traffic Police went on a rampage arresting every motorist. The fear was they had actually been sent to collect funds since Graduated Tax had been abolished and it was a very bad story out there. I want to be assured that when these fines are collected by the traffic Police it will not look like we are desperate and are trying to raise funds for the Road Fund. 

Secondly, I wanted to understand the fuel levy and who the collecting agencies were only to be told by the speaker who has just left the Floor that we could raise funds by increasing the fuel cost by Shs 1,000. Sincerely, we are already overburdened by the fuel prices –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am giving hon. Kabanda information that last financial year the Minister of Finance in his Budget Speech said we were going to raise funds from fuel and as we talk now I have paid for this fuel or for this tax for the last one year. So, we are already at it. They are not going to increase; you have already contributed money as you buy fuel at the petrol station. So there is no need of you getting worried since it is already there.

MS KABANDA: Thank you very much, hon. Kubeketerya. However, I still have fears. Is this going to increase the fuel prices or is it not? If it is not; well and good. If it is then we have to bear in mind what we are already going through. The fuel prices are very high and it is affecting the whole nation. 

I have been hearing people talking about road tolls, but I have not even seen that here in clause 21 and I am wondering where they are getting that information from. Others have fears that it will be very expensive, others fear that it will be abused, but I have noticed that developed countries still have road toll centres. I am just wondering about it because we started this in the 1980’s and it was abolished and I did not understand why it was abolished while developed countries still have it. You talk about being abused, but you go to the airport and there is that little centre that still collects money. Recently when I was going to the airport I said, “These people must be raising a lot of money if they charge Shs 1,000 for every vehicle that passes by.” It is very clean money in a little centre. Why don’t we go for such a thing instead of fining people or getting the Police again abused and hit left, right and centre for charging fines? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am remaining with one point about the research on clause 22 of the committee’s report. The Road Fund is for maintenance and when we are testing for the roads and doing research, we do this before construction.  So I think the research function and test function should go to the Ministry of Works, which is done prior to the construction. 

The other point which I am raising is about the components of the Road Fund. I would like to get it clear if the roads include all the bridges and all the other transport methodologies like we use on the lakes. What about the people who use ferries to Kalangala, will their ferries be maintained by the Road Fund?

Finally, maybe we should create a water fund for that, but I think we should expand it.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you very much my colleague. I would like to reinforce the aspect of the Road Fund in relation to waterways because vessels on the water use a lot of fuel and therefore contribute to the Road Fund. There are many areas within the islands and Government has an obligation to put a road on the water in terms of a ferry. It is very important that we consider this Road Fund taking into consideration maintaining ferries and even at times buying ferries because water transport uses a lot of fuel. So it is very important that as we deliberate on this issue of waterways in as far as maintaining and reaching out to the islands - for instance in Kasensero - they use a lot of fuel to reach the islands where they go to carry out a lot of activities. I propose that this fund should take into consideration the ferries’ aspect as a link to the islands.

MR NASASIRA: I thought that I should intervene much as I would like Members to debate so that it does not go on. The Road Fund will cater for bridges and the mobile roads on the water, which are the ferries.

MR NGABIRANO: Mr Speaker, the other point I want to make is about the percentages we are proposing vis-à-vis the ministries to get a scientific formula. I think it is important that we keep the principle of percentages and use this principle to get your formula so that the formula is derived from the percentage that we propose. That way, if you bring your formula, then we can get out the percentages as Parliament later on.

Finally, you well know that I have been a very big stakeholder in the road industry for some years and I am not happy about the discarding of the labour based methodologies in our maintenance of the roads. I think with this Road Fund, we should emphasise the labour based methodologies where money trickles back to our population and efficiency is well monitored. I thank you very much.

5.13
MS FLORENCE SSEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, my concern is on exploitation in one way or another. Deep in the rural areas you know there are some bridges which have to be graded and then the road tolls, which could be put in place. During the charging of money, I should be assured that those who are pushing for example bunches of Matooke on wheelbarrows and bicycles are not going to be exploited in one way or another. I want some clarity on who will be paying at the road tolls. And this should be very clear to the people because at the end of the day, it may be misunderstood and then people may end up being exploited, especially deep in the rural areas. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, do you have something to say? Then the minister will wind up.

5.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gaudioso Tindamanyire): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank all Members who have contributed to this motion. I have appreciated all your concerns and most of them have been incorporated in our amendments. However, I want to comment basically on one thing. What we are trying to introduce here is the second generation road fund. That presupposes that the users of the roads are actually contributing to the maintenance of the roads; and you will also see it in the composition of the board. That is why we have said that among the board members that are appointed by the minister, the chairman will be there. And we have deliberately done it in such a way that the chairman will be from the private sector such that the very people who are contributing to this second generation road fund are the ones who will be able to take charge of the fund.

About labour based uses; when we talked of district committees, we are trying to say that the agencies that will manage - we have UNRA which will basically target the national roads. But when it reaches the district and urban roads, the agencies will be at the district level. In other words, the people who will be managing our community roads will be from our different districts such that whatever methodology will be used, the supervisory authority in charge of that would be UNRA, which will be the leading agency in as far as the Road Fund is concerned.

Assuming bad performance occurs as hon. Ekanya has said, there is a performance report which will be coming back to Parliament through the minister. We have also proposed some measures on how we shall penalise some of these people who will not be able to perform as expected. I thank you for your contributions and let me ask the ministers to add and answer or allay all your fears. 

5.17
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague, the minister of finance will finally wind up as we move ON with the Bill. However, I should respond to some few comments made by honourable members. 

Hon. Loote, on the four axles - we have lorries where all the four axles are joined together so that when the vehicle is turning, all the four turn at the same time. Yes, it is true they have been banned in Tanzania. We members of what we call the Northern Corridor Transport Transit which is Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi and DRC met last year and passed that we ban them. They should have stopped by July last year and of course most of them start from the coast. As soon as we are putting that into effect, the transporters - and I want to say that most of these lorries the majority are actually Kenya based - took the Minister of Transport in Kenya to court and asked for an injunction. So, as of now, we are waiting for the court to finalise the decision but as far as we are concerned, we are mending all our roads in the five countries to ban those. 

In fact if I may tell the House, my argument with Kenya was that these axles are fixed in Kenya; they do not come with them from the factories. So I said, “Why don’t you start from where they are fixed rather than wait for them to be fixed? Ban their fixing so that they are not on our roads.” And we are working on that.  

Hon. Yiga asked whether the Road Fund should cover development as well. This Road Fund is meant mainly for road maintenance because as you might have noticed since about five or six years ago, we had reconstructed our roads and maintained them. But over the last six or so years, our road maintenance started deteriorating and that is why there is an outcry concerning roads. I think I might have to distribute the document I wrote and even presented to the committee of Parliament predicting this situation we are in way back in 2003/2004. The former chairman is here and the vice-chairman who was a member then is actually my colleague in Parliament. I will distribute that document again and I will also discuss it with Finance. 

As regards what is happening now, some of us knew what was going to happen unless we increased funds. But the reason is that the budget was competed for by so many from 2000 when we started UPE and so on. As such, road maintenance has been getting less - almost 50 percent of what we need - and this is what we ended up with. 

As for me, I am very happy that I am still around and as soon as this Road Fund starts, I can assure you and predict that in about two to three years, there will be no potholes on our roads in the country. I can assure you of this, if this fund is followed and this is going to be in the Hansard; in three years’ time, irrespective of who is in charge of the ministry, there will be no potholes on our roads with this Road Fund. This is because we saw the potholes coming five years ago.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am looking at this issue of public expenditure as a very important issue because Uganda is a very poor country and we are trying to use the money we collect as efficiently as possible. Therefore, I want to find out from the minister whether creating a new board or department outside your ministry could help because we are creating this board with administrative and management costs and this is the money that we are going to collect and also use to pay workers. Why don’t you reinforce your ministry? 

I am saying this because I had a problem with the Ministry of Tourism. When you look at the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, it is a naked ministry yet it is very important. However, we created the Tourism Association outside the ministry and they have an independent budget. We also created two other departments: export promotion is one of them, outside the ministry and it has an independent budget. 

The core ministry itself does not have enough funds and we are doing the same thing within your ministry. We are leaving it naked instead of bringing in a basket full of money so that you can improve on management and utilisation of funds without creating more administrative costs. Why are we cheating the taxpayers, Mr Speaker? I want to find out from the minister what would happen if this money was given to you to improve on your management and maintain your roads.

MR NASASIRA: You see this Road Fund is part of the major reforms we are carrying out in the ministry, if you notice. What has happened is that we are saying, let the ministry concentrate on policy formulation, regulation and monitoring. Let us form a specific body, the Road Authority, to concentrate on carrying out the work and let us guarantee that this Road Authority will have a bank for money for maintaining roads. So, we trust this Road Fund. You can call it a road bank but the money should be guaranteed because what happens is that when it remains in the Ministry of Finance, it is raided by them for other pressures. So we are stopping the raiding of road funds.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister has made a very fundamental statement and as politicians, we have noted the date - 18th of June 2008. He has said that within three years, as soon as this fund is created, there will be no potholes on the roads of Uganda. I really wish that hon. John Nasasira could live to see that statement come to pass. The point of clarification I would like to seek from him is as to whether we have potholes on our roads because of lack of money. Is it so? 

Less than a year ago, this same Parliament appropriated and gave Shs 153.8 billion for CHOGM activities and among those activities was the support for roads. The roads I am talking about are not many miles away from here. Jinja Road is near your office. There is a roundabout, which they call the Jinja Road roundabout with one road branching to your office on Port Bell road and the other one continuing to Nakawa. Despite that money, two to three months later, potholes were seen. You have to convince me that those potholes erupted because there was no money or the money was not enough.  

Isn’t it more an issue of management of the resources or shoddy work done as a result of corrupt tendencies in the minds of our contractors? Isn’t it because we contract poor contractors? Right now I can give you endless examples: Jinja-Kampala highway was given to a contracting firm called Multiplex, a Ugandan local firm. The work they are doing is not work! They should actually be handling feeder roads and not a highway like the Jinja-Kampala one. Is the type of work they are doing, which is so sub-standard, because we do not have money? I think there is much more, Mr Minister. 

I know the three years should be around the election time. I will ask you questions and you will have to convince me. I have always trusted you, hon. John Nasasira. Convince me that it is money, which is the cause of those potholes. 

MR NASASIRA: The best way to convince you is to have no potholes; that is all. But let me answer to the example you have used. The roundabout at Wampewo near my office was actually not done by CHOGM money. That road was part of improving the junctions from Kitgum House past Wampewo roundabout with the funds we got from Japan. The pothole you saw was not as a result of shoddy work. That place was dug up by the water department soon after. So the hole you saw - yes, there was a hole there but that hole was caused by the water department and you can go and check. It is on record. It was dug up and they are supposed to have repaired it but why I am saying this? I think will ask for an appointment so that we organise a big workshop for hon. Members of Parliament about the problems of roads, because what maintenance means is that you must intervene at the right time. It is like treating a patient. If you delay, the disease gets worse. 

Let me give an example of the Kampala-Jinja road. Kampala-Jinja road was reconstructed in 1991; fully reconstructed like we are doing the Jinja-Bugiri road, for a design life of 15 years. We should have now reconstructed it fully two years ago, but we didn’t have the money yet. So what the contractor is actually doing there is working on what we call “black spots” in different places, and that is one of the fairly promising Ugandan contractors we hope to be enabling for the future. Now you are telling me to kick him off the road! He might not be doing the work – in fact he has taken longer – but what he has done is supposed to last. He has been slow, he has delayed; it is part of the frustration you get when bringing up a child, but I also think Ugandans should be prepared that we train our contractors so that 20 years from now, we have contractors who earn money from our loans and from our budget, and who keep it in Uganda rather than earn money and take it away. And the sooner we get our contractors competent, the better our roads will be. So these are some of the things we have. 

Then there is what they call shoddy work. I am sorry –

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up. 

MR NASASIRA: If you get half the budget and you are under pressure to keep the roads passable, you will sometimes do half the quality of the work and that is seen as shoddy work. Yes, the work is not good enough but it is what you are able to do just to keep sustaining the road network, but this is now coming to an end. There will be enough money and there will be timely interventions and within that cycle of the years, I expect no potholes. I am ready for your answer in 2011 wherever I will be; I will make sure I am still alive -(Laughter) 

I appeal for this formula; it is good most Members of Parliament are here. The formula will first of all guarantee that all areas of Uganda get their share, although hon. Okupa is worried about other formulae. The formula will also guarantee that you get the share according to the length of roads you have in the constituency or in the sub-county rather than saying that, “Let every constituency get so much”. There are some constituencies with 100 kilometres of roads, and there are those with 300 kilometres. So, you will get funds proportional to the length of roads you have and that is fairer than –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, the variable you have used of the kilometres you have in each constituency would be a good one but you know, already there are some constituencies that are big but have fewer kilometres of the roads that one will take. So, those will suffer. That is why we are worried about that variable of using kilometres; that is why we are opting for a uniform equitable amount to be given per constituency, because some constituencies have lesser kilometres than others. So those who have more kilometres will definitely get more money and leave those disadvantaged already – 

THE SPEAKER: I thought it was said that this money is for maintenance rather than development. So, if there is maintenance, you maintain what you have. I think stress should be put that there is another fund, which goes for development so that there is equitable distribution of money for development. This comes in for maintenance. This is what was said. So, they can only give you money to maintain something, which is in existence. 

MR NASASIRA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. But you see, on that I would also like to address the issue of development, which hon. Yiga raised. This fund is meant to guarantee maintenance. We must solve maintenance first. We cannot continue like this. Maintenance is intervening on time so that roads are kept, so that they are good all the time, and that they are maintained all the time. 

Then development is a separate subject. The money for development will be raised by government for upgrading roads and it will have a separate account but this one is to guarantee maintenance. It is also an assurance by Uganda that we really would like to maintain what we invest in and, therefore, we can go to banks to borrow for upgrading roads or even for other friends to get grants. So the development part will be separate. On maintenance, this is a sure guarantee that there is always money for maintenance. You know our maintenance culture has not been very good; not only on roads but many things. 

Of course if a road is graded and after three months of rains it is bad, you say it is shoddy work. But you are grading it when you should have put there gravel. But you don’t have the money for gravel so you just grade and somebody who is watching that road thinks it has been repaired and three months later if it is skidding, he says “Shoddy work, corruption, they have eaten the money.” I can’t guarantee – I am not God to know everybody’s heart but I think if there is corruption, it is not a norm, it is an exception. If there was adequate financing, the norm would be good roads, not that they have eaten the money. 

Hon. Byanyima talked about gangs; as you saw in the budget we are going to buy equipment for every district to maintain their roads and we are going to establish maintenance road gangs. We are going to establish a roads army to maintain roads. This is going to be a major exercise of getting people to maintain roads. We are going to get a roads army which is not armed with guns but armed with maintenance equipment. (Laughter) 

MS NYOMBI: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for giving way. The idea of buying new equipment is good but I want to inform you that even the old equipment given to districts is all down with no maintenance; they are just not functioning. So as you buy new ones, put a budget for maintaining the equipment. 

MR NASASIRA: The budget for maintaining that equipment has been put into account and I can tell you that the budget for annually maintaining equipment for all districts will be Shs 57 billion and it is all catered for. 

THE SPEAKER: I think it is a welcome idea to give road units to the districts; even Members can participate by using these road units to maintain roads in their constituencies. 

MR NASASIRA: Yes, these units will be there as long as there is enough money for maintaining them. 

Supervision: the Road Authority – if you realise in the law which you passed here, honourable Members, we said we will interview everyone; whoever goes on that authority and that is what has happened. We did not only depend on the interviewing board; we even hired an independent consultant. I think that consultant came from the UK or somewhere, to assess each individual that is being employed. Now I can see from hon. Okupa that complaints have started. 

THE SPEAKER: How?

MR NASASIRA: This consultant that is assessing the interviewees has no tribe in Uganda; I don’t even know his religion. If it happens that maybe you find one or two more people of a certain tribe, fortunately for me I heard the last complaint and if I may say it, it was that, “It seems they are employing more Baganda”. So I said, “Thank God they are not Banyankole or they would have said the minister is influence peddling”. But when I saw the first level of directors, I think one comes from Teso - that is after the executive director. One comes from Buganda, another one I think comes from Kasese. I don’t think I have seen a Munyankole there yet. But really these are people that have been interviewed and passed on merit. So which way do we go? Do we have proportional tribal representation without taking experience and quality in place and then we are politically stable? 

Please, I beg you. At the end of the day when the exercise is finished you will find that this tribal thing has balanced itself. That is what I think. So, let us get quality people; we have got quality people in UCC. When we started it, we followed the same method with the Uganda Communications Commission. So let us get quality people in these organisations then we shall have work done. But now when we start interviews and then we bring in tribes and then you want supervision, I beg you, hon. Members and Mr Speaker, let us follow the exercise of the interviews we are doing. I get names when they are finished. I have not interviewed anyone myself, neither have my colleagues. So, I beg you that we follow that.

I think basically that is what is done. We shall try and work out a fair formula. I agree that community roads have been neglected and they need to be reconstructed but all this is because everyone wants a good road. If the fund is enough, and the community roads are good and district roads become good as well as national roads, there will be no need for, “We want 60 percent.” Nobody will be caring about the percentages. The target is to use this fund to rebuild our roads and maintain them and there will be no problems of percentages if the formula is scientific and fair. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Finance, would you like to make brief comments on your motion as you wind up?

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUITES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Rebecca Otengo expects me to give a scientific response but I may fall short of that. First of all, I would like to thank all the Members for generally accepting and supporting this motion. 

Hon. Okupa Elijah prayed that 10 percent going to administration was on the higher side. On 27 September 2007 when we submitted the Certificate of Financial Implications we prayed that the amount going to administration should not exceed 3 percent of the funds that will be appropriated and this was tabled here and I have a copy. So, we maintained this prayer. (Applause)

The second issue was raised by hon. Nathan Byanyima about ring-fencing of this fund. You will recall that we ring-fenced the Energy Fund and now we have Shs 208 billion of this money, which has been ring-fenced in the Bank of Uganda. This year, after Parliament has appropriated the Budget, we shall be giving an additional Shs 109 billion and the Ministry of Finance does not touch this money in any way. So the funds that will be going to the Road Fund will also be ring-fenced and as I mentioned earlier, we have already identified Shs 240 billion in the new budget that will go towards this fund and the additional Shs 35 billion has been recognised in the Budget to support the road maintenance so we are on board together. 

Additionally, hon. Kabanda says she did not see the road tolls being indicated in the Bill. This is indicated in the Bill on page 13 under item 21, sub-section 1(v) where road tolls will also be a source of this funding. So, I thank you, Mr Speaker and I urge Members to support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, thank you minister and thank you committee and Members for your contribution. The motion is that the Bill entitled “The Uganda Road Fund Bill, 2007” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

The Uganda Road Fund Bill, 2007

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think we shall deal with this tomorrow -(Laughter)- I think we have done something. Tomorrow we shall deal with the statement of the Minister of Internal Affairs; we shall deal with cotton policy matter and we shall deal with this one. 

But honourable minister, may I ask you, because I read you the programme from today to end of August. I did not indicate the Vote-on-Account. I do not know whether you intend to bring anything on Vote-on-Account. I did not allocate a date for it because I never received indications from your end.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We shall be bringing the Vote-on-Account next week on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean you want it to be done on Tuesday?

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Because on Tuesday that is when we start the motion for thanking the President for his speech. But then you can bring it. You send the paper we shall see how we accommodate you on the Order Paper.

MR OMACH: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, with this -

5.44
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I have very reliable information that the loss of energy by UMEME has now tripled and yet the objective of privatising was to reduce it by half. So, through you I want to ask that you direct the Minister of Energy to make a statement to the House. Otherwise, we are the ones paying.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. The Leader of Government Business has heard. I think then we – yes, hon. Alaso.

5.45
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. By the time we went on recess, the Ministry of Works was supposed to present to us a statement on road safety and the extent of implementation of the rules and the regulations that have been set up. Anyway, we went on recess and I am hoping that somehow the business of Parliament is saved one way or the other even when we are in a new session -

THE SPEAKER: It was saved.

MS ALASO: Because the question really of accidents continues to be a big thing. So, is it possible to ensure that the Ministry of Works gives us that statement?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

5.46
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Mr Speaker, we are supposed to make statements on 30th and we were ready but you know on 30th Parliament had adjourned to committees discussing the Budget. What we have agreed with my colleague - in fact in the Prime Minister’s statement, the Prime Minister had said the Minister of Internal Affairs or Works would make a statement. What we have agreed with my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, is that we shall come with two statements because you see road safety is policy, regulation and enforcement. 

The Ministry of Transport deals with formulating the policy and preparing the law and the Ministry of Internal Affairs makes sure that the law is enforced. So, we shall come with two statements: one from the Ministry of Works and Transport to deal with what we have put in place vis-à-vis policy and the law. The last statement will be from the Ministry of Internal Affairs on matters of enforcement. I would like to say that as soon as we have consulted the Speaker’s office –

THE SPEAKER: No, you just send me the copies tomorrow; I will find time to receive them. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, this could have been an oversight on the part of the Clerk or your office but I remember last year around November we passed a motion to establish a select committee to investigate the alleged anomalies in the recruitment of the cadet police officers. However, since that time we have not received that select committee report although the documents were submitted here by the Minister of Internal Affairs. I am just reminding you.

THE SPEAKER: Select committee on what?

MR OKUPA: A committee to carry out an investigation into the alleged flaws in the recruitment of the cadet police officers. Although the Minister of Internal Affairs submitted the documents here, the committee has never been composed. I do not know whether the problem is on the side of my Chief Whip or on the office of the Clerk to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is one of the functions of the offices of the whips. Let them liaise and advise me. Thereafter, I will advise you.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When a resolution that a select committee be constituted to look into the recruitment and terms and conditions of service for the police was passed by Parliament, I diligently wrote to the Clerk to that effect. Actually I still have my copy. So, I think what we need to do is to –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think check with the Clerk and then we shall –

MR WADRI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I will take it up.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A few days ago the House agreed that a committee be set up to look into the police conduct. This to me looks like duplication. Is there a way of marrying the two?

THE SPEAKER: No, the other one had limited mandate, while this one has a wide mandate. In any case this one has been set up in a new session while the other was set up during the old session. I do not know, but let them first trace the records; we shall see what to do. Otherwise, that will tantamount to amending the resolution, which we passed last Tuesday. Anyway, let them sort out the other one because this one is being sorted out. Actually what we are doing now is to wait for the names of honourable members to sit on this select committee so that it can start its work because it has a timeframe within which to submit a report.

With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m., prompt. That is when we will start the debate on the Minister of Internal Affairs’ statement.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 June 2008 at 2 p.m.)






 






