Thursday, 17 June 2010

Parliament met at 10.37 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this morning’s meeting. I would also like to welcome the Leader of Opposition; he has been missing from our midst for some time. You are most welcome.

I also want to announce, hon. Members, that on 20th June – this Sunday – His Excellency is inviting you, Members of Parliament, to a National Prayer function to take place at Kololo Independence Ground at 9 O’clock in the morning – I do not know who the pastor will be.

10.40
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Soroti Woman Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have noticed that Members have raised issues about that National Prayer meeting. So, I thought that I should help them with some vital information. I am not part of the Presidency; and so, I am not speaking on behalf of it. 

However, I would like Members to know that it is important for us to pray for our country. That time has come, in the history of Uganda, for us to humble ourselves, like the Bible says, and repent for what is going wrong in this nation. No matter whether you believe that things are wrong or right, we owe ourselves a time of humbling and prayer to seek God’s mercy upon this country; and given that we are about to get into the election period that is characterised by all sorts of disagreements, intolerance and violence, it is more important that we come together as a nation. 

We are also part of the nation, Madam Speaker, where we know that many children are being sacrificed with innocent blood being poured left and right; people are dying here and there are many people suffering from all sorts of things. 

As you are aware, as a country, we have suffered tragedies – the landslides, floods – I think we need to take a day for National Prayer. It is not just an ordinary prayer. I understand it to be a day of national repentance. So, I would like to ask you as leaders to try to lead this country in the way we will pray on that day. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was Pastor Alice. (Laughter) Yes, Leader of the Opposition.

10.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you so much. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, it has been a very long time since the accident that occurred to me on the morning of 11 October 2009 kept me out of work.

I formally communicated to the Speaker that I would resume my office on the 1st June, which I did. Unfortunately, since then, apart from the State Opening and the Budget, I have not appeared in the House and did not, therefore, get the opportunity to make a brief statement.

I would like to say that the accident that occurred on that day brought out many things. First of all, the vehicle that I was travelling in was completely destroyed. I lost my driver, the late Sam Ongia, who had been with me for many years. I had faced many things with him; for example, he was at one time abducted and burnt with electric gadgets and things like that, on my account. Unfortunately, the Lord ruled that he would continue to the next life on that day.

I also lost a colleague, Innocent Alori, who was travelling with me. She was a young lady who came from my constituency. She, unfortunately, died before fulfilling her expectations in life. But most importantly are the circumstances that I found myself in, because nothing in that accident could have allowed me to live, yet it is only I who survived.

When the accident occurred, various people were informed. The RDC of Gulu, Col. Walter Ochora, and many of my friends in Gulu did everything to arrange for me to be moved from Bweyale, where the accident had occurred, to Gulu. The Chairman of Masindi, Mr Birijja, who is not in the chair now, also strived very much to arrange for my movement. Lacor Hospital arranged for an ambulance, and the Army in Gulu also arranged for an ambulance. But the ambulance that arrived first was that of Gulu Independent Hospital, where I was admitted for one day.

Parliament, through our leadership, hon. Alice Alaso and her colleagues, and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament, plus the technical people in Parliament, did everything possible to have me flown to Kampala the next day, which actually happened.

On my arrival at Kampala, I was welcomed by a very large crowd of well-wishers. From that day, including the one day I was in Gulu, the doctors had to be begged to allow people to see me. Throughout the period that I was in hospital and after, many Ugandans from all walks of life – ministers, the Prime Minister, the Speaker of Parliament - sent best wishes or came to see me physically. I will personally arrange to thank each of these individuals. I will also arrange for a prayer. 

The main thing I would like to say at this moment is a deep appreciation on my own behalf and on behalf of my family for the support shown by everybody when we suffered the accident; for the goodwill that was expressed across the board; and most important of all for me, is for the great grace that God bestow upon me that I came out of the accident. Although seriously injured, the chest bones and the internal organs were left intact. When they found me, they assumed all my legs were broken, and after eight days I was able to be discharged from hospital. I had to remain under the good care of our family doctor, Dr Ben Khingi.

I would like to thank Parliament, Gulu Independent Hospital, Mola Clinic in Bweyale, and the International Hospital, Kampala, for all the services they gave.

When I was recuperating at home, I was visited by two groups of people that I must mention. The first group was the Parliamentary Press Association. Immediately after I was returned home, they came as group to visit me. Some two weeks later, on Idd day, they organised and came with two goats and they said that when you are a Kawonawo (survivor), they give you some soup to help you recuperate. 

The second group was that of children from Kampala Kindergarten. These children had visited Parliament about a month before my accident. When they heard of the accident, they were very distressed and they asked their teachers to allow them visit me. They came and we had sodas but after they presented to me this file. In this file, the children instead of buying get well wish cards actually wrote their get well messages. I would like to randomly read two.  

“Kampala Kindergarten 27 October, 
To hon. Ogenga Latigo: 

Dear Latigo, 
Sorry for the accident. We love you so much for being our friend. We wish you a good recovery. We felt bad when you got that accident, but when we heard that you had recovered, we felt happy. 

From Hope Kisakye, Primary 1.”

“My name is Sheba Murungi 

“Dear Latigo, we are very sorry of the accident. I wish you to recover well”.

Nobody told them what to do, they wrote them in their language; but the most important in the content of all this is the spirit they expressed. I do not know how to pay back to these children the spirit they showed. I can only ask God to keep them well.

Finally, my colleagues, hon. Wadri and many others on the Opposition side who held Fort when I was not there. I would like to thank them for that. 

When I was away, three of our colleagues passed away. I was not there to convey condolences to all of them, and I will formally say that I am very sorry that they passed away.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you Leader of the Opposition. Just before the Leader of Government Business comes in, I just wanted to say that there is somebody who needs to be thanked, and that is the Commander of the Defence Forces of this country because he sent a plane to fly you to Kampala.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I did not formally structure this statement, but there were two offers from Government; both the Defence Forces and the Police had a helicopter to transport me and I am deeply appreciative of this. I must put this on record that at the opening of Parliament, the Speaker formally welcomed me back and had very kind compliments upon my return.

10.56
THE MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is an opportune moment that when I act as both the Prime Minister and as Chief Whip, I have the opportunity to welcome our good friend hon. Latigo. 

But before I say something about that, I would like to appreciate the contribution by hon. Alaso on the issue of praying for our country and ourselves. I think there is so much goodness around and the problem is that we do not know how to tap into it; sometimes we see it and we do not recognise it.

So, hon. Alaso, it is good that we can all come together in prayer and have no difference in praying for our country. So, those who can make it to the prayer place, please do so. It was an appropriate comment from the Speaker when she said that you are a preacher and we never realise that there is so much in us until certain occasions help us to bring it out. So, congratulations on being a preacher.

Regarding the survival of hon. Latigo, there are many things you can say, and I listened to what you had to say. You can thank God and why not, because we do not know what happens after death. People think that you go to heaven; others think that you go to hell. But none of us in this House has any experience of what it is like in both places, if there are those places at all, because we also have this concept of a place which is very earthly. I cannot imagine heaven being a place or hell being a place, but that is how man looks at those two places. 

We thank God for sparing hon. Latigo to be with us. I think as you said, hon. Latigo, it was a miracle that you survived. Indeed, you are a miracle even in your existence. I do not think there are too many people that scale the heights and present themselves the way you do. I think this House has recognised that you are above the ground and probably the Maker wished us to still have you so that you can lead us in the next phase of our political development.     

You are lucky to have been around to see the appreciation; to hear it and have it presented to you in the form we have graphically presented it. I think that should give us all a sense of humility, that we do not realise how much we are until that moment comes. And in your case, you have had a real occasion where, as the Red Pepper would say, you have cheated death. But in a way you have appreciated it probably more than you would have done if you had not gone through that experience. 

Let me complete what I want to say on this occasion. Hon. Latigo, you have a challenge ahead of you. The rest of this House, as we enter the election period, will need sober leadership on both sides, and hon. Alaso made reference to that. Perhaps it is through prayers that we can realise the universality of our existence; but also perhaps it is through prayer that we can ask for guidance; guidance not in party activity but guidance in acting in the right way because leadership derives from the Maker. The laws of nature and the laws of society, are connected. That is why I believe that your survival is connected with the survival of this country in your leadership role. 

So, take up the challenge. Let us all sober up; let us all realise that we have a bigger role than we imagine. Hon. Latigo, you attracted everybody to yourself by having that accident. (Laughter) So, keep alive now. We thank God for giving you to us and giving us this House and the country; and do not thank Government as if it was some distance away from you. Humanity is with all of us; anyone who does a good thing should be appreciated. Why not today appreciate Latigo even when you have an accident; and even better still, even if we did not appreciate a person when a person is in need, it is only Godly that you have to respond. Thank God everybody responded and you are alive. Welcome to the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I wanted to announce the seventh annual general meeting of the Parliamentarians Co-operative Savings and Credit Society tomorrow in the conference hall at 11 O’clock, and in the evening there will be some kyamucation in the Parliamentary gardens. So, you might receive your dividends in the morning and dance the afternoon away. Kyamucation is to dance. (Laughter) The Members know what kyamucation is.

11.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you. Madam Speaker, we on this side are of course the privileged side really, and I do not want to belabour our feelings about having the Leader of the Opposition back; but we thank God that he is back and alive. 

We were also privileged even in an accident to practice leading the House on the Opposition side. So, I think we have enough potential here; and you can just tap into it and we will always be willing to work with you. 

We want to appreciate our colleagues for the co-operation they gave us while so many of us acted, and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker were both always keen to find out who among us – you know we could even act for an hour and that was it. 

The Leader of the Opposition just said he did not plan a statement - he has not written his statement. I want to fill in just a small portion of what I think should come out in this statement of the Leader of the Opposition.

I was privileged to be in touch all the time and on phone - I want to emphasise our appreciation to the Deputy Speaker. I want to recall the night she literally did not sleep by trying to coordinate and get us to sort out issues with International Hospital; to get the CDF; to get us an alternative plane just in case ours, the one of International Hospital, did not work. It is not about the office, but she went far beyond the requirements of her office. I remember talking to her for the first time at around 2.00 a.m. just to get Prof. Latigo flown this side. We would like to appreciate that. 

The other person, unfortunately I do not remember his name, but there is this boy who sat on the vehicle after you got an accident and moved with you in an ambulance up to Gulu Independent Hospital. And every other time I was talking to him, he kept saying, “He is fine. No, he is not dead; he is alive. We will reach hospital.” I do not remember his name, but I think that it would be good that he knows that we took special appreciation of the intervention he made in escorting professor all the way from Masindi up to Gulu. That is the fill-in I would like to do this morning. Thank you.

11.07
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you. I thought I should add my voice in appreciating the return of the Leader of the Opposition to the House, because in his absence we felt like orphans and now we are more solid, more united, and our hopes have been revived. I think that is very important. 

One point which I feel that we have learnt from this disaster comes from the Bible, and it is that in all bad things, God has packaged something good. And I think that the good that I have seen in this is that our colleagues from the other side of the House have really stood with us and they all expressed sympathy to us; and it shows that if we can be united in disaster, let us also be united in joy. This is very important that we are united and we help one another. It is important that we must be alive. 

Madam Speaker, when people look at us talk in this Parliament from the gallery or read in the papers, they think we are arch enemies. They may not even imagine that if an honourable member from the other side finds me involved in an accident, he would get involved in saving my life. But I have seen the contrary; I have seen that people have visited each other. I have personally taken trouble to visit some of my colleagues from the other side who have been sick and I have been very touched by people from the other side who have visited us. This is a very wonderful spirit. I think we must demonstrate it outside there so that the people we lead learn from our example. 

I want to tell our Leader of the Opposition that God has a message in all this. When God preserves your life, He does it for a purpose. In the Book of Jonah, there is somewhere that God wanted Jonah to go, but Jonah wanted to design his own destiny. So, God had to put it in the stomach of the fish in order for Jonah to reassess his assignment. God might have put you in the fish for you to reassign the value in your life. So, I would like to congratulate you through God that you have been preserved and the will of God will be fulfilled through you. 

I want to thank you, Rt hon. Deputy Speaker. You have saved many lives. You saved our family when we were in a desperate situation with our brother and friend, Dr Okulo-Epak. You did everything within your power in order to send money from Uganda to South Africa within one hour; it had never happened; but it did happen -(Applause)- and may God preserve your life and that of the Clerk and the Speaker, and all those who are involved. And may God preserve all our lives.

You know we have all been complaining about potholes, but now that they have been sorted out, the straightness of the road has been turned against us. So, we all have to learn how to pray before we start a journey. Never be so much in a hurry not to pray before starting a journey. It is very important so that the grace of God may cover us. May God bless you, the Leader of Opposition; may God bless the Deputy Speaker and the Speaker, and may God bless the House. I thank you. (Applause)

11.17
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. On my own behalf and that of the people of Obongi who I represent here, I would like to thank the Almighty God for preserving the life of our Leader of the Opposition, Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo, and for his return to the House. 

This is more so because the people of Obongi County owe some people here for having contributed tremendously to the improvement of their lives. One of them is Prof. Ogenga Latigo and the other one is you, Madam Deputy Speaker. You have been among the many who accepted our humble invitation to Ugandans to come and witness the conditions of suffering in Obongi. 

In that fateful month we were preparing for our Obongi Day, 2009, we had invited highly respected people, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, His Excellency the President of the Government of Southern Sudan, Gen. Salva Kiir Maradit, and our Leader of the Opposition as the highest ranking person from the side of the Opposition. All these people had confirmed and the people of Obongi were itching to welcome all of them. Only to be stunned by the sad news that the Leader of the Opposition, Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo, would not attend the function because he was involved in a very deadly accident. 

That news nearly killed the Obongi Day. People really wanted to see Prof. Ogenga Latigo once on that day since he had ever been there and the people had known who he is and wanted to fraternise with him again. So when we got the news, it was very shocking. But all comes from God and to God shall be our return. 

11.14
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (NRM, Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, Prof. Latigo the person, and Prof. Latigo the Leader of the Opposition, are two different people. Prof. Latigo as a person regardless of the position he holds, is a very good man; he is a very professional man. (Laughter) And clearly, this country would have lost a very important and useful man who has distinguished himself in the academics, and is now distinguishing himself as Leader of the Opposition. 

The accident was regrettable; lives were lost. And indeed, the absence of Prof. Latigo from the House caused a lot of anxiety and sadness. I have no doubt in my mind that if Prof. Latigo had been in this House, the experience we had of banging tables and kicking doors and finally ending in suspension of our colleagues from the House would have been prevented [HON. MEMBER: “Hear! Hear!”] He would have prevented it; he would have prevailed on the situation and it is regrettable that this accident happened. 

We praise God that finally you were saved and you are back in the House. The name of the Lord be praised! Thank you very much. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DISSOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2010/2011 IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 129 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

11.16 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, “WHEREAS clause 4 of Article 154 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund account for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the service of Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriations Act, whichever is earlier;

AND WHEREAS the Government financial year will end on the 30th June 2010; and it is the belief of the President that by that date this House will not have approved the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the Financial Year 2010/2011;

AND WHEREAS it is necessary that the President authorises the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund account for the purposes of meeting expenditures necessary to carry on the services of Government;

AND WHEREAS clause 5(a) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorisation of the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund account for purposes of clause 4 has to be approved by a resolution of Parliament; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament approves vote-on-account allocated to the various votes attached to this resolution, which has been distributed.”

Madam speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, I think there were some - you know, last week we required you to complete your motion by laying on the Table the names of the accounting officers before we can proceed.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, that is correct. In compliance with your guidance, I hereby lay on the Table the list of accounting officers for the Financial Year 2010/2011 and the list has been distributed through the letter of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to the Office of the Clerk to Parliament and to Members. I lay it on the Table.

11.20
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not want to derail this motion, but last time I did raise an issue concerning the accounting officers on the list that was laid on Table - accounting officers of local governments. I do happen to be the chair of the Local Governments Accounts Committee of this House, and when the Clerk eventually distributed the list that had been laid on Table, I see very many names of officers who actually are under investigation for misappropriation of public funds and financial mismanagement.

I think it will be unfortunate for us - first of all, the letter dated 10th June from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government, to the Secretary to the Treasury, just recommends these officers to be appointed. We do not know whether they have already been appointed as accounting officers. But in case they have been appointed, on behalf of my committee, we have got strong objection on many of the officers that have been appointed.

I will give you an example, Madam Speaker. Here with me is the latest Auditor-General’s report and I have just done some random sampling. Abim District unaccounted for funds are almost Shs 326 million; just a small district like Abim. Adjumani Shs 362 million; Apac - this is the worst – Shs 626 million; Bukedea Shs 275 million; Arua Shs 60 million; Gulu Shs 52 million; Kotido, Shs 196 million; Maracha-Terego Shs 380 million; Nakawa Division - just a division - you are talking about Shs 700 million; Tororo, Shs 430 million and the list goes on. When we talk about just unaccounted for funds, the total figure of all the districts is Shs 5.8 billion.

So, how do we allow these accounting officers who have failed to manage the financial resources to be re-appointed this financial year? I think we will be wasting our time as a committee and indeed as Parliament to allow this list to pass - these people to be entrusted with public resources without discussing this recommendation from the Ministry of Local Government with us as Parliament, and maybe with the appointing authority, who is the Secretary to the Treasury.

I would, therefore, pray - and I brought this to the attention of the Minister before we walked in - I would pray that our committee be given an opportunity together with the Office of the Auditor General and the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Local Government that have made this recommendation, to have a short meeting - the recommendation is to have these officers appointed as accounting officers yet some of them as we have been going around upcountry, we have referred their cases to Police, but they are still in office.

So, let us have a short meeting before we can go ahead and approve the estimates of Local Government. Otherwise, we have very strong objections on this entire list and some of them like the CAO of Isingiro; the CAO of Budaka; the CAO of Kisoro; and the CAO of Manafwa - in fact they are really many on this list. We just need to sit and harmonise so that the Finance Minister will be cautious when re-appointing some of them as accounting officers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have said that these accounting officers have being investigated. If you had told me that they had been convicted, that would be a different matter – yes; but you have said they are under investigation. Since they are under investigation, allow the investigations to be completed and then they can be removed. The appointing authority can appoint and disappoint. I think we should not delay funding to the local governments of this country because these matters have not been completed.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, let me make a short reply. I think the law is very clear. We are not seeking for their dismissal. If you are being investigated, you cannot hold that office. You even interfere with investigations. We are talking about service delivery, including districts like Kamuli; Kamuli is also on this list. (Laughter) Here are accounting officers who have been queried by the constitutional office of the Attorney-General.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the honourable member for giving way. The Auditor General makes a report to the Parliament of Uganda and the relevant committees of Parliament review these reports and make recommendations to this House, which we must approve.

I wanted to seek clarification from the hon. Chairperson of Local Government Accounts Committee on whether during the process of these reviews, you have made a recommendation to this House and the House has made an approval of what you want us to take a decision on now, or you are still reviewing the process so that we could be guided properly. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is some information from the Minister of Finance.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk about accountability from the districts, some of the CAOs are not the ones who are handling everything. They have accounting officers from sub-counties and whatever. So, when the information comes, all those people must make accountability to him. So, when we are investigating - they are investigating so that those people give the right information. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the other day when we did push this issue to this day, I remember debating and saying if the person – as the minister was saying that day – he was involved in CHOGM and is being investigated; the office is there; the minister can appoint some other person –(Interjections)- to act. So, from this perspective or from the perspective of that day, we are not stopping the ministry from operating; other people can be appointed. 

But coming to the point, Madam Speaker, in 2007/2008, if you look at the document of the Auditor-General, there was about Shs 6 billion not accounted for. In 2008/2009, there was about another Shs 5 billion not accounted for. The Committee on Local Government produced these reports, brought them to this House, and we adopted them to have these accounting officers investigated and prosecuted by the Executive; but nothing has happened. This is the third time. If you look at those three consecutive years, we adopted the reports and asked the Executive to deal with the accounting officers. 

So, I think the right thing for us to do is to ask the Minister of Local Government and Committee on Local Government, to sit and agree because these people should be suspended. If we keep rolling them, this will be a third time. The fourth time they will say, “We shall do the same thing and nothing will happen.” We must bite. We must set the precedent. This is the third time. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I think this kind of justice, which is being stampeded, is a bit problematic. If you had told me that this CAO number so-and-so; Mr so-and-so in 2007 we reported this; 2008, we reported this; 2009 we reported this; and this year we are reporting this; that would be a different matter. But now they have just brought these accounting officers here and you want to stampede their dismissal! (Interjections) Yes; where is your report and where are your recommendations hon. Chairperson of the Public Service Committee? Where are your recommendations, which we have adopted and which we are flouting now?

MR KATUNTU: Let me make the responses and also make myself clear. One, I am not saying accounting officers should be dismissed; that is not the point. 

Two, most of these accounting officers we are talking about are in our report, which we have already laid on the Table and Parliament has not yet had time to discuss them; but they are already your property. They are no longer the property of the committee. There are about three of them. 

Some two reports have already been passed implicating -(Interjection)- yes, accounting officers. I do not want to mention those names. That is why I was seeking an opportunity for our committee, the Ministry of Local Government and maybe Ministry of Finance, to go into the details of name per district according to each report. That is what we are saying. 

But for us to come here and approve this Vote-on-Account when money is entrusted to people who have fraudulently – in fact, Madam Speaker, that was all unaccounted for money. We also have fraudulent transactions among other districts. Masaka, Shs 62 million; Packwach, Shs 142 million; Lubaga Division, Shs 400 million and so many – Mbarara, Shs 30 million and – many others. I do not want to go into those details, but you can discuss them with the Minister and the Permanent Secretary. 

If we want to fight corruption, this is the time. This is the time –(Interruption)- yes - I will give you an opportunity, Prof. Kabwegyere. Let me make my point first. Let me just - okay, I will.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I want to get it from hon. Katuntu about what this meeting between him or his committee and the Minister is supposed to achieve. Could you articulate exactly the ultimate goal of this meeting? What is it meant to achieve? [MR KIBANZANGA: “Knowing a thief is enough.”]

MR KATUNTU: I do not want to give details of the names of each accounting officer and the money owed to the Hansard now, before we reconcile ourselves with the Minister. If you want, I can go ahead and name people; but I think that is not correct -(Interjections)- that is not correct.

What we should do is to sit with the Minister; agree on these names; and see the gravity of the matter. Some of these accounting officers have been eating money in the name of the people of Karamoja –(Interjections)- in the name of the people. I wish the Minister for Karamoja were here; she would tell you what we are talking about. I am even surprised some Members from those regions are not coming to defend this position –(Interjections)- because -(Interjections)- their people are the ones missing out on service delivery.  I am trying to fight for your people and you are seated –(Interjections)

11.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, accountability is a function of the accounting officer. The accounting officer must perform that function and when there is an audit query, he must look for all those accountabilities. What I am not sure we are proposing is whether Mr X, as an accounting officer, is the one to blame. That is why we should allow investigations to be undertaken to see the role of the accounting officer –(Interjections)- let me complete my statement. The accounting officer must follow up those accountabilities.

Secondly, being an accounting officer does not mean you are the one who was responsible for non-accountability –(Interjections)- because the staff are -(Interruptions)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I am surprised that, that is coming from a Minister –(Interjections)- of Public Service. The law is very clear. The role of an accounting officer as the word or phrase goes; he is pecuniary and personally responsible for all financial accountabilities in his area of jurisdiction. Is the Minister, therefore, in order to say that an accounting officer is not responsible for some other accountabilities of the area where he is responsible –(Interjections)- when the law is very clear? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I have not understood hon. Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee. Is it your intention to sit with the Minister and say, “Delete this person?” Are you going to appoint other accounting officers?  (Interjections)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker that is not my intention. (Interjections) For example, the letter here is a recommendation from the Ministry of Local Government. I thought since you are a minister, you should know what your colleagues wrote. We are saying that we do not want the Minister of Finance to act on this recommendation because some of the people mentioned have got very serious queries against them; others are guilty of financial impropriety. At the end of the day, it will be the Minister of Finance –(Interjections)- who is the appropriate appointing authority, to decide.

11.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the first instance, what is happening is unprecedented but it is already happening. Unfortunately, we in the House seem to handle it in a way that will cause unnecessary anxiety. 

Hon. Abdu Katuntu said that as a committee, we have a problem in regard to accountability in respect of certain districts. We wonder how the appointment of those officers, who are yet to account fully, reflects on our commitment to ensure that people charged with responsibility account. 

What he asked was that they would meet briefly. He did not mention the details, but in my mind a brief meeting would most importantly be to exact a commitment from the Ministry of Finance to get clarification from Local Government that look, what you have raised is a real problem and we commit to dealing with it. We don’t want them to actually discuss it here now that the matter has come. If we had adjourned to give them 20 or 30 minutes to sit down – please, I am saying this - Madam Speaker, I beg some of my colleagues from Finance not to be emotional about this. There is no intention to sabotage because the law is very clear that we must pass the Vote-on-Account; nobody would block it. My request is, let them sit down. If they can’t agree, they will come back and say, “We have failed to agree”, and we proceed.

11.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my friend, the Leader of the Opposition. First of all, as a sector ministry, we are not against the idea of sitting down with my Committee on Local Government Accounts and looking at these recommended names. Certainly, we have always interacted and we can still interact. 

Having said that, what you are seeing as a list is a recommendation from the Ministry of Local Government to the Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, and this recommendation is based on the fact that these are the accounting officers that we have in office as of now. As we speak, we have no reason whatsoever not to trust them to continue doing the accountability job.

Notwithstanding what is in the report of the Auditor-General, these accounting officers can be removed any time. I can assure you that if there is proof beyond reasonable doubt that they are involved in financial impropriety, we have a procedure in the Public Service on how these officers are dealt with. 

As of now, there is no way you can crucify a person who has an appointment letter as an accounting officer and you say, “I am taking this action against you”. You will be shooting yourself in the foot. This person can even go to court because you have no basis of doing that. I want to appeal to you because we are committed to this.

The Secretary to the Treasury has written to this Parliament saying, “These are the people I intend to appoint”. Now, the intention to appoint is effective 1st July when the financial year starts. Between now and 1st July, anything can happen. But I want to assure you that with your co-operation and with interaction and discussions, we may not appoint if we establish for sure that some of them are terribly tainted. This is what I want to promise you. I appeal to you that let us pass Vote-on-Account –(Technical interruption due to power surge)

(The House was suspended at 11.46 a.m.)

(On resumption at 11.53 a.m., the Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, do you have something - I think all these microphones are on together and I do not know how we shall record. Okay, I think it is okay now.

11.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): I just want to confirm to the House that hon. Katuntu has been very good. He drew my attention to his intentions to raise the matters he has raised on the Floor of the House about accounting officers mentioned in the Auditor-General’s reports. After he had done that, I also cross-checked to confirm that the statement of the minister in the budget, which I can repeat here for the benefit of record, is that Government is committed to zero tolerance of corruption and wastage of public resources –(Laughter)- which are some of the major challenges facing the country. 

I want to confirm to this House that Government absolutely has no intention of protecting an officer of Government who misappropriates public funds and indeed there is record here. We have taken action on officers found guilty of this offence: the chief administrative officers in Mpigi and Lira, the Town Clerks of Masaka, Kitgum, Oyam, Bukedea and so on, just confirm to you, Madam Speaker, that what I am telling the House is indeed what we are going to do on the matters that hon. Katuntu has raised. 

We have in a way undertaken that since the financial year ends 30th June, between now and 30th June, we agree to sit with hon. Katuntu – the committee to go through the list of the names submitted to the House, which the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury intends to appoint as chief accounting officers for the coming year 2010/2011. We must clearly follow the law because these officers are protected by the Constitution and they are also protected by the procedure – the legal procedure must be followed and we will take action.

I want to confirm to this House that I will take action against any officer found guilty of misappropriating funds. He will not be reappointed as an accounting officer when these matters have been done. Otherwise, to do it now will also be unfair to them because in the first place it is the Auditor-General’s report and some of the reports submitted here have not even been approved by the House.

For purposes of a good name of Government and fair treatment of officers, I propose we adopt this procedure and we proceed on the Vote-On-Account. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So shall we instruct the Committee on Local Government to remain with this matter on our behalf between now and the new financial year so that we are sure of compliance? I thank you. I now put the question that the House dissolves into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of Vote-On-Account for the fiscal year 2010/11 in accordance with rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2010/2011.

Central Government Vote

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I propose that the total sum of Shs 1,636,214,163,000 be provided for as Vote-On-Account for the Central Government vote for the Financial Year 2010/2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Regional Referral Hospitals

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I propose that the total sum Shs 17,434,038,000 be provided for as Vote-On-Account for the regional referral hospitals for the Financial Year 2010/2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Missions Abroad

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I propose that the total sum Shs 20,038,077,000 be provided for as Vote-On-Account for missions abroad for the Financial Year 2010/2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Local Governments

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I propose that the total sum Shs 2,165,278,645,000 be provided for as Vote-On-Account for the local governments for the Financial Year 2010/2011.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson that is the grand total. We might as well be pronouncing ourselves on something wrong. The sub-total for local governments is Shs 491,592,366,000. I do not know whether you want to consider reading those figures again. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For the local government?

MR AMURAIT: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Oh! Okay. Hon. Members, for the local governments, I propose that the total sum Shs 419, 592,366,000 be provided for as Vote-On-Account for the local governments for the Financial Year 2010/2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Minister of Finance.

12.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2010/2011 and has passed it without amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

12.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I now beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the House do adopt the report of the Committee of Supply.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE
GOVERNMENT TO INCUR EXPENDITURE OF SHS 5.6 BILLION TOWARDS UGANDA’S HOSTING OF AFRICAN UNION SUMMIT IN JULY 2010

12.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to incur expenditure of Shs 5.6 billion towards Uganda’s hosting of the African Union Summit in July 2010. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Uganda is preparing to host the African Union Summit 2010 in Kampala from 24 to 27 July 2010;

AND WHEREAS Government has prepared a budget for hosting the said Summit of a total amount of Shs 11.532 billion;

WHEREAS Government has already provided for Shs 5.932 billion to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the Budget for fiscal year 2009/2010 for preparing for the Summit, leaving a balance of Shs 5.6 billion;

AND WHEREAS, on 10 June 2010 Government presented before Parliament the estimates of expenditure and revenue for the Financial Year 2010/2011 in accordance with the provisions of Article 155 of the Constitution;

AND WHEREAS the said statement of the expenditure and revenue did provide Shs 6.6 billion to the Ministry of Foreign as balance of funds required for hosting the AU Summit 2010;

WHEREAS Government recognizes that the Vote-on-Account provision for hosting the AU Summit of Shs 1,860,666,667 only will not be adequate to cover the requital amounting to Shs 5.6 billion for hosting the AU Summit in July 2010;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:

1.	Government adequately provides funds to facilitate preparation for hosting the African Union Summit during the month of July 2010;

2.	The additional funds on this expenditure item required above the Vote on Account amount being Shs 3,733,333,333 only be charged on vote 006 – Ministry of Foreign  Affairs, Programme 09 – African Union, Output No. 162104 – Station Summits and Conferences.

3.	Government is hereby authorised to incur expenditure during the Vote-on-Account period up to Shs 5.6 billion under Vote 006 – Ministry of Foreign Affairs for hosting the African Union Summit in Kampala, Uganda.

I certify that this resolution is passed by Parliament –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just move.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that we have a procedural problem and let me point it out before we move on to the substance of the motion. The procedural problem is that in this motion, the minister is seeking to incur the expenditure of the entire amount for hosting the AU Summit with up to Shs 5.6 billion. However, we have already passed the Vote-on-Account. And from the wording of his motion, it is suggestive that what we have just passed includes one third of that amount.

Madam Speaker, we need your guidance on how to proceed because we have issues with the entire provision. We had hoped that this would be the time to deal with the substance of the allocation of Shs 5.6 billion in entirety. But now I can see that part of it has gone in the supply of the Vote-on-Account. We need your indulgence to be able to deal with the entire amount because it is a matter of principle. We are seeing a double allocation in terms of the African Union provision. 

I will table the evidence after you have given us guidance substantively. How do we proceed? We need to have the entire allocation availed to us for the debate on whether to or not they should be given that money for the AU Summit. I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to the procedural matter that the Shadow Minister of Finance has raised, Parliament will recall that a similar motion was brought before the House in 2007 in respect to the CHOGM expenditures. I remember we had a very heated debate over that matter. As of now we do not even know whether the resolution that was passed that time enabled Government to spend beyond what was budgeted for CHOGM. 

More importantly, I seek guidance from you: under what provisions of the law would it be possible that a motion such as this can be moved before Parliament? Because the issue of Vote-on-Account and how much is spent has been debated here. When it is convenient to the Executive, they argue that the 30 percent is on the overall budget for a sector. They also come to us to raise a ceiling for them to spend on an item under a ministry.

We as Parliament are acting without clear rules as set out in our Rules of Procedure on this matter. For us to digest this, what does the 30 percent mean? Does it mean the overall budget for the sector or on an item? Because we have even changed items, as we consider the items in a budget, we have said, “Cancel this expenditure”. If it becomes expedient that that item be cancelled after we have already allowed Government to spend, how do we proceed? 

We argued that time that 30 percent of the resources that have been given to the ministry are available for the ministries to spend and they are allowed under our laws to exercise flexibility on how to spend the money up to a certain extent.

I do not know why the ministry cannot administratively move money from various items with in it rather than burdening us with a decision, which is not inched on any specific rule of procedure or law. We really have to digest that otherwise we will just tell the ministry, “You have your 30 percent, go and sort it out”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not recall what we discussed in the last debate but maybe the minister can explain why he has brought this motion.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I want to draw the attention of Members to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which explains why we have come to the House to seek the approval of Shs 5.6 billion to finance the African Union Summit. 

Article 154 (4) says that, “If the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not have or has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President may, subject to the provisions of this Article, authorise the issuance of monies from the Consolidated Fund account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year ….”

The explanation here is that we have passed Vote-on-Account and it only authorises a third of the total expenditure. If we need to spend funds before, this Shs 5.6 billion will be beyond a-third of the amount allocated to Foreign Affairs and consequently for this expenditure to be incurred we need authorisation of Parliament for this period. But otherwise if the whole budget of the ministry had been approved, we would not have come to the House. It is just the timing that the Summit is going to be held before Parliament has approved the whole budget. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank the minister for quoting that provision of the Constitution because it was that very provision that I remember they quoted in the argument earlier. The authority is vested in the President and not in the House. Nothing in that says you bring a resolution to the House; the President can exercise that prerogative and inform the House that he did so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there is Article 154 (5) which requires Parliament to approve action taken under 154(4): “Any sum issued in any financial year from the Consolidated Fund account under clause (4) of this Article in respect of any service of the Government –
(a) “Shall not exceed the amount shown as required on account in respect of that service in the Vote on Account approved by Parliament by resolution for that financial year.”  So, Parliament has a role.

MR ODUMAN: There is a reason we are getting uncomfortable with this. Maybe to illustrate the point we can go to the minister’s motion where the minister says the Government has already provided Shs 5.932 billion. We think there is something the minister is hiding and we insist on this because it is our role as Parliament to supervise.

As the public is trying to come to terms with the CHOGM report, they are wondering whether we do not have a share of the blame in terms of what happened. At the stage of supply at that time, we argued that they should give us a breakdown; we were defeated and the “ayes” had it. But what happened is there for everybody to see.

We are now pointing at others, but what share of the blame do we have? This is the stage that we look at our share. The minister says that this House has provided Shs 5.932 billion. There is something the minister is hiding there; the amount is much more than that.

During the debate for the budget for this financial year, this House provided Shs 4 billion in the main budget. Subsequently, there was a supplementary in Schedule No. 1; an amount of Shs 4.43 billion to facilitate the African Union Summit was provided in March. Now the total of that is Shs 8.43 billion. When the minister says that Government has provided Shs 5.932 billion, we do not know what the minister is saying. Where did you get Shs 5.932 billion from? 

Madam Speaker, you might need to know the background. The AU Summit was supposed to have been held in June; actually this month. The AU Summit should be taking place now but it was only postponed because there was consideration that perhaps the people to attend the AU Summit could be interested in the World Cup. That is why the AU Summit was postponed. That is why all the money required for preparation was provided in this year’s budget. And then subsequently you came and said, “The money is not enough, give us more”, and you were given. The Summit should be taking place now. 

The mere postponement to July cannot have a financial implication. I am aware even during the debate of the supplementary, the minister had included an amount for beautification of Kampala –(Interjections)- yes! And I am aware the committee wisely ruled out that and rejected it and only allowed Shs 4.43 billion because Kampala had already been beautified under CHOGM. (Laughter)

The Shs 5.6 billion, part of which, unfortunately – and that is where I was requesting your indulgence on procedure - part of which unfortunately must have now been supplied in the Vote-on-Account but which we are seeking to reverse because there is no point in appropriating a further shilling on the AU Summit because all the money had been provided for. 

The Budget Committee made a report to this House after reviewing the report of the sessional committee during consideration of the MTEF. In that report, the Budget Committee reported –(Interjections)- yes, on page 85 – this is the report of the Budget Committee dated 14 May 2010: Recommendations of the Parliamentary Budget Committee on the Medium Term Macro-Economic Plan and Programme for the financial years 2010/2011 to 2014/15. 

In their report that consists of a report of the Sessional Committee of Foreign Affairs, this is what they had to say: “The committee noted that in the Financial Year 2009/10, Shs 4 billion allocated to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was facilitation of hosting the African Union Summit in June 2010. During the month of March, Parliament approved additional funding of Shs 4.43 billion under Supplementary Schedule No.1 for the same activity, making it a total of Shs 8.43 billion. 

The committee noted that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has submitted another budget of Shs 5.6 billion for the same activity in the Financial Year 2010/2011. The committee finds this budget uncalled for and unjustified. The committee, therefore, rejects this application since sufficient funds were allocated for this activity in the Financial Year 2009/2010. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed budget of Shs 5.6 billion for hosting the AU Summit should not be allocated to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs since sufficient funds were appropriated.” 

Madam Speaker, what is our share of responsibility in making Government commit the sort of mistakes that were committed under CHOGM? Our share and our responsibility is exercised at this time in seeing that we do not put these people into problems; to splash money at them and putting them into the sorts of problems we saw under CHOGM.

So there is no reason whatsoever why a coin should be allocated to this activity at this time and we seek to move, Madam Speaker, that whatever has been supplied in the Vote-on-Account amounting to, as per this motion, Shs 1.866,666,667 should be retrieved from the supply that we have just done. And we should base on principle in discharging this motion. There is no politics in it but I think we must really own up. We must be seen to mean what we say. (Applause) 

The report of the Budget Committee that was tabled here became our report - the report of this House to the President and it was based on principle – the budgeting had already been done and there was no need to appropriate more money. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just wanted to inform you on this side that these two microphones are not working. So, you may have to move back or come down to speak. By the way, where are the chairpersons of the finance committee and that of foreign affairs?

12.30
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, the honourable member on that side was giving figures and I think we need to give the minister time because –(Interjections)- it was not debated during the budget report. So maybe they can reconcile these figures and they give us the details because we must know where to begin and where to end. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Chair, Foreign Affairs.

12.31
MR MAWIYA LULE (NRM, Kalungu East, Masaka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am no longer the Chair of Foreign Affairs but by the time this report was made, I was chair and I appeared before the Budget Committee then. By the way, I should inform the committee that I am a member of this Committee on Foreign Affairs and I think I can come in to assist my chair where necessary. 

When we were analysing the policy statements of the current financial year, we got information from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and on the recommendation from the Office of the Prime Minister; we synchronised the budget the ministry submitted for AU. And in this one they were quoting a figure of Shs 8.407 billion as total funding for the AU Summit. That is the recommendation from the Office of the Prime Minister. 

As my colleague has rightly put it, in the main budget we mainstreamed Shs 4 billion and that went to the account of Foreign Affairs. In schedule No.1, they submitted another figure of Shs 5.6 billion. 

When I appeared before the Budget Committee again, when I was defending this budget on behalf of the committee, we cut off Shs 180 million that had been allocated for the beautification of the municipalities including Kampala, Entebbe and others. We said this was unacceptable and the Budget Committee agreed with us and it was put off. So, that left the funding under Supplementary Schedule No.1 to Shs 4,430,000,000. So, in effect this would have brought the entire figure of AU to Shs 8.4 billion. So it would have exhausted the initial budget as presented. 

The information I am getting – and actually, Madam Speaker, about this Shs 5.6 billion that had been put into the budget proposal, when we were considering the MTEF, the Committee on Foreign Affairs in its wisdom saw it again as unacceptable because the budget had been exhausted. And again the Budget Committee agreed with us. We were actually getting some background from CHOGM so we did not want the CHOGM affair to be reflected in AU. 

The information we got after we had presented our report to the Budget Committee was that Shs 3.8 billion had been garnished by URA from the initial Shs 4 billion that we had provided in the main budget. So that left about Shs 200 million of the Shs 4 billion. So, the question was: how did this arise? How did it come about? It was not brought to the attention of the committee and in any case, if there were any unpaid monies by Foreign Affairs, they would have been charged probably elsewhere because we were told that those were CHOGM taxes in arrears. So, since URA has access to these accounts, it charged directly from the Foreign Affairs Account/AU Vote. That left about Shs 200 million on that one.

But the figure would not have been Shs 5.6 as it is being put. I would have probably expected it to be brought to Shs 3.8 billion. So, it complicates the matter but that is the clarification I wanted to bring out. So with your guidance - actually even the Vote-on-Account, which we have just passed, will change everything because what we had agreed with Budget Committee is not this whole amount. We had reallocated this amount to specific areas within the sector. So we are yet to be guided by you but that is the situation as it stands. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter is not as straightforward as it appears. In fact –(Interjections)- no, you should have said that during your motion. This business of your money being unseen and so forth - this House has already provided money which the URA has taken. So I think, hon. Minister, your motion is premature. You should seek time and sit with the committees of this House and iron out this matter because this House provided money for your service. (Applause) Unless you satisfy us that –(Interjections)- it is not there. I do not think that we should give you more money. Please, meet with the committee and sort out all these things that have been happening and give us a full report.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, thank you for that wise ruling. As we move to the next stage, wouldn’t you have preferred that you pronounce yourself on the Shs 1.8 billion that had been supplied shortly so that as this motion goes to be substantively looked at by the respective committee, we are sure that Shs 1.8 billion is not going to be spent? To us, this is very important. Because as you have already seen, the minister was hiding information [PROF. KAMUNTU: “No.”] Yes, if you want money for taxes, you come with a specific motion.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I listened to the Member’s contribution and I crosschecked the figures and I was ready to give a full explanation but of course I go by your guidance. Is it, therefore, in order for a Member to imply that I am hiding information when I have been forthright in presenting this information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know hon. Minister, when you come here with a request of this nature; I think it is in your interest to bring all the information so that Members understand why you want the money -(Applause)- and why it is not sufficient especially after we are aware that we provided the money. Isn’t it? It is your responsibility to convince us. So, please go back and meet the committee and the committee should give us a report about this matter on Tuesday. I am not prepared to deal with this money now. Let us hear from the Budget Committee. 

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I just want to add that as the Minister goes to meet the committee, perhaps it is also important for the benefit of this House to know the whole budget required and what the previous amount has so far been spent so that we do not have any more missing information when they come to present. Thank you. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, this is just a rejoinder to what the Shadow Minister of Finance has observed and I would like to call the attention of the House to the actual figures allocated on the Vote-on-Account to Foreign Affairs. A quick calculation would indicate that we are actually appropriating more than 30 percent; in actual sense it is 33 percent that they have appropriated. 

My concern is: what is going to stop Foreign Affairs from spending this money on the AU Summit if we do not delete it from the total figure that we are appropriating to this particular ministry? I have a problem; whereas we might say it is not good for this additional Shs 1.8 billion to even be spent on the AU Summit, I still think looking at the dishonesty that I read from the Ministry of Finance, it will actually be spent on the AU Summit. So, I think the solution to this problem is for us to deprive them of this money during this time until we pass the budget a few months from now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think the committee will deal with that. We have also already dealt with the Vote-on-Account; we cannot recall it. So, we should not attach any more conditions. That is what our rules say. But let our committee go and meet the minister and give us the full facts surrounding this matter including an account of the monies we have already allocated to you for the AU Summit. 

Hon. Members, I suspend the House to 2.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 12.44 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.44 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, good afternoon. I will adjust the Order Paper briefly to permit hon. Nabilah Naggayi to make a personal statement. But also I would like you to join me in welcoming students and teachers of Maranatha High School, Makindye. They are up here in the Gallery. You are welcome. They are represented by hon. Mabikke and hon. Naggayi. (Applause)

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.45
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I am reading my personal statement under rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure on the incident of an assailant in my office on Tuesday, 8th June.

I thank you for the opportunity because I need to make this statement and recount the events when a stranger came to my office at Parliament. He entered Parliament, room W205, Bauman House, around 1800 hours, that is, six O’clock. He asked if I was hon. Nabilah to which I answered in the affirmative, pulled a chair and sat down. He made small talk like, which kind of passport I hold to which I answered that it did not specifically matter. 

He went ahead to comment on being my voter and afterwards said that we are handling markets issues badly as Members of Parliament after I said that I was a bit busy with Ggaba Market issues. He then got up and started saying that we were all a disappointment to him that he did not like Members of Parliament but fortunately that was in the presence of my secretary, political assistant and one campaigner. He started working himself into frenzy, stood up, and that is when I realised that I was dealing with somebody either who was unstable or somebody who was dangerous. I told him at this point to leave my office but he did not leave. This sounds funny but then I started realising that I was not very secure.

I told my secretary to call security at the reception but no one was answering the call because it was six O’clock. At this point, the assailant assured me that he was above the policemen I was trying to call and at that point I weighed my security and defence options. The only thing I had in my office was a bread knife that lay on my table for I was about to have my evening tea. I then stood up not to show him that I was afraid and told him to leave my office. My political assistant whispered at this point that he thought the guy was armed or he had a recorder. Between the two, he said, either he had a recorder in his jacket or he is armed. I silently panicked but I could not show because I thought I needed to show that I was still brave.
 
I wanted to see a way of opening the office; so I stood up and told him that, “I am opening this door” and he almost grabbed me but my political assistant got in between us and that is when my secretary ran downstairs to call the policemen at the reception. In the scuffle, they hurried back but when the policeman arrived and tried to hold the guy, the guy told him not to touch him and the policeman complied and did not touch him. At the end of the day, we started asking the policeman, “Why don’t you detain him?” That is when hon. Beti Kamya and some other colleagues like hon. Banyenzaki, hon. Oyet Simon and hon. Kubeketerya all came and said they should detain the man.

Now there were other police officers who had arrived at the scene but they let the man just walk and in the meantime he was saying, “You cannot do anything to me, I am above you and I am a security operative”. I was wondering why my police, which I had hope in, had not helped me so I told them that I wanted to make a statement but when I saw that they were releasing the guy, I told my political assistant to take a picture using a phone at least to capture him. That is what he did but then he grabbed the phone and in the scuffle the policeman got it and I asked for it. That is how I managed to print out at least a picture of what he looks like.

At that time, many people came and I had one say that he works in State House but for me that was not the issue. I said I was going to Bukedde, I held my talk show and at nine O’clock, 2100 hours, I returned to record my statement. But my police post refused to take my statement. They said I should go to CPS.

My issue now was not the assailant but the reason behind my police refusing to take a statement when I had an assailant in my office. Actually, the next day was the Wednesday of Heroes’ Day - it was a public holiday and I could not come to your office, Madam Speaker. So I waited. Thursday was Budget Day and I came with printed pictures. After the police at Parliament saw the pictures, that is when the OC said, “But now you can come to record your statement.”

There are several pertinent questions: who is this man really? What does he do? Why is police afraid of him? Why wasn’t he arrested at the scene? Why did police deny me the chance to record my statement there and then? Is he a state operative as he said? What was he doing in my office? And I do not know up to now because I did not get the chance for police to see if he was armed or not. 

But since then, Madam Speaker, I have an addendum of facts that some people, having seen the picture, have told me that he is a one Ouma Adere. He is the former Deputy RDC, Iganga District. He is a renowned smuggler in counterfeit goods on Lake Victoria waters and he —

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you know those are serious allegations and that person may not be able to come here. Confine yourself to what you went through not what you heard.

MRS SEMPALA: Okay, I wanted to furnish police because I am not sure that police will take these facts. Maybe, I can lay them on the Table so that in case they do not know his issues, at least these are some facts and I have managed to get some people to show them even his picture. I want to lay it on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, maybe for the comfort of honourable members, on Tuesday the acting Leader of the Opposition raised this matter and we undertook to take it up. I just want to just reassure all the Members of the House that your security is paramount and we shall ensure that you are well protected and that we shall take up that matter which you have reported.

MRS SEMPALA: Madam Speaker, at least I want to be assured that police will handle this matter and at least I get to the conclusion of who this man really is and what he wanted in my office.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have my assurance on that one.

2.54
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. On Tuesday this week, I happened to have been here in the morning. I had come to attend a parliamentary sitting and shortly thereafter, at around 1.00 p.m., I received calls from a number of my constituents in Nakasero IV parish. They were reporting to me that there was an exercise going on whereby some people were registering voters in Nakasero IV parish and they were not part and parcel of the Electoral Commission team. 

I got so concerned that I had to dash there. On reaching there I found a team of people with gadgets, which looked like those of the Electoral Commission. Indeed they were taking pictures and recording particulars of people who had queued up. I enquired about the exercise and the identity of the people who were doing it. They told me it was an NRM exercise. First, they did not identify themselves and said I had no business with the exercise because it was an NRM exercise. The good thing is that it was behind a police post and the OC of the police post had to intervene. In the course of the discussion, the police compelled these people to give me some document to show what they were doing exactly. They said they were carrying out an NRM registration exercise - a biometric registration exercise. So I got a letter, which I wish to lay on the Table. 

It is from the National Resistance Movement, Office of the Secretary-General, Plot 10, Kyaddondo Road. It is addressed to Maj. Gen. Kale Kayihura, the Inspector-General of Police, Kampala. It is dated 10th June 2010. It is written by hon. Amama Mbabazi, MP, allegedly as Secretary-General of the NRM. 

This is what it says. The heading is “Biometric registration of NRM members”. 

“The NRM is in advanced stages of biometric registration of its members. This exercise involves the use of computers and their accessories in the field. Before this exercise is rolled out, our technical team would like to carry out a field test on data transmission (signal strength) in the Kampala region.

Since this exercise involves delicate equipment, they would like to use areas around police stations for reasons of security and power sources. The contact person in my office to liaise with is Mr Rwantare Bonny on telephone number +256772400492.

Thanking you for your usual co-operation.”

When I got this document, I enquired further and asked, “Why is a parallel registration exercise being carried out by a political party when the Commission is doing the same exercise?” And, as far as some of us are concerned, all along, the information we had was that the NRM finished carrying out its registration exercise. Now what is this going on in my constituency without giving us information about the exercise? 

Finally, I wondered why it was being carried out at police stations. It was only at that particular police post in Nakasero because I sought further information about other areas where it was being carried out. The population there, the people in the locality, were so suspicious; there was a lot of anxiety. The situation was saved by the police because the people wanted to destroy the gadgets. 

I am raising this matter because there is too much anxiety; we are worried. We do not know what is going on exactly. We do not know whether the NRM, as a party, is still registering. If it is still registering, why mix it up with that of the Electoral Commission? They are carrying out biometric registration at a time when the Electoral Commission is carrying out a national voter registration exercise. This is confusing the people. We really need an explanation from the government whether this is really a genuine exercise of the NRM and why a parallel exercise is taking place. We need you to allay our fears. Thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am genuinely giving information that the registration of our party has not ended. The preliminaries started and as we talk now, they are making final lists of registers that people will go and view, even displays will be done and complaints will be handled. So, I do not know why hon. Lukwago is worried. He wants to snoop and see what is happening in our party. It is a normal exercise, which has not ended. If he is not aware, I would like to inform him that the process is still going on before we have the elections. It is done everywhere, so if you are not aware, please get informed. There is nothing that can scare you. I thank you.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Kubeketerya, for that information. We are talking about biometric registration of voters. The information we have is that there are yellow books for NRM. They carried out manual registration. The country has never been informed that NRM is carrying out biometric registration -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, now you are arguing about issues which are not before this House. The author of that letter is known; he is a Member of this House. We shall ask him to come and explain. I do not think we should speculate. You lay it on Table and we shall ask the minister to come and explain.

MR LUKWAGO: I beg to lay this document on the Table. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I require the Government side to cause the minister to come and explain because he is alleged to have authored that letter? 

STATEMENT ON THE DAY OF THE AFRICAN CHILD - PLANNING AND BUDGETING FOR THE WELL-BEING OF THE CHILD; A COLLECTIVE RESPONSIBILITY

3.02
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Madam Speaker, yesterday, the African Continent was celebrating the Day of the African Child. 

The Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children had requested you to accord us space on the Order Paper and I wish to thank you so much for doing the needful. Although it was celebrated yesterday, we feel the content of the statement still holds water. This is a statement about the Day of the African Child. 

It was dated 16 June 2010. The theme of the day was: “Planning and budgeting for the wellbeing of the child; a collective responsibility.”

In 1976, thousands of Black school children entered the streets of Soweto, South Africa, to demand their right to be taught in their own language and to protest the inferior quality of their education. Hundreds of students were shot down during the march. This led to a two-week revolt that caused hundreds of deaths and thousands of injuries.

In memory of those killed and to recognise the courage of all those who marched, the Organisation of African Unity created the Day of the African Child on June 16 1991. Since then, Uganda has been joining the rest of the African community to commemorate this day. This day aims at drawing attention to the lives of African children today. 

This year, the theme of the day is or was, “Planning and budgeting for the wellbeing of the child; a collective responsibility.” Child wellbeing means a lot to the development of the country. The future of Uganda lies in the wellbeing of its children. Today’s investment in children is tomorrow’s peace, stability, security, democracy and sustainable development. 

Child wellbeing involves the full and harmonious development of each child’s personality, skills and talents. This means respecting, protecting and realising the rights of children and nurturing a social ecology that provides opportunities for all children. 

The Government of Uganda has tried to plan and budget for the wellbeing of children in a number of ways such as:

Increasing the budget allocation to the health sector; Uganda has made progress in reducing infant and child mortality rates since 1990, registered impressive progress in the proportion of deliveries attended by health workers, increased immunisation coverage among others.

The Government is becoming more committed to ensuring longer and better lives for people including children affected by HIV/AIDS through increased access to ART.

The introduction to Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education shows that Uganda has increased budgeting for the education sector.

Uganda has harmonised its national laws with international laws that protect the rights of children. It is evident that in spite of the good policies that the Ugandan Government has instituted since 1996, many gaps still exist in the policy and the legal framework as regards child rights, responsibility and obligations. 

As child focused actors, Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children is duty bound to see that such gaps are considered and well addressed by the appropriate authorities. These gaps include: 

•	Uganda has not fulfilled its pledge made in the Abuja Declaration of increasing healthcare spending to 15 percent of our national budget.

•	OVCs and disabled children are increasing in the country but government intervention is still not very visible.

•	Malnutrition is still serious and accounts for about 60 percent of under-five mortality in some parts of the country.

•	Despite considerable progress in increasing enrolment at primary level, little has been achieved in increasing secondary enrolment and improving the quality of education at both levels.

•	Defilement and child sacrifice are on the increase in Uganda but little is being done to address these problems.

•	More children in the country are reported being physically abused such as the street children in Kampala and major towns of Uganda. There is need to address the push and pull factors that force them on the streets.

•	Although the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Children clearly articulates in Article 19 the state’s responsibility is to protect children from all forms of violence, there is little progress in planning and budgeting for the needs of approximately 3.3 million vulnerable children where health, education, safe water and other indicators on the status of children are consistently lower than national averages.

•	Malaria remains that largest single cause of child mortality. 

•	High initial enrolment in primary education is not sustained with only 27 percent of girls and 30 percent of boys completing the primary school cycle. 

•	The Police has set up a unit to investigate ritualistic sacrifice but more cases of children murdered continue to be reported across the country.

The Uganda Parliamentary Forum’s priority planning and budgeting interventions for child wellbeing:

We need to ascertain resources that are directly benefiting the children. The situation of children should be given priority not only in how much money is allocated to the sector but principally in how much budget allocation directly benefits the children and also the extent to which local authorities are voting resources for children.

Calling for developing and strengthening coordination and collaboration among line ministries that handle children’s issues in such a way that they are not only known to be clear cutting but clear to all stakeholders where intersections are and what role each partner is playing.

We should advocate for policies to be matched with resources. All pro-children policies that have been formulated should be accompanied by appropriate planning and budgeting to ensure that they are implemented and are making a difference in the lives of children.

Advocate for meaningful achievement of the MDGs. There is need for better political will and more capital investments on pro-children initiatives such as MDG 4, MDG 5 and MDG 6 in the national budget.

Urge for the institutionalisation of monitoring public budgets and providing relevant information to civil society groups and others who may be interested in national resource allocation to children.

Call for the review of the Birth and Death Registration Act of 1973 by waiving the fees, decentralising the registration at district level and allocating resources to implement birth and death registration as a national policy.

Support the participation of children in the budget and planning process. Children constitute more than 50 percent of the population. They know better the issues affecting them and are in the best position to determine what the priority should be in regard to enhancing their rights.

Call upon the Minister of Gender and the urban authorities to attend to the problem of street children by removing and settling them to suitable places. The government should also address the push and pull factors that cause the children to go to the streets.

In conclusion, the government should adopt a two-pronged approach to child well being, that is, adoption and implementation of effective laws and policies and secondly a policy of child budgeting that prioritises the needs of children.

Importantly also are the frequent reviews of experience and performance of the government ministries that are directly in charge of children. 

Many stakeholders have advocated for child rights but there are three things that we need to focus on, that is, politics that puts them first, laws that protect them, and budgets that provide for them.

The Government should take children as the foundation of sustainable social, economic and political progress and, therefore, it should put them at the centre of public policy. 

Laws should protect children from all forms of violence, abuse, exploitation and exclusion and finally, budgets should provide for the basic needs and full development of children.

I thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the statement. I am only bothered that the role of parents has not been touched upon. All this is focusing on the Government; I don’t see the role of the parents but anyway it is your business, I am just listening.

3.12
MR KIBEDI ZAAKE (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Milton Muwuma for this statement. I have been inspired by the sentence on page one, “Child wellbeing means a lot to development of the country. The future of Uganda lies with the wellbeing of its children”. It continues to say, “Today’s investment in children is tomorrow’s peace, stability, security and sustainable development”.

For us who are in leadership, when we talk about sustainable development we need to see that whatever development is being carried on does not destroy the future of the children or jeopardise the future of this country.

I am concerned about the developments that are being handled in a way that is affecting our environment. I will give you an example. When you come from Jinja, on the right hand side at the street lights there is a wetland which accommodates the National Sewerage Line of Nakawa. They pour murram there everyday including today and I am worried about the kind of development we are having, which is going to deprive the young generation from benefiting from its own environment.

On that very street, when you continue you see warehouses, places where they sell cars, you find that there are high voltage wires that move to the Eastern part of Uganda but there is a petrol station being constructed under the high voltage wires. It gives me a very big headache and I wonder whether the development we are looking at is going to be in harmony with our young generation.

I would like the Prime Minister to get a statement from the Minister of Environment to see whether they are looking at what is happening in the different parts of this country vis-à-vis the environment. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kibedi.

3.14
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): I thank you. I would like to thank hon. Muwuma and the Parliamentary Forum on Children for this statement. I agree with you, Madam Speaker, that this statement is mainly focussed on what Government has done and not done but has not come out clearly to indicate that for children to be brought up well, the parents and we the leaders in the community have a very big role to play. 

If Government is being blamed - and which is true – that in primary schools the children are supposed to pass without failing and yet here in the statement the information is that only 30 percent of those who start are able to finish primary seven even when Government is paying for the exam fees - this means that there is a bigger problem in the community and with the parents than it is with Government. Government will not feed, house and provide everything to the children. Actually, in most of our rural settings, UPE has been misinterpreted to mean free primary education; free in all aspects. To them it is a matter of giving birth to children and sending them to school, which is not the fact. 

I think we should go out there and tell the parents of these children and the community to ensure that the responsibility of making these children grow, study and complete all these levels is not only with Government but for all of us. They are the parents and Government only comes in to help. 

Now on page 4, in the second paragraph, the statement is calling upon Government and urban authorities to attend to the problem of street children by removing and settling them in suitable places. 

I am concerned about this issue, having been a leader in an urban setting. The problem is that these children are misled to come to urban areas expecting life to be easy. My biggest worry is in some urban areas, there are occasions which to me are the ones abetting this problem. They get these children who come from villages – who come from nearby areas and help them come to town. They pick them and start giving them a better life and facilities instead of finding out where these children came from, why they came and if they can help them go back. By receiving them and giving them better facilities in terms of food, accommodation and other things which their parents may not genuinely afford in the village, it means that those children will know that their friends have run away and they are now in an urban area which offers better standards of living. 

In Mbale, for example, there is an organisation called Child Restoration Organisation (CRO) which picks children who stubbornly run away from their homes for wrong reasons, receives them and gives them better facilities. This encourages more children to leave their homes to come to the urban areas without looking at why they should come. 

I think organisations that receive these children to help them better, should be able to find out why these children run away from home. If the problem is with the children, the children as well as the parents should be assisted so that these children could go back to their villages. After all, especially in Mbale for those children who come from around Bugisu, the facilities are available. It would be better to bring up these children in their parents’ homes and their communities than bringing them up in organisations that cannot help them throughout. I thank you.

3.19
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three minutes please.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I would like to thank hon. Muwuma for the paper but I think it is not well researched. I would like to suggest that next year, they should do a lot more and come here with comprehensive information. 

The bulk of the children of this country are being completely destroyed. This UPE is the biggest weapon of destruction of our children. A system where the best and the worst in the class move to the next level as equals will not produce anything. There is no competition among the children. What is happening in this country is that when we are talking about the children being catered for, we are talking of urban children. The children of the rural poor in Uganda are no longer an issue. They are not part of our agenda. 

Last year, Lamwo was still part of Kitgum. We had 19 sub-counties including the town council. If you remove the town council, you have 18 sub-counties. Out of 18, there were 11 first grades in UPE, which means seven sub-counties did not get a single first grade. Where are we going? In the town council alone, one sub-county, 76 got first grade. 

So, we are catering for the children of the rich people who live in town but the majority of Ugandans - the poor – their children are just going down the drain and I think Government should do something about this. In the past, it was possible to get a child from Lukung bordering Sudan to come to Budo, go to Makerere and then to Harvard. It is no longer possible because we are discriminating against the rural poor.

The paper is talking about health care. Actually there is no health care system anymore in this country. When you go to a government hospital, you have to tear a leaf from an exercise book for prescription and then you go to the bus park or somewhere to buy medicine in this Uganda which is being praised the world over. Are we safe? I think the future, Mr Leader of Government Business, is bleak. I thank you. 

3.23
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the presenter of the paper, which I think is short of information. I agree with the paper when it says that the future of Uganda lies with the well being of its children. This is true. But I would like to say that the well being of a child does not start when the child is walking. It should start at the conception of the child, meaning that the parents are the core caretakers of the child. 

The responsibility of any Government should be to really sensitise the parents to take responsibility for their activities as far as child nurturing is concerned because when we start, as the child is already walking, then we are late in modeling that child. I am worried about the unborn child. Mothers who are pregnant are exposed to alcohol and once that happens, then that child is already abused. The child will be born with low IQ and will not be able to compete with other children. So, the wellbeing starts at conception.

When it comes to education, I would like to say that Uganda is doing very poorly – and I am sorry to say that – because during our time, we used to go to primary schools and end up either in Buddo or Kisubi without any problem. Today such a thing is non-existent. I think Government should reorient itself to the wellbeing of the children if we have to hope for a better future. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.26
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Muwuma for this statement. However, I would like to say that on a big day like this one, we should have got a statement from the minister assuring us that they are on the right course given the policy measures that have been put in place. I am saying this because whereas the theme is well-thought out and I support it, the problem is that this statement is full of lamentations. It does not clearly show the way forward. And when you look at its background, the way this day was thought out – why this day was created - you realise that it was out of the efforts of the civil rights movement. I thought hon. Muwuma would have been assertive enough to reflect the spirit of this day; civil liberties are not given on a silver plate.

In addition to lamenting, hon. Muwuma is just pleading: “Help us to do this and that!” This is the more reason I would have liked to have the minister make the statement in respect of this day.

Having said that, I would like to add that there are a number of inadequacies. On page 2 of the statement, paragraph two, it is not true that we have an inadequate legal framework. The gaps, which hon. Muwuma says exist, are not pointed out. So, I do not agree with him on that. We have enough legislation on the protection of our children. We have the Children’s Act, the Penal Code Act, the Protection against Child Sacrifice Act and so on. Why are these laws not being enforced? This is the challenge that hon. Muwuma should have told us about.

On page 3, paragraph one of the statement, hon. Muwuma states that although the police have set up a unit to investigate ritualistic sacrifice, more cases continue to be reported across the country of children being murdered. Murder is a capital offence in this country. Why do we still have child sacrifice or murder of our children in this country? This statement does not explain such issues. The statement does not also give the practical measures that are going to be taken – this is a serious matter, yet no practical measures are being suggested here. 

In the same statement at page 3, second sentence, there is something about high initial enrolment in primary education which is not sustained, with only 27 percent of the girls and 30 percent of –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Lukwago for giving way. My point of procedure relates to the fact that whereas we are debating a very important statement as presented by hon. Muwuma who is also the secretary to the committee dealing with children issues, he has vanished. We are talking, but who is taking note of what we are saying? Who will reply our concerns and how will he reply when he is not following the debate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this Parliamentary Forum for Children is not only comprised of hon. Muwuma. The other members are here. But also I would like to say that hon. Muwuma is actually just taking some water; he sent me some note to that effect. (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I wind up, I would like to say that from the statistics given here, I need to get an assurance on whether these are correct figures on whether the completion of primary cycle in Uganda is only at 27 percent for girls and 30 percent for boys. If this is true, then this is a very worrying trend.

3.31
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Muwuma for presenting this statement. My concern is about the theme. I think we left out one thing - we forgot something on parents to monitor the wellbeing of these children. 

Recently, we were in a workshop where we looked at the abuse and neglect of children and how this can be prevented. I would like to report that in my constituency, most parents are now allowing their girl children to get married when they are still below age – 13, 15 and 17 years because of poverty.

One parent challenged the head teacher of the school and we the leaders when he informed us that his daughter had been defiled and married to some army man who was attached to Moroto Army Barracks. I reported this case to the Ministry of Defence to help us trace this army officer but to date, nothing has come forth. Just recently I was told that this same girl returned to tell the parents that her husband had been already taken to Somalia for deployment, which was a lie.

So, I think something ought to be done particularly about the education of these children. This is important because when you look at how UPE is moving with children going to USE, you realise that most of them stop at UPE level. The majority are not getting to USE level, colleges and universities.

When you look at page 2 of this report, you realise that we are not serious about education. Recently, I was in Lira to witness the verification exercise of the former soldiers in that district. I realised that there were thousands of widows. When I interviewed some of them, I was told that there are thousands of children who are not going to school, yet I understand in the Army, when you lose your parent, you should be receiving free education. Most of these widows were struggling to register so they can get gratuity and pensions for their late husbands; not all of them have been registered. We have said it over and over that at least a school for these orphans should be built in Lira even after the war. This would have been meaningful as we observe the Day of the African Child; it should have been Uganda’s case first. 

I am saying this because we cannot debate a statement in respect of the Day of the African Child when Uganda’s children’s situation is worse. If that is the essence of these cerebrations, then I do not understand.

3.34
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the forum for presenting a statement on the issue of the children to the House.

First of all, I would like to note that around 2007 there were lots of activities in resettling children especially those of Karamoja through the Prime Minister’s office. There was a lot of co-ordination between KCC, the local governments of Karamoja and the civil society. I have been following up this thing but I wanted to see what Government side is talking about the status of repatriated children in Karamoja. We know that some children were relocated to Karamoja; some have found their way back to the streets. Kampiringisa is full and we do not have more facilities around the country. The issue is not for the civil societies, the children are there and we watch them. There is even an incident where a mother was starving her own child. Such are the images that we are getting on the streets.

I decry the lack of empathy by our society when they are watching these children. Actually, society has given up on children because we are not firm on parents who abuse their own children. For example, a mother throwing her child in the latrine, what punishment should such a mother get? The law is quiet about that.

When we talk about some success stories, we know them such as Watoto, Dwelling Places, and others. They have done so well with our children. We should thank them for doing work that Government should be doing. On such days, they should be brought on board to see how they could foster and help mitigate even the challenges that these children get in their communities.

I would like to see what the local governments of Karamoja are reporting on the status of their children who are lining the streets from Karamoja to Kampala. I would like to see the status of the report of what local governments there are doing on behalf of the children. 

The education is another issue. Parents are being locked out of the process by refusing it to be mandatory that they should provide for their children and telling them to just look on. I think that is encouraging them not to be in charge of the process of the growth of their children -(Member timed out_)

3.37
MR MICHEAL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you madam Speaker for giving me an opportunity. Looking at the theme as presented here: “Planning and budgeting for the well-being of children”, I think this is a very timely period because our budget has just been read and I will implore us to try and analyse our budget and how much is directed towards the wellbeing of the children.

The presenter, hon. Muwuma laboured to show that Government is very committed to improving the welfare of children but his remarks were more on the increase in the budget. Increasing the budget alone is not enough. What is important is: how will the increased budget help the welfare of the children?

Every time we budget, the budget has been going higher, but if we check on the welfare of the children, there has been no improvement and therefore we should question ourselves, what does the increased budget always do? Does it improve the welfare of the children?

Recently, I was in my constituency, when you are talking about the welfare of children, you are talking about the health of the children and their education. But you find that Government has built health infrastructure where there are no nurses to man the hospitals, there is nothing like health staff.

In my constituency right now, women are trekking from Atiak to Lacor hospital, which is a distance of about 70 kilometres, to get health services and yet Government infrastructure is everywhere. The major problem is that there is no staff and drugs.

I would like to agree with hon. Okello-Okello that unless we change our policy on UPE, we are going to have a certain group of children who are going to have better education and another group who are going to be caught up in a viscous cycle of ignorance. When we were growing up only one primary school would get about 17 to 20 first graders. But as we are talking now, we are talking of a whole district getting 11 first grades. The situation is really very bad. Now these children cannot go to secondary schools, they will be peasant farmers and the viscous cycle will continue.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know this debate is very revealing. It reminded me about another occasion when the youth Members of Parliament brought a motion here about street kids and the plight of children in general. But each time it ends here in the House where we debate from. As I was listening, I asked myself: which committee actually follows up these matters on behalf of this House? Who is actually tracking the things we discuss? We are about to amend the Rules of Procedure. I want to see an amendment somewhere in one of the committees to bring out specifically the issue of children. This is because I think we are burying it in medicine, books; infrastructure and then the children are forgotten.

I have another problem with what they call thematic education. My people in Kamuli have complained that they will not accept a situation where some children in Uganda study in English from P1 up to P7, then the children of the Basoga there study in Lusoga up to P4 and they do the same exams at the end.

I have written to the minister and she has laboured to explain to convince me that it is okay, but it is not. I think we need to do more work to help the children of this country by focusing a bit more.

MR OYET: I thought the minister in charge of children would come out and present Government’s position on this. Is Government coming out with any plan to consider the guidance you are giving to the House so that we proceed with the debate at least when we know the position? Is there any policy that is being developed by Government to consider the issues of children? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister for Gender, there is public demand that you say something.

3.45
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the report by the presenter has stated, we have policies, and we have laws. For instance, to guide the Government with regard to children’s welfare, we have policies with regard to street children, we have policies with regard to education of children - there are policies. I think what we need to do is to put in more resources to implement the policies.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you. I am really compelled to stand on a point of clarification because if the minister is telling us we have policies on each and everything – street children, policies on child sacrifice, policies on this and that, wherein lies the problem? Like you said, Madam Speaker, we debated the issue of street children; if we are to move out of here, Mr Minister, you would find those street children. They are there. Can we really get a clear position of Government on all these issues and how we are going to implement them? That is what we really want.

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, I was not given time. Shortly after I have started I got interruptions. I think it is better that I make my statement and then Members can come in and question.  

When it comes to the issue of street children, it is illegal for children to be on the streets. There is a policy on that. We would ask, what is happening with regard to street children? I would like to state that we carried out a study and found that over 90 percent of the children on the street are from Karamoja and from only three sub-counties. And we have asked what causes this. We have found out that there are several reasons. That area, although fertile, has some of their relatives in places like Kisenyi, Busia, Mbale and when problems of cattle rustling came, these people remained with a few of their cattle, therefore, they could not manage life in that part of the country. Some of the parents opted to have their children out of Karamoja, to go in towns and live there. 

What is Government doing? First of all, we are against having children on the streets. We, therefore, have decided that we turn Koblin Youth Centre in Moroto into a reception and resettlement centre -(Interjections)- please, wait because I am developing my point. We had some Non-Governmental Organisations that were saying, “Why don’t we put reception centres in Kampala?” We opposed that because you are now saying that people in Karamoja should have their children brought up in Kampala. Children must be with their parents. 

We have Koblin Reception Centre. Once they are there, social workers will identify the parents of these children. For those whose parents we cannot find, we are going to have them resettled in Koblin but we think that the number will be small.

Before we get to do that we must have something in Kampala –(Interruption)

MRS SEMPALA: I want to inform the minister that I have been following that issue since 2007 and there is a relapse of children coming back from Koblin to Kampala. I have the information and the names of the children who have been taken to Koblin and yet they come back. NGOs took on some children and what they decided with Government is to have those children study in Karamoja and they actually study in schools in Karamoja. They also got social workers who speak Karimojong. I have followed and noted that civil society organisations have had some success to date. Now, why is Government not getting on board and seeing how to adopt what they are doing?

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, I was just developing my argument but some Members are impatient. I was going to tell you the steps that Government has taken and I was saying that we are against NGOs having reception centres in Kampala. We are with those NGOs who would like to participate with our reception centre in Koblin and in trying to resettle these children with their rightful parents. Those whose parents we fail to get are the ones we shall settle. 

When it comes to how these children go and the following week they are in Kampala –(Interjections)- yes, we know this. Some of the children come back but they are aided by grown ups. What are we doing about this? We have requested the local government in Moroto to assist in disembarking these children who do not have their parents; who are not accompanied so that these children do not travel to Kampala or Busia. And the bus company, which is notorious for transporting these children, is Gateway. We know that Gateway is paid to ferry these children to Kampala. Some children use traders’ Lorries. When they are coming to Kampala they put some children on them. We have instructed the local government to make sure that these children are disembarked. But you see with human error, instead of constantly doing this somehow children find their way back to the streets in Kampala.   

Also the parents are to blame. In Kisenyi, there are parents or guardians who decide to use these children as bait to get money. They come and hide somewhere and use children who look very desperate to beg by your car window.

What we are doing is to get these children and take them to Kampiringisa before we complete Koblin. Our decision has been to partition - it is not good to take our children to Kampiringisa because Kampiringisa is a juvenile delinquent place. We have got Shs 1.2 billion from the Government and UNICEF and we shall have a tent so that we keep them there as we wait to transport them to Koblin. As a –(Interjections)- no, we are saying in Kampala. We have adequate land in Kampiringisa but buildings are not there. The buildings, which are there are for juvenile delinquents. So, we cannot take them there. What we have done is to get a portion of that land, demarcate it and put them there as a temporary reception centre until we transport them to Karamoja. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that the plight of children cannot be improved only by just collecting them off the streets of Kampala because these are just the ones you see. These are signs and symptoms that a problem exists but what is the cause of this?

Last week, in Obongi, a woman from Otubang village had a sick child. The child was taken to Obongi Health Centre IV but the doctor was not there. There is a doctor assigned by the Government to be at the health centre but as you know these health workers at the rural health centres, like Obongi Heath Centre IV, fall out of supervision. The ministry does not ensure that they are okay or whether they are there or not, so they remain in town. An ambulance was called, 65 miles away from Moyo, to take this child to a referral hospital – to look for a doctor – a doctor who was supposed to be around. 

On their way, about 15kms to Moyo, the child died. The driver said he could not continue with the mother and child to hospital and decided to leave the mother and her dead child on the road. She had to walk back to Obongi with the dead child on her back. 

What is the responsibility of Government in ensuring –(Interjections)- the information I am trying to give here is that policies are there; health centres should be there and they are there; doctors should be there and they are there but how do you ensure that the policies, the finances and the budget that have been allocated work to deliver results? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, some time back under the Resistance Council system, I think the vice chair of the LCs was responsible for children but I do not know how many of them are actually monitoring what is happening to the children and where do they report? 

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank you, hon. Minister. The information I would like to give the Minister is in regard to the children who are in the rural areas. The Minister is concentrating his remarks on the children from Karamoja who are on the streets of Kampala City; but I should inform him that if you go to the towns of Lira, Gulu, Mbarara and Arua, you will find many street children. 

The Minister is hereby not being fair to this House. I am a Member of the Committee on Equal Opportunities and we have been discussing matters regarding the fate of this vulnerable group of children. These include victims of HIV/AIDS, children whose parents have been killed as a result of the war. And we have a number of them in the villages. What is the minister doing about these children? Completely, nothing! If the Minister comes here to tell us about the centre they are establishing within Kampala, saying, “We are taking these children to Karamoja.” It is not anything worth this Parliament’s effort and that of this country. That is something that is not even worth debating here. 

I am personally taking care of about 10 children who have been orphaned as a result of HIV/AIDS. The other day, we were launching a programme down here in the Conference Hall and you saw those children who are being supported by Mildmay Centre. Almost all of us shed tears down there. These are children who have been abandoned; their parents have died as a result of HIV/AIDS and there is nobody who is taking care of them. And these are the children we are talking about. It is not only the children who are on the streets. How many are they, anyway? In any case, why should the Minister come here to elaborate to us - we have known that one. We are also aware of that one [HON. MEMBER: “You are the one who has asked.”] What have you done about it? 

We have passed several legislations in this House regarding children - including our own Constitution – giving the state and the parents a responsibility to protect the children. What have you done about it? If the parents are not taking the responsibility of taking care of their children, what has Government done about it? This is what the minister should be telling us. In fact, Government has committed a serious offence. They should have just been taken to court for negligence. So, Madam Speaker, the information is a round not only children who are on the streets of Kampala but all the streets and towns in this country and those ones in the rural areas who are actually orphans.  

I know the Ministry seems to have very little money, which they should have clearly told us here: “We do not have money to build rehabilitation centres; we do not have money to do this and so we want such and such an amount of money.” That would have been serious and sensible to me. That is why I have been quietly listening. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity for the second time. The information I would like to give to the Minister is that we have certain categories of vulnerable children, especially in Northern Uganda, who have been born in captivity and have come with their mothers but have been rejected by their grandparents - the fathers of their mothers - because they did not consent to their fathers who were in the bush. Now, they have nobody to pay attention to them.  

In cases where their mothers are getting married, they are also being rejected. So, I do not know whether the Minister is aware of such a category of persons and if so, what plan do you have for such a category of children? Some of them are being taken care of by GUSCO but it is closing by December. Where will these children go?  These are Ugandans who were born in captivity; they did not choose to be fathered by rebels and neither did their mothers consent to the circumstances under which they are. 

The second category, which is a very big issue, is that we have some parents who are declaring their children orphans and handing them to NGOs. I do not know whether the minister is aware of such developments. There is an NGO in Gulu called SOS, which is trying to rehabilitate some vulnerable children and because of some parents’ vulnerability, they are declaring themselves dead and handing over their children to this NGO as orphans. So, if the Minister is aware, what plans does he have and what has he done regarding these two serious categories of vulnerable children? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please answer and we conclude.

4.01
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You can see that we have a lot of problems. Some people are denying their children and they want the Minister to go and say, “You are the father.” 

I would like to state more seriously. First of all, on the assertion that Government is not doing anything to look after the children, I would like to say that education is a responsibility of the parents, the government and the teachers. And when you look at the HOPE 2008, it provides stakeholders. 

Government is spending over Shs 600 billion on primary education. Government has increased the salary of primary school teachers by 30 percent. It is also making efforts to put up structures in every primary school. It is also trying to make sure that there are books for primary school going children. 

The 2008 Act provides that the stake holders, who are parents, must make sure that the children eat. Now that is a responsibility and the law is there. We are sensitising the people about it and after that, they will have to abide by it.

You are telling me that the children are all over town.  Apart from Government, the parents who produce these children - those who are orphans, we understand but there are parents who allow their children to wander around even at night selling eggs and groundnuts, and you want us to go and arrest the parents. Why can’t we come to our senses as parents of this country including us Members of Parliament to make sure that we are responsible for the children we produce? You want Government to go and do that? We have our responsibility, the parents have got their responsibility, and Members of Parliament have got their responsibility. We must take over this responsibility. 

It is not possible to say – the 2008 Act says children between the ages of 6 and 13 must be at school. We are going to sensitise people and later on if you have children who are between 6 and 13 and you have not taken them to school, they will be charged. It will be criminal. We are still sensitising people because if we go full blast when people do not know, it will not be fair. So, we are first sensitising people to know that they are responsible. 

When it comes to health, I am sorry that that child died through negligence but that is also the moral attitude of our people. How can a Ugandan in a Government vehicle who has taken the child to hospital and the child dies say - and the man says; it might have been a man because most drivers are men – “Get out of the Government vehicle.” Why don’t we follow up that case? (Interjections) No, Police must be reported to. Police was not there. The parents of the child who died must report and a case must be instituted. 

MR FUNGAROO: The Police was involved when the lady with the dead child trekked back home. It was almost getting dark; they had to be taken to Ndrindri Police Post in Icula sub-county. You can cross check with the DPC of Moyo, you will be able to get to that police station, or I can provide you with the information. 

The other aspect is the general environment of work - the relationship between the Central Government and local government in terms of service delivery in particular health. How can the district be supervised by the Ministry of Health and ensure that policies are implemented? If they do not work well, can we bring them to order?

MR OPIO: Thank you very much. We as Government are reviewing the decentralisation policy especially with agriculture and health. There is already a cabinet paper by Ministry of Health to consider the supervision of the health personnel by the Central Government as opposed to local governments. But as we know, it took us a long time to discuss the decentralisation policy and there has been an argument that we give it time to see whether it will work. There are certain ministries as I have mentioned Health and especially Agriculture who are now proposing that some of the functions at the district level should be brought back to be supervised from the centre. We are considering that but when it comes to availability of drugs and medicine and health personnel, one of the reasons why we have few medical personnel has been salary. You can imagine that a doctor who takes four to five years and the one year internship has been getting about Shs 600,000. We as Government have decided that we begin the process of increasing the salaries of the people of that type and that has started.

We are not blind; we know and when it comes to medicine, we have a very corrupt system at the local government level. We decided that 70 percent of the money sent for health services should be for drugs and 30 percent for salaries and administration. This has not been received well by the medical personnel at the several district headquarters. They would like to go back to the ratio which had more of administration and less of the drugs but we are insisting that we maintain that ratio and what we have decided as Government is that instead of waiting to receive the request from health centres, we are now identifying essential drugs which are going to be delivered regardless of the request by health centres. This will make sure that the drugs are there. 

Waiting for the health centre to put in requests when they are not motivated in inverted terms of having the 30 percent drugs and 70 percent administration, when we have turned round and said 70 percent drugs and 30 percent administration is becoming a problem. Actually, we need to do more and we are working to make sure that this is done.

With regard to maternal health, which you have talked about, we have decided to borrow money which will be received annually to make sure that we improve health services. When I am answering, some people are looking at their watches. They thought we do not have the answers. We have the answers and we must continue giving the answers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope we shall do what we have agreed to do on the issue of the committees. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EMOLUMENTS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Barnabas Tinkasimire): Madam Speaker, I have just assumed my office as the Chairperson of the Presidential Affairs Committee and I have read through my predecessor’s report. He informed me that he had presented the report on the Floor of the House. There were a few amendments that had been proposed and they were not yet made in the House and yet there was an instruction from Parliament, which was asking the committee to also table a report that has to handle the terminal benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker such that all of them are handled at a go.

When I read through the Bill and also the report that my predecessor presented, I felt there is need for us as a new committee to build consensus and make sure that we present what is very clear. There is some kind of confusion particularly on the headline. We need to agree on what to present and I felt if you gave us time like we hold a meeting tomorrow and then on Tuesday we would be in position to come here and present those two Bills together as it was requested by this House. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, hon. Members, I hope you really settle down and get cracking. We do not want to keep you too long for these two months. We want to release you as quickly as possible so the sooner we finish these Bills, deal with the Budget and State of the Nation, the better. So, Members I will adjourn the House to Tuesday at 9.30 in the morning.

(The House rose at 4.12 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 June 2010, at 9.30 a.m.) 

