Friday 18th June, 1999.

Parliament met at 10.35 a.m in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

MOTION MOVED UNDER RULE 89(1) FOR THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER'S BILL
 
(Debate Continued)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  when we adjourned yesterday,  I had on my list the following people:  the hon. Okulo Epak and the hon. Mao Nobert.  I will call upon the hon. Dr. Okulo Epak to make his contribution.  But before you proceed hon. Member, I propose that we proceed this way:  try and restrict your contributions to about 10 minutes,  to allow as many of you as possible to make a contribution.  I hope that is agreeable.  You will be warned by the bell when you have two minutes to go. 

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac):  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I feel happy to contribute to this, what I consider to be a landmark of a motion.  I would like us to appreciate two important things.  

One, that the Constitution we made in 1995 had in its wisdom provided for a constitutional possibility for it to be reviewed over time.  It had provided for possibilities for Amendments,  except that it had provided for some very difficult procedures for other Amendments.  

But I would like to observe that the fact that it provided for an easier procedure for amending provisions in the transitional section,  I think was very wise.  That it provided for the Amendment of any provision in the transitional section by a majority and by Parliament without reference to a referendum,  I think it was very considerate and it must have anticipated that some of the transitional provisions would in due course call for such a possibility.  

I would like therefore to commend hon. Omara Atubo for seizing this opportunity and constitutional possibility for amending a provision which is not only being controversial now, but dealing with an issue which had been controversial even as the Constitutional Commission worked,  and became very controversial in the Constituent Assembly.  And before all the laws that operationalise some sections and provisions of political system have been adopted by Parliament,  it is already raising a lot of debate throughout the country.  The fact that this is already happening throughout the country means that hon. Omara Atubo has provided this august House - which is actually the ears, the voice, the eyes of the people of Uganda who are sovereign - a very good opportunity,  as far as I am concerned.  

I also think that many of us in this august House were not privileged to be in the Constituent Assembly,  and it is of great benefit to us that this motion has come to give us the opportunity to express ourselves on an issue which had created sufficient controversy, and could not be amicably resolved in the Constituent Assembly.  This is why,  Mr. Speaker, in my humble submission I would like to disagree with many of the arguments which went on in the debate yesterday.  

The arguments which went on in the debate yesterday were actually discussing the actual Bill, and I do not think the intention of the motion we have before us is about the Bill.  The intention of the motion we have before us is simply seeking leave of the House for a motion on the Bill to be Tabled.  That is a very simple thing and I think we would have tackled it on the technicalities - whether it is constitutionally permissible,  or whether our rules of procedure permit that such a Bill can be introduced in the House.  All the other controversial elements which took up our time yesterday should be brought when the Bill is finally Tabled in the House for debate.  

It is very unfortunate,  Mr. Speaker, that we Ugandans seem to have specialised in diversions.  We prefer to discuss things which are far beyond the immediate requirement of our indulgence, and this is very, very unfortunate.   I find that even people like the National Political Commissar who was himself the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly,  and served for a short period as Speaker of this House,  could be enticed to indulge in those diversionary tactics.  

I think the matter is very simple.  Can this motion be accepted by the House to enable a Bill to amend the constitutional provision on the holding of the referendum on change of a political system?  Can this House approve it?  Is it possible?  Is it technically justified by the Constitution?  And I say,  'yes, it is indeed.'  Then I would go a little further to say, 'the spirit of the motion to take leave of the House to bring the Bill is very good.'  First of all, the matter we are going to deal with in the Amendment has been challenged by people who say, 'you can no longer do anything about the referendum now,  because it is already provided for in the Constitution.'  And we would like to agree that that is the situation.  But if you proceed that way, you do not solve our problem.  You leave so many people in jeopardy over the entire matter.  

And we forget one little thing,  Mr. Speaker, that on both sides of the divide, there are different considerations.  I know of so many people in the Movement who would prefer not to have the referendum, they would rather have something else so that this country can be saved from further rifts.  And I know also of so many people in the multi-party sector who will want the referendum to be held, because for them this is the best opportunity to throw out the Movement.

THE SPEAKER:  I am sorry to interrupt you.  If anybody has a mobile telephone in his or her pocket, can you please take it outside.  I heard one and I do not want to go to the extent of searching for it.  I want it outside the Chambers,  as per our rules.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  So,  Mr. Speaker, this motion - brought in good faith - should be treated as such.  And if we have any steam to blow on demerits and merits of a referendum, or the use of elections, we should only bring them out at a time when we are debating the Bill.  Otherwise as far as I am concerned, those who are now discussing the demerits and the merits of elections or referendum are offside.  So if I was a referee, I would have blown the whistle against them,  you know.  And if I blew it twice,  I would have given them a red card.  

I want to handle this matter in this very simple manner,  and I think that this House is full of men and women who are sensible and full of goodwill,  and they will not kill a motion which has such good intentions - at least not at its infancy.  That would send very wrong signals,  both to this country and to the international community.  People who would support us in our development of democratic principles and system, and ensuring that Uganda proceeds on the right path for economic prosperity and social progress will not appreciate that this motion could be stopped from causing an alternative to be debated by this august Assembly.  

I am appealing to all of us as persons of goodwill and intentions,  to allow the motion as Tabled - seeking leave of the House to bring a Bill for an Amendment to the provision of the Constitution - to pass.  And if we would like to throw the Bill out, that should be the next stage and we should not start discussing the issue of the Bill at this stage.  The matter to me is much more simple and it could have taken us only ten minutes if people were not in a hurry to discuss things which are beyond the motion which is before the House.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. MAO NOBERT (Gulu Municipality, Gulu):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As usual,  I will be brief.  I would like to rise in support of the motion that the House gives authority to the hon. Omara Atubo to present a Private Member's Bill seeking to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  With the benefit of hindsight,  even those of us who were not in the Constituent Assembly now think the Constituent Assembly did not do a perfect job,  and those who think that the Constitution does not need to be changed are misleading us into thinking that a perfect job was done.  

Most of the things which have been said point to the sad fact that a Constitution is like a cloth which was cut to fit a particular organisation,  a particular system,  it does not fit the other systems.  It is because those other systems want room.  That is why Amendments are necessary,  Mr. Speaker.  We have heard on this Floor that there is a dilemma, that we are stuck with Constitutional provisions which we cannot change.  I think this dilemma can be solved,  because whatever problems the Constitution has caused can be solved using the same Constitution.  That is why I support this motion.  It is an important motion and Parliament is the best placed institution to deal with this dilemma and to solve this problem.  The Constitutional Commission failed to pronounce itself decisively on it,  the Constituent Assembly failed to pronounce itself decisively on it,  everybody is looking to Parliament.  In fact this Parliament is even being praised today by a usually critical publication,  The Confidential,  which says, 'Parliament is the only institution of Government now working in this country.'  So, can we get to work on this subject?  

We are being told to obey the Constitution.  I think this is superfluous.  Because we are obeying the Constitution by seeking to amend it to solve a problem.  We are only disagreeing with some provisions of the Constitution,  Mr. Speaker,  and to disagree is not the same as to disobey.  What is our disagreement,  which seeks to bring these changes?

The first one,  and I will be brief on this point because I would prefer to raise them when the Bill is being debated substantively,  the referendum is really not the best way of deciding a political system.  There are those of us who object to the referendum based on the principle that it infringes on the fundamental human right which is enshrined in our Bill of Rights in the Constitution.  And the purpose of a Bill of Rights,  Mr. Speaker,  is to put certain rights beyond the reach of the majority.  When you bring these rights within the reach of the majority,  they cease to be fundamental.  

I was in Switzerland last year,  I was privileged to travel there with the Minister of Justice, and yesterday he gave some convenient examples.  I should report here that the Swiss,  who have held more referendums than any other country in the world  - actually 400 out of 800 referendums so far held in world history,  told us point blank that you cannot hold a referendum on everything.  One time, somebody brought a referendum to abolish the Swiss Army. We were told by a professor at the Institute of Federalism at Frieborg that that referendum was so divisive, but they could not stop it.  Because they had already decided that you could hold a referendum on anything provided 100,000 citizens sign their names to a petition for it.  After that sad experience,  the Swiss decided that there must be an agreement that certain things should be beyond the reach of the majority.  I submit,  Mr. Speaker, that the freedom of association which the parties aspire to enjoy fully in this country,  is one such right which should not be subject to or put within the reach of the majorities.  

People will say, 'but that is the law,  it is in the Constitution.'  The fact that something is legal does not mean that it is just.  If it will not shock you,  whatever the Nazis did in Germany was legal,  it was lawful,  if you want to hear it from me!  But was it just?  Where injustice has been talked about or where questions of justice are being raised,  you cannot hide behind the law.  

There are many of us multi-partists and many of those who are professed Movementists who believe deep in their hearts that the Movement is not an alternative to a multi-party system.  Many of them spoke their minds in the Constituent Assembly.  And it is objectionable to some of us who believe that the Movement is acceptable as a transitional system,  not as an alternative to a multi-party democracy.  We always aspire to a multi-party democracy.  And I know many Movementists believe deep in their hearts that that is where we should end up.  Why then are we hoisting up a transitional system to the status of an alternative system?

I think our problem in this country is Movement fundamentalism.  Mr. Speaker,  between 30 and 40 years from today,  most of us will be long gone.  What sort of Uganda do we want to leave to others?  Why do we want to dodge our responsibility and fail to solve the dilemmas of our country, instead of facing them squarely to ensure that even after we are gone,  at least Ugandans will be able to hand over power peacefully? Who is going to sort out our mess?  

I ask another question:  is there need for compromise on this question of the referendum?  I think there is need for a compromise.  And this is one such opportunity for even the Movement fundamentalists to compromise with those who seek to amend the Constitution,  in order to preserve the aspirations of Ugandans.  Most of us who believe in multi-party democracy have over the years tried to reach out to the Movement.  I do not know what happened to the talks between the Parties and the then National Political Commissar.  I do not know what happened to the proposal which was sent to the National Executive Committee of the Movement.  I think the Movement is behaving in a very rigid manner and that is unfortunate,  Mr. Speaker.  Their excuse for rigidity is that the Constitution is clear on these issues.  Yet this Constitution was presided over by the Movement,  the process of making it was controlled by the Movement,  and now the same Constitution is being waved as an obstacle to any change which may be a result of compromise.
  
I think we should remember the words of a song which says, "All the bridges that you burn,  come back one day to haunt you."  This is a bridge that hon. Omara Atubo and those of us who support this motion are building.  I think the Movement fundamentalists seek to burn this bridge today,  in the full glare of the God Almighty,  and being witnessed by Ugandans.  This is a bridge of compromise,  go ahead and burn it,  it will come back to haunt you.  It is only a matter of time.

I call for a great compromise to make the necessary changes which will make the Constitution facilitate democracy,  rather than obstruct it.  I challenge the Movement leaders who are here,  Mr. Speaker,  to be good midwives to our democracy otherwise it is going to be stillborn.  In the same way that the 1980 elections aborted the promises of the anti-fascist struggles of the 1970s,  this referendum will abort the promise of democracy that the NRM era ushered in in 1986.  I am ready to be quoted,  that this referendum is exactly like the 1980 elections.  They were rushed, the ground was not level,  the winner was known before the elections,  and this is exactly what is going to happen in this referendum.  

Let us allow this Bill to be published,  let it be read the First Time,  let the Committee debate it,  let the Committee hold public hearings so that the public advises Parliament to avert whatever problems the referendum may cause,  let the public come and give their views,  Mr. Speaker.  In other words, let us do justice to this Bill,  and justice is both substantive and procedural.  If this Bill is denied,  if this motion seeking to give authority is rejected, I do not think the Mover of this motion and those who second it will feel that they have been treated fairly.   If a Bill like this ends up being rejected,  if a Bill like this ends up as a DOA (Dead On Arrival),  most of us will walk out of this House knowing that another opportunity has been missed.

I support the motion and appeal to all my Colleagues in this House to allow this Bill to see the light of day,  then we can go on to debate the substance of the Bill.  Do not run away from the debate of the substance of the Bill.  If you really want to listen to the merits of the Bill, allow it to see the light of day.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. ZZIWA NANTONGO (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I thank hon. Atubo for being persistent, consistent and determined.  Hon. Atubo, we were together in Committee number five in the Constituent Assembly,  and I remember the rigours and the fights - if I can use that word - which we went through right from the report of the Constitutional Commission,  through the level of debate in the Committee itself,  right to the Plenary. 

I want to say that I oppose this motion vehemently,  reason:  the reasons forwarded by hon. Atubo in support of bringing his motion are exactly the ones he presented then.  I can also add that wishing that perhaps four years would have healed the hearts of many,  when he came on to the Floor and put his reasons across, has not changed anything.  I realised that the situation is much the same as it was.  

I want to add that - or maybe I should thank him - because he has for a long time nursed this motion.  Actually I should say that at one time he lobbied me - I do not know whether effectively or otherwise,  but under the circumstances, it actually prompted me to go back to my constituency of Kampala district.  You know of course that that is where many of these political elites reside,  and I asked the people whether they really want this referendum, as enshrined in the Constitution.  Having gone through 82 parishes of the 100 parishes I have in Kampala district,  the people are saying they are ready to go to the vote.  The people are saying they are ready for the referendum;  the people are saying they should be given this chance; the people are saying that maybe if they were given this chance in 1958/1959 or 1960, they would have decided otherwise,  and not gone with partyism then.  People are saying that even in 1980,  which hon. Mao has described as a period of disaster,  if we had had enough food for thought,  maybe we would have had a better day. 

I want to urge many Members to take the opportunity to read the report of the Constituent Commission,  it was very detailed and I think people should not read it in abstract.  People should desist from taking particular extracts which may fit their situation of argument at a particular moment.  In fact when you read the whole chapter eight which basically talks about the political system this country would wish to adopt, it is categorically put that up to about 97 percent of the population opted for the Movement System.  In fact many other people wished to have this System for over 20 years or even 50 years.  I do not see how hon. Mao is interpreting this as transition!  It was only in the wisdom of the Commission that they wanted the people to decide on the political system,  together with the Parliamentary and Presidential term of offices,  and these are basic facts in the report.

As you are aware,  the Commission gave a list of recommendations and those are the ones which the Constituent Assembly ably analyzed and took on.  One of the many was,  and I think this was the first one,  that the Constituent Assembly discusses the options as laid out.  They were three by then:  that the people wanted the Movement System, the minority wanted Partisan System basing on the old parties which had existed then, and of course a few wanted the two to prevail.  But they analyzed the option of the two prevailing,  and it found impractical.  So, they decided to have the two, movement and multi-parties.  But of course under the circumstances, the two could also not work together, that is why it was opted that they have the Movement proposed as the first one, and this was put on the Floor of the Plenary.

Yesterday, I heard hon. Atubo suggesting that 52 Members walked out.  Just for a reminder, we were all there.  Members did not walk out on the political system per se.  They walked out when we said that we were going to have the Movement system for the next five years.  And for that matter they even walked out after the vote,  which can be interpreted in all ways:  maybe they went out for a cup of tea?  Because they did not put it to the Speaker of the House that they were walking out in protest,  for they had actually been defeated.  

I want to say that the Constituent Commission had thought about the Constituent Assembly pronouncing itself on this issue.  They imagined that if we were given the chance,  it would require just two thirds of the Assembly to take the day.  I want to add that even if it was based on the results of the previous vote,  they would still have taken the day.  What is wrong with asking the people to vote,  especially under the guise of democracy which we cherish so much?  Many people now want to have the opportunity to take up their political rights.  

In this respect,  as I conclude,  hon. Atubo yesterday laboured greatly to say that the judgement to deny a referendum or to call for one, is based on the poor performance or divisive and destructive nature which are always blamed on the political parties.  In our culture,  and I think I should first say it in English,  they say,  'once bitten, twice shy',  or simply in Luganda,  'sekawuka kaali kakulumye...'  If you have experienced something before,  you approach it with caution the next time round.  The people in this country know what they went through with the parties system.  The people in this country experienced all the denials of - call them rights - as you ably put it.  They have been denied even the rights to participate in even the basic elections,  during the so called arrangements of multi-partyism.  This is the very reason why many are still saying that,  'we should now think about this new system.  What has it got to offer?'  

Let me also remind the Members that in the Constituent Commission report there was a challenge which was put to the multi-partyist advocates.  I was that the people wanted to see the multi-partyists put their house in order,  give something new,  redefine their roots,  redefine their agenda.  Definitely other than coming here to go into all this,  we would go to a referendum and let people say, 'okay, let us give the multi-partyists the opportunity now.'  I really say that this is a waste of time.  I do not support this motion,  we had ample time even in the jurisdiction towards the Constituent Assembly,  to debate this fully.  I think the Constituent Assembly did adequate work.  

I wish to call upon hon. Mao to take off time and read the Hansard of the Constituent Assembly, and I guess there were men and women with brains in that Assembly.  I beg to oppose the motion.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want first of all to thank hon. Omara Atubo for enabling us to re-internalise the intricacies of the problem we are addressing.  But I want to state at the outset that I do oppose his motion.  

Let me do so by stating the basic question we are addressing.  The basic problem we are addressing is, 'who shall get what, when, how and for how long'?  In other words we are saying, 'what systems shall we use to allocate these scarce resources'?  So, this is a pre-eminent political question and I am happy,  as a permanent student of political science,  to address it.  

Hon. Omara Atubo said - and we have to address the questions he actually posed - that 'the approach of the referendum is costly'. But he has not weighed the advantages of the referendum.  I wish to state categorically that the advantages of the referendum outweigh those of the elections;  why?  

First,  when you use a referendum, you focus on one question.  In this particular case we shall be focusing on one question, and therefore, unlike his approach of elections, we shall not be dealing with many variables like leadership.  For example yesterday people were also mentioning hospitals, they are mentioning so many other issues.  And we are saying, when you approach such vital issues and you overload the question, the problem of making people lose focus is maximised.  We are saying, we want to minimise the problems,  especially when we are dealing with people who have not had basic education for a long time.  

Article 34, clause 2 of the Constitution enjoins the State and the parent to provide basic education to our children.  Children need this basic education to be facilitated further to resolve many more intricate problems without facing distortion.  

Secondly, we wish to state that when people participate in resolving a problem, they will be educated further.  So, the benefit of educating people is almost unquantifiable.  

MR. NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am sorry,  Mr. Prime Minister,  for cutting you short on your very eloquent matter.  But just in case I make a wrong assumption, I would like to benefit from the Prime Minister's understanding - since he has just come from the Ministry of Education - as to what political matters he considers to be generally acceptable by all Ugandans as basic education in this country?   Is it Chaka Mchaka or something else?  Mr. Prime Minister, you will help me.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I think he was making a political point.  All I can add here is that in our context,  basic education starts from primary one to primary seven.  But let me proceed with the second issue,  the advantages of the referendum.  

We have been with a lot of conflicts and therefore we need different methods of resolving conflicts.  We have used, for example, elections and we are saying that we are now using the second mode of resolving conflicts,  that is the referendum.  I refer you to Article 255 of the Constitution where Parliament may make provisions for the right of citizens to demand the holding  - by the Electoral Commission - of a referendum,  whether national or in any particular part of Uganda,  on any issue.  In other words, we are marketing the second viable approach of resolving an intricate problem,  that is the use of a referendum. 
Let me also say that we are dealing with many issues in politics concerning who governs and how the people are to be governed.  When we are dealing with issues concerning who governs and what political system we shall use,  we are suggesting that you may use elections.  How are we to be governed, what political systems are we going to used; 'let us use the referendum approach,' we say.

Hon. Mao said that certain issues like fundamental human rights should not be tampered with by majorities.  But again I refer him to  the Constitution which clearly says that a referendum can be held on any issue.  Is he trying to amend the Constitution without going through proper methods?  

I want to add also that the question he posed poses further intricacies regarding who shall determine those sacrosanct issues which will not be determined by the majority.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank him for giving way.  Prof. Nsibambi as a student of political science, would you give us an example of a country in the world which has tried to solve the issue of the choice of the political system through a referendum?

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you very much.  If you listened very carefully yesterday,  hon. Wapakhabulo did indicate to you very clearly that even fundamental rights can be subjected to a referendum.  The point was made that even death which is ultimate, there are cases where people's lives can be taken away.  If the issue of death people can decide whether or not to administer it, what about a political system? So here you have simply to use the logic and proceed properly.  

Going back to the issue brought by hon. Mao that certain issues were sacrosanct and that they cannot be touched by the majority, then the next question is, who shall decide what is sacrosanct?  So we need arbitrators,  and I am saying that arbitrators must be the people - in fulfilment of Article 1 of our Constitution. They must be the arbitrators.  But we are also saying that when issues are being resolved,  and even after they have been resolved, the minorities are not disregarded.  

That issue was also raised by hon. Atubo.  He was saying that we must not have the tyranny of the majority essentially.  And I want to put it to him that the Movement system does not terrorise the minority, it embraces all the groups.  As you must have seen  it is through the Movement system that even two Ministers have been censured, this is what I mean.  Which means that it is a system which enables different groups to cohere, to inter-face, and therefore the minority participates.  It is not exclusive, and that is why -(Interruption).

MR.  OMARA ATUBO:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  I thank hon. Nsibambi for giving way.  I know I may have the opportunity to reply and you may not,  but since it is an important point,  I would like you to clarify to me in your argument about the inclusiveness and competitive nature of the Movement.  

As a political scientist,  I would like you to look at the competitiveness in terms of organisation,  that the Movement organises itself as a system with its leaders and they compete for power.  And unless you have another competitive system with its structures up to the grassroots,  would an individual in such a system really have an opportunity to succeed to get power.  For  example, the structure which you will need for him to be elected as a President.  

Secondly, I would like you to direct your mind on the question of Tanzania.  About five years ago when the people of Tanzania had similar problems of whether to open up from CCM to multi-party democracy, they were not restricting the right of freedom of association.  They were trying to open up the right of association,  they also went to the people not through the referendum but through a Judicial Commission of Inquiry.  They asked the Chief Justice and in their Commission they came out with a report where people in Tanzania said that 23 percent supported opening up for multi-party democracy,   and the majority of up to 77 percent still wanted the CCM to continue.   Still the report of their Chief Justice said that they could not ignore the 23 percent.  When the CCM met, they decided - irrespective of the majority decision in the Commission of Inquiry - to open up.  In the process of re-internalising this issue, and I am happy that you are re-internationalising it,  would you think that this system of opening up may not be good for Uganda,  especially when the multi-parties got 25 percent in the general election,  and Museveni got 75 percent, a poll higher than the opinion in Tanzania?  

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Beginning with your second point,  the answer to any question is contextual.  In the Tanzanian context, they decided at one point that it was time to transit from one political system to another.  They had gone through a one party system, the leadership enjoyed political hygiene, strong institutions had been created,  and there was agreement that they were ready to transit from one system to another.  In the case of Uganda,  it has had a lot of conflicts and atrophy of institutions.  After the referendum is decided what you should say is,  can we continue to negotiate?  That is really the issue.  You should say that, 'let us continue to negotiate.'  

But we would like to involve the people in resolving the question of what political system we shall use,  and after resolving that question, we should continue to negotiate.  And I am saying that in the kind of political system we have,  there must be many options and you must remove rigidity.  We must make it possible for 100 schools of thought to contend and bloom, and I want to suggest that 100 schools of thought are contending and blooming in this Parliament and even outside Parliament.   

With regard to your second point,  people in Uganda do not even suffer after they have made controversial statements.  One friend went to a country where he was assured that there was freedom of speech.  After making his criticism,  he was assaulted and he said, 'I thought there was freedom of speech.'  He was reminded that there was freedom of speech but that there was absence of freedom of after speech.  But in our case we have the freedom of speech and the freedom of after speech,  and we can test it.  After you have moved your motion you will get out and you will be secure and safe.

With regard to the first question, you are basically talking about absence of competing structures.  What I could say here is that we begin with Article 70 where the Movement has to be participatory, it must have accountability, transparency, accessibility of opposition to leadership and individual merit.  And there is already a Movent Act which had to comply with those requirements.  In our context those arrangements allow competition,  and as we institutionalize the very system, and as we democratise our attitudes, statements and behaviour,  even the restrictions on political parties which exist under Article 269 will disappear.  Because there we are transiting from anarchy and atrophy,  from a state of nature as described by Hobbes,  to  State-led democracy.  Then as we make the civil society vibrant, we shall move to society led democracy.  These matters must be handled in a measured manner.  If you rush, you may miss transiting from one system,  and go back to square one.  

For those reasons, I would like to oppose the motion, and strongly persuade you to withdraw your motion.  I thank you.

MR. BEN WACHA (Oyam North, Apach): Mr. Speaker, I thank you.  I have not been in this House because I have been sick.  I was therefore not able to participate in yesterday's debate.  Should I say something which has already been touched on,  I beg your indulgence, and I pray for forgiveness.  Mr. Speaker, I am going to be very, very brief.  

Our rules envisage two stages in debates connected with private Members' Bills:  the first stage in a private Members' Bill is what we are doing now.  The second stage deals with the debate on the Bill itself.  But if what I have read in the newspapers is true,  and what I have been hearing this morning is the trend of what happened yesterday,  then I think we are handling this motion in a completely wrong way.  

I would have expected that now what we Members of Parliament would have been doing would not be dealing with the merits or the demerits of what hon. Omara Atubo anticipates to bring before this House.  Because what we have is an anticipation, an application for a wish to bring before us a Bill which would be entitled in a manner that we will decide.  

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The information I wish to give is that hon. Omara Atubo,  in asking permission for this Bill to be tabled,  spoke for two and half hours in this House.  During all that time, he did not only anticipate but actually expounded on every single issue on which Members are commenting. I thought that will help hon. Ben Wacha know that Members have a right to reply.  Thank you.

MR. WACHA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank hon. Obiga Kania,  Member of Parliament for Terego and Director in the Movement Secretariat,  for that statement.  We are really not in conflict. Unfortunately I do not seem to be in contact with him,  but we are not in conflict.  What I am saying is exactly that, if hon. Omara Atubo went and started amplifying on his Bill,  then he actually did what he should not have done.  So, what I am saying is that despite that, the rules still reside in you.  The rules still endure in you Mr. Speaker,  hon. Members of Parliament,  to confine yourselves to that anticipation,  because even that intent can still be amended.  

I heard people saying,  'look, do not accept this application because there is a possibility that this Bill will be brought under the wrong Article of the Constitution.'  But that can be amended.  If it is wrong, if I accept that Bill, I know I will amend it eventually.  What I am saying is,  let us not be blinded by discussing demerits of that Bill.  Let us discuss whether this particular intention is frivolous,  whether it is not necessary.  Does it have a serious intent which is amplifying the intention, the wishes of a certain sector of the people of Uganda?  Or is it something out of the blue brought out by hon. Omara Atubo to waste the time of this House?  That is what we should confine ourselves to.  Is it something that this House - being a national institution - should stand back and say, 'by the way,  let us listen to what they are saying.' 

It might be rubbish as hon. Wapakabulo says, it might be brought under the wrong Article,  but is it a waste of the time of some people in this country saying, 'look, hon. Members,  turn back  - that is what we should now be spending out time on.'   As to whether a referendum or elections are good, whether my muko hon. Prime Minister says it is the highest level of what,  that would become relevant when you are discussing the Bill.  But at this stage,  to start talking about the CA,  how the matter was handled by committee five, how it was rejected, how 60 people walked out of the Constituent Assembly,  is really not yet relevant.  

You could put that to me when I stand up to support that anticipated Bill,  put it to me that, 'you were defeated in CA in this matter,  why are you raising it again?'  But that is not yet to be.  What you have before you now is to decide: is this matter frivolous, is it necessary, is it being an amplification of the wish of a certain percentage of the people of Uganda?  That is all you have to do.  If you think it is useless think back,  because some people were going to say, 'this Parliament is even so scared,  so scared of even just discussing a motion, they do not want it to be brought out, such cowardice!'  Why do you not wait and defeat it on merit?  Why are closing it out?  What sort of cowardice is this?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MED KAGGWA (Kawempe South, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In view of what hon. Ben Wacha has said, I am prompted to move a motion that you put the question.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  There is a notice for a motion, we have to dispose of that one first.  I think the hon. Member is proceeding under the same rule that was proceeded under by the hon. Egunyu;  and the effect of my ruling yesterday was that I declined to exercise my authority under that rule.  I preferred that the hon. Member withdrew her motion - which she did - and I did so because I wanted to give an opportunity for more hon. Members to express themselves about this important matter. I consider this matter so fundamental to our resolve to promote constitutionalism, democracy and good governance.  Up to this point, I am not yet satisfied that the number of people I expected to express themselves on this matter has reached what I thought would be appropriate in the circumstances.  

I would therefore rather go by my earlier ruling that we give a little more time,  and opportunity for more people to express themselves before you are called upon to express yourselves on this matter.  Would you still insist on your motion?

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am obliged to that ruling.  Instead I want to add that in what will follow,  you limit us to the gist of the question.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, in light of your ruling, I am seeking guidance on a matter of procedure,  how to conduct ourselves on this motion.  This motion pertains to an amendment to the Constitution, it is an application.  Therefore in my opinion it falls under rule 73.  Anybody who stands up suggesting that we should pronounce ourselves under a different rule will be misleading this House.  However, Mr. Speaker,  I will leave it to  you to guide this House on whether this matter should fall under rule 73 or rule 62,  as previously requested.

THE SPEAKER: It was 63, but you state your rule.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, rule 73,  "There shall be secret voting in the House in respect of a Bill for an Act of Parliament -(Interruptions).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let him make his point.

MR. AWORI: In case my hon. Colleagues are anxious,  I will quote the last one,  item (c) "any other matter if the House so decides."

THE SPEAKER:  I do not know why you have gone that far,  because my ruling is that we are still debating this matter.  So, that point is really of no consequence as far as we are concerned at this point.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr. Eriya Kategaya):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make a few remarks on the motion.  

First of all,  I sympathise with my Friend hon. Wacha,  because the mess in which we are is a result of the Mover of the motion. In fact,  it is as if hon. Obiga Kania was just reading my mind, because hon. Omara Atubo put up a well spirited and well researched exposure of this issue of the referendum.  And I think after him bringing these merits before the House,  we have a right to reply;  it is like squeezing toothpaste out of the tube, you cannot put it back.  So, I also got mixed up in the whole process of comments on the merits of the debate.  

I know that this House has a right to amend the Constitution, because we are representatives of the people.  But we thought of having a referendum as a way of determining how to be governed. I think there should be a difference between how to be governed and who leads us.  They are two different things,  and if you look at the Article 1(4),  it talks of both who leads us and how we are going to be governed.  

On the question of being governed,  I am a very strong believer that we should have people decide on how we should be governed.  In the Constituent Assembly,  we were also worried about what has historically happened in this country in our politics.  Some of us thought that history had been repeated because of people being governed without being consulted.  In 1966 there was a quarrel between Prime Minister Obote and then President Mutesa;  there was a fight.  We did not know which issues were involved at that time,  but somehow our lives were disturbed. 

In 1971 Idi Amin said over Radio Uganda,  'I have taken over the Government, there is a new Government.'  The people of Uganda were spectators,  they were not involved,  nobody consulted them.  What has happened?  In 1980 the same thing happened.  We went for elections,  some of our people voted in one way,  others said, 'no, no, this vote is not good enough.  Although you have a right to vote,  you voted wrongly.'  Even ourselves - if I may be fair on how we came into power - we came in without consultations.  But I think what has happened is that we had the decency to write a Constitution which said, 'from now on you will be consulted.' 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for giving way. There is a very important remark that you have made,  on which I want your clarification.  If you say that the people of Uganda should be consulted,  that they should not be spectators,  aware of the fact that you yourself attended the Constituent Assembly,  and aware of the fact that you know that the Constitution of Uganda lies on the shoulders of the Odoki report, to what extent were the people of Uganda consulted in resolving that the best political system shall be reached through a referendum?  Why is that not reflected in the Odoki report? (Mrs. Matembe rose_).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, is it an order or information?

MRS. MATEMBE:  Mr. Speaker, it is a point of information to hon. Lukyamuzi, because he referred to the Odoki Commission -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: If it is not a point of order,  then I would like the  First Deputy Prime Minister to respond to the point raised by the hon. Lukyamuzi.  If it was a point of order,  I would then have entertained you.

MR. KATEGAYA: Mr. Speaker, I would not like to go through the history of how this Constitution was made.  I thought hon. Lukyamuzi - who is very active in politics - knows how the Constituent Assembly was constituted. If this House is being asked to amend the Constitution on the basis that we represent the population,  equally the Constituent Assembly was representing the whole population.  We went through elections specifically to go and make the Constitution,  and I remember one of the questions that was being raised during the campaigns was whether you were going to support the Movement or not, it was a clear question.  So, the consultation was there.  I do not think that we did not have the power to constitute a referendum,  a way to determine how to be governed. 

I had a discussion with hon. Ssemogerere at one time,  on this question of how to be governed,  and what really shocked me is whether these people who are talking about multi-parties are democratic!  Mr. Ssemogerere told me - and you can ask him - that he does not -(Interruption).

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I am sorry to interrupt the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs.  But when I stood here to contribute,  I thought I drew our attention to the fact that we are being diversionary.  Hon. Ben Wacha,  who was fortunately Chairman of our Rules Committee,  stood up and pointed out that we are actually debating something which is not on the Floor,  we do not have a Bill on the Floor.  And despite that,  the First Deputy Prime Minister is saying that since a mistake was made,  we might as well continue with it?  This is really very dishonourable.  Accordingly therefore,  Mr. Speaker,  I am drawing your attention to rule 55(1) of our rules of procedure:  scope of debate.

THE SPEAKER:  Which sub rule?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Sub rule (1) which reads, "Debate upon any motion or amendment to a motion or upon any Bill,  part of a Bill or amendment to a Bill,  shall be relevant to the matter being debated."  First, Mr. Speaker, I am drawing this to your attention for you to enforce this rule;  but then on the point on which I have risen,  is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in order to go on debating issues which are not relevant to the motion before the House?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What are the irrelevant issues he is debating?  You should draw my attention to that.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  The motion is seeking leave of the House to bring a Bill for amendment of the Constitution.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is discussing the merits and demerits of the Bill; that Bill is not yet before the House.

THE SPEAKER:  My position is this:  if you read the motion,  a draft Bill has been attached and when you read the text of the motion,  there is a reference to a Bill.  And I do not think that you can talk about that motion without talking about the draft Bill.  You may not go into the merits but I think you can talk about the Bill in so far as the Bill is supposed to do one thing - to amend the Constitution.  And I think hon. Members you are free to discuss whether it is necessary to amend the Constitution in the context of this motion. 

I would like you to tell me,  hon. Okulo Epak,  the extent of irrelevancy.  If you can point that out,  then I will be in a position to rule,  basing on what I have just explained.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, our rules state that when an hon. Member is moving a motion seeking leave of the House to move a private Member's  Bill,  a draft of that bill shall be attached to the motion.  It is my understanding that the question of attachment is for information of the House that,  'this is the kind of Bill that the private Member intends to move.'  But the substance of the motion should be on the merit - whether or not the Member should be allowed to bring a Private Member's Bill,  and it is what I am trying to say,  Sir. I think that if we now start debating in depth the merit of the Bill which is not yet before the House,  we are really indulging in irrelevancy,  as far as I am concerned.

THE SPEAKER: I think you have not understood me.  I have said that the Bill which is attached - you are quite right - is for information.  But you cannot discuss the merits or the demerits of the motion without reference to the Bill,  it is just not possible.  Otherwise there would be no need to even attach the Bill;  you could just talk about it.  The text of the Bill is there for you to make up your mind on whether it is necessary to amend the Constitution in a manner that is being proposed,  hence requiring you to pronounce yourself in support of the motion or not.  That is the crux of the matter.  

I nevertheless agree with you,  hon. Okulo Epak,  that at that point you do not go deep into the merits of the Bill.  I am asking now that you have raised a point of order,  I would like you to help me make a ruling on whether the First Deputy Prime Minister is out of order,  by pointing out the irrelevancy so that I can make my decision. Otherwise I am with you.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, the rules are very clear.  The final authority of interpretation is on you -(Laughter).  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Let me not waste time.  In light of the fact that the hon. Member has not pointed out those areas which he considers irrelevant in the contribution of the First Deputy Prime Minister, I would say that I am not able to appreciate the point of order,  and I will ask the Prime Minister to proceed.

MR. KATEGAYA:  Thank you, Mr. speaker, for your ruling.  I think hon. Okulo Epak was in the House yesterday but he did not object when hon. Omara Atubo was actually taking us through the exposure.  

Yesterday hon. Omara Atubo raised one question which I would like to have more clarification on.  He was saying that by going to the referendum,  we are going to lock out people.  My question was,  to lock them out of what?  Because if the system was locking out people,  we would not have had the benefit of  hon. Omara Atubo yesterday giving us exposure for two and a half hours in this House,  because if he was locked out he would not be in this House.  To me that is why I want to know who is locked out of what.  I will be happy to have that definition so that we can look at it,  Mr. Speaker. 

I agree that if you go to a referendum it is a very important exercise and I advise hon. Omara Atubo that when the Minister of Constitutional Affairs brings a Referendum Bill to this House,  he should ensure that what we put down in that law is very, very fair to all.  We should ensure that everybody can go and canvass with his or her views, that if need be we should assist groups which want to canvass for either position on a referendum.  In other words,  we should expose our people to views so that at the end of the day whoever wins it is a fair game,  because we want stability.  

If that emphasis, that energy was put on how to make a good law that will be fair to all, I would support that position and the sooner the better because we want a referendum which will bring stability in this country,  for the future.  As somebody was saying,   I also do not mind if multi-partyists win, I have no problem with it as long as people pronounce on that position.  That is the issue.  How to be governed affects my life, affects the future of my children,  and I want the people to pronounce themselves on that question.  

This practice which has been happening in the country before,  of some of us sitting in Kampala and conspiring among ourselves, should stop.  Leaders who have views should go to the people, have the peoples' views put forward and get their support.  People are talking of cowards, I am not a coward!  I do not mind going to the field with anybody, if you defeat me,  really I have no problem.  But to sit in Kampala is detestable,  because this idea of smuggling in political parties is unacceptable.  The views I have had from law society, I do not know who is trying to go round the population!  They want us to conspire among ourselves!  

Before I was interrupted, I was going to tell you about my discussion with the big man of DP,  Ssemogerere.  He told me, 'why do you go and bother these peasants with multi-partyism, they do not understand it.'  And I said, 'then what is this system for?  If the peasants do not understand it, you leave it for the time being.  But to not consult them saying they do not understand, whom then do you want to lead?'  

As I said, as long as some of us are around, we should ensure fair rules of the game, for everybody to stay in his or her position, canvass,  even if it means funding these groups, I think we should do so.  To me, that is how we shall come out with a system acceptable to the population, rather than having conspiracies among ourselves here and then go and tell the population, 'yes, we have decided in Kampala, that is how we should be governed.' Who are we?

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, it pains me.  I am raising this point of order with a lot of sadness.  Is the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister in order to describe the august power of Parliament which is charged with making legislation for the good governance of this nation that in the process of our duties when we meet here as Parliament,  we are conspiring?  Is the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Kategaya in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  I did not understand the Prime Minister to have said that when we are in these Chambers we are conspiring.  I think what he is talking about is what you do outside this House.

MR. KATEGAYA:  Mr. Speaker, I must salute you on that ruling.  What I was exactly talking about is political groups, not Parliament - Parliament is not conspiring, we are open.  I am talking of political groups, because this is what hon. Ssemogerere was telling me. He said, 'if we agree among ourselves,'  - I am talking of political groups.

Another point which I would like to give more information to hon. Atubo on is the question of Tanzania.  Tanzania had a Commission of inquiry on whether they should go multi-partyist or not.  The Commission came out and advanced the same issues as you have.  CCM has about 75 per cent or so support,  and Mwalimu said, 'if you are so strong, why bother?  Have other people to make noise so that there is no pressure on you.'  It was the question that if CCM is so strong,  leave other people to make noise and get no problem from anybody.  Whether that is democratic or you think it was good, I do not know, but that is the situation.  The whole system was so strong that the 'Mulemas' could make noise and nothing happens.  

Lastly,  I would like hon. Atubo to look at this Amendment he is trying to move.  Even if we amend (ii) and (iii), will that take out the possibility of the referendum?  I think the answer is no. If we look at the Constitution,  Articles 14, 74,  and  255,  even if we amend 271 (ii) and (iii), these Articles will still be in existence, anybody who wants the referendum will invoke them.  So, what is the purpose?  Are we not shadow boxing?  That is why I am opposing the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

MR.  KIKULUKUNYU SSALI (Youth Representative, Central):     Thank you,  Mr. Speaker,  for the opportunity given to me.  I wish to first of all say that the matter on the Floor should not be seen as a subject of multi-partyists versus movementists.   Why I am saying this is simply  because of the previous presenters on either side.  It seems as if we are trying to draw a boundary between the movementists and the multi-partyists.  I would therefore say that the subject on the Floor is just a question of individuals versus the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  
Before I go further, I want to first arrest any feelings by the nation that the youth of Uganda are saying no to the referendum. We are saying that it is not true that the youth of Uganda are saying no to the referendum,  as put across by one of the presenters.  I am  saying that everybody is entitled to an opinion, however your personal opinion should not champion other people's opinions and in doing so give a false impression of what the people of Uganda are saying.

MR. EKANYA:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  I find it very sad and disheartening for a hon. Member to claim that the information I gave him yesterday was not a representation of the youth whom I represent in this Parliament.  I wish to reiterate that I was voted by 86 per cent of the youths of Uganda,  my Colleague speaking was voted by 53 per cent.  Therefore,  I wish to state that three weeks ago, the youths of Uganda gathered - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  What is the point of order?

MR. EKANYA:  Mr. Speaker, I am giving a chronology of my statement and I want to challenge that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Welfare organised a seminar for the youths of Uganda youth representatives,  at Pope Paul Memorial Centre.  I went there and they gave the view that they do not support the referendum. He was not there.  Is it in order for him to allege that the information I gave was false?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  First of all, no name was mentioned regarding yesterday's contribution.  Secondly, the contribution did not say that yesterday's contribution by whoever was false.  

The contribution of today - if I heard it correctly - was that whoever made that contribution was expressing his opinion.  Right?  I did not hear the word 'false' being used, or any other word.  So, the hon. Member is in order, he can proceed. 

MR. ADOME LOKWII:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Kikulukunyu was proceeding properly.  Is it in order for hon. Ekanya,  who is indecently dressed,  to interact with us in this House?

THE SPEAKER:  Well, hon. Members, I think you know the problem we have with our rules.  This is a matter for the Committee on Rules,  and they have not come out with the specifics of what constitutes a decent dress.  So, I am really handicapped.  But if I had my way and could proceed without the rules, I think you can guess what I would say.  But since I have to follow the rules, I think the hon. Member - I would reluctantly rule that the hon. Member is decently dressed and is in order.

MR. KIKULUKUNYU:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  We have a problem of time, I hope you appreciate it.

MR. KIKULUKUNYU:  Mr. Speaker, as I proceed, I will not go back to what hon. Ekanya has said, but important for him to know is that whether he got 86 per cent, the balance is an indication that others were not in for him.  That stands to explain why we should allow the minority as well,  the chance to speak what they think is dear to them.  

We are saying that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda was made by peoples' representatives through the Constituent Assembly.  And we are saying that Members could not agree on certain contentious issues among them the aspect of a referendum on the political system to be adopted.  I do not think we are any more legitimate as a House to reverse a decision by the Constituent Assembly to consult the masses of Uganda on a matter seen to them as being contentious.  Mr. Speaker, why should we start to believe that we Members in Parliament now are more legitimate than the Constituent Assembly?  I think all of us have the mandate of the people.  The CA decided that they could not resolve this matter and therefore must refer to the people that sent them to the House.  Why then should we believe that we are more legitimate than the body that was in place then and reverse what was seen to them as being more suited for the people of Uganda?

We must not forget Article 1 of the Constitution which says that the people of Uganda are supreme.  Where we fail to agree, why not reverse to them?  Mr. Speaker, I am not apologetic to say that when we sit here and decide that let us extend the movement,  or we go to multi-partyism automatically,  we are denying the Ugandans the chance.  Which chance?   We said they must be referred to when there is a matter that is contentious,  now we are saying there is a matter that has come up and we are saying we go for it this year and then automatically go to the other;  what are you fearing?   Is it the history that you are fearing? Why can we not go to the ground and tell the people the reality? 

People make mistakes and reform.  Why can you not tell them that you reformed?  Here we are, we are ready to cooperate, let us not do things the simple way, let us not take the shortcuts.  Let us respect the Constitution.  The Government of Uganda has a duty to defend the Constitution of the people.  They are the custodians of the Constitution of Uganda.  If you say that they simply give in,  leaving out aspects that people stood to respect, are we doing a favour to the people of Uganda?   Are we being nationalistic in our outlook?  Are we doing what our people are expecting of us?  So, Mr. Speaker, I greatly oppose the motion.  We must not talk of this automatic return.  Let us give the people of Uganda a chance to determine their way forward. 

In this motion, we talk about the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which guarantees the protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms.  Mr. Speaker, may I be educated of the fact that the people of Uganda are supreme?  Is it not a right, a freedom to them and if denied,  are we respecting the Constitution?  For why should we be simply confined to the aspects of human rights?  Is it a human right to deny Ugandans a chance to determine their political system?  What kind of right is it?   I stand to be educated on that.   

I also find it challenging when one says that a referendum is not in the interests of the country.  What then is in the interest of the country that is constitutional, that the people of the country have predicted?   Why can we not go by the standards that the Ugandans have set,  if we are to have a stable country?  I find it challenging,  Mr. Speaker,  when one says that with a referendum, we are going to end instability.  Is it the referendum that is causing instability or the formalities of the referendum or the after-effects of the referendum itself?   I do not think the referendum has a problem, but if the Electoral Commission and the State fail to organise a free and fair referendum, then the aspect of insecurity may come in.  But I am asserting that it is the responsibility of the State and Electoral Commission to see to it that we arrange some thing good that will ensure stability.  

The people of Uganda have no problem with the referendum.  I mean some people of Uganda.  I would not say that because we have hon. Omara Atubo, we have hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, who have a problem with the referendum, therefore it would be improper of me to generalise that the people have problems with the referendum.  But I am saying, some people of Uganda - the majority - because the Constitution was the word of the majority.  Mr. Speaker, I wish also to point out that -(Interjection).

THE SPEAKER:  Your time has run out.

MR. KIKULUKUNYU:  Mr. Speaker, I also find it challenging when one says the costs involved in holding the referendum are exorbitant and quite prohibitive.  I mean we must go for it;  for much as it is quite expensive,  we are winning certain ends.  Democracy cannot be achieved at zero costs.  So, we must get it at an expense.  Whichever costs that are to be involved, Mr. Speaker, I would advise that the State goes for it.  

Further, let me try to emphasise this aspect.  The question of the referendum is not a question of the State.  The State is simply a custodian of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The Government that is the Executive and so on, are simply the custodians.  They must see to it that they respect what the people put into the document.  They must not be like a leader in France - you may remind me if I go wrong - Louis the 16th.  Louis said that a thing is legal because I want it, for I am the State.  The Government should not be like that.  The State is simply trying to implement what the people of Uganda want, it is not the State that wants it.  So, we must respect the Constitution and act accordingly.  

Finally, I want to call on individuals that are against the referendum to begin on their kakuyege,  mobilise.  If it is the UPE that is bad, tell people that UPE is bad.  If you think that it is chaka mchaka that is bad, say to them that chaka mchaka is bad.  If you think you do not want the Government to defend certain territorial borders, talk about that, rather than talking about certain aspects of the Constitution as being poor.  Mr. Speaker, I once again beg,  on a very strong point,  to oppose the motion.  I thank you.

MR. OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to begin by thanking hon. Omara Atubo for the gift he has given this country at this time,  in the hour of need.  Refer to Article 74(1) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which reads: "A referendum shall be held for the purpose of changing the political system - (a)if requested by a resolution supported by more than half of all members of Parliament."  'Shall be if requested,' are the key words. (b) If requested by a resolution supported by the majority of the total membership of each of at least one half of all district councils; or (c) If requested through a petition to the Electoral Commission by at least one tenth of the registered voters from each of at least two-thirds of the constituencies for which representatives are required to be directly elected under paragraph (a) of clause 1 of article 78 of this Constitution."  
I have read all those with a purpose to ask this House now whether we have satisfied the conditions set in those provisions of the Constitution.  Mr. Speaker, Article 271(3) imposes a referendum on the people of this country.  It says,  "During the last month of the fourth year of the term of Parliament referred to in clause (2) of this article, a referendum shall be held to determine the political system the people of Uganda wish to adopt."  It does not reflect Article 74 of the Constitution.  Mr. Speaker, I want to say the following -(Interruption).  

MRS. MATEMBE:  Mr. Speaker, can I give an information to the hon. Member?  The hon. Member on the Floor has read two different provisions catering for two different referenda.  In the first one, he says, 'yes, that is the right one which the people wanted.'  In the last one, he read 271, saying it is being imposed on the people.  I want to inform him that it is the same people through the Constituent Assembly that drafted the same Constitution that has the two different articles.  

The other one is concerned with the immediate time after this Government, and that is the automatic referendum.  It was made by the Constituent Assembly representing the people of Uganda.  The other provision is catering for any other referenda after this.  I therefore want to inform him that if he accepts one, he should accept the other,  and he should remove the word imposition because it was properly made by the Constituent Assembly,  duly constituted and elected by the people of this country.  I thank you.

MR. OMODI OKOT:  Mr. Speaker, allow me to say one thing that, I always find it very difficult to deal with lawyers.  They can change positions on a single issue several times.  Two, they always get away with it, in the name of interpretation.  Normally they do this by creating confusion to enable them get away with it. 

The two areas of the Constitution of this country that I quoted should be upheld and protected.  Mr. Speaker, Article 29(1)(e) of the same Constitution provides for freedom of association.  This Article provides for a freedom of association knowing that we may have leaders who do not respect Constitution and smooth running of Government based on it.  These may throw this country into turmoil.   

It is important for us to know that the issue at this hour is that of holding a referendum. The question hon. Omara Atubo is raising in his proposal is, by going ahead,  aware of the fact that the general mood in the country, the general feeling, does not suggest going ahead with a referendum,  can we not find another way of getting out of this impasse?  Mr. Speaker -(Interruption).

MISS. KIRASO: I am seeking clarification so that I may understand what my Colleague is talking about.  When you talk about the general feeling in this country, what measure have you used to determine the general feeling?  Because I thought this is what we are trying to determine,  through people voting for what they want,  so that we may determine the general feeling.  How did you know the general feeling?

MRS. BAKOKO BAKORU:  I would also like the speaker holding the floor to clarify whether he is demonstrating to us the exit he was talking about,  when he tells us to find a quick alternative.

MR. OMODI OKOT:  Well, the general mood of the public can be deduced from many sources one of which is the newspapers we read.  Newspapers are supposed to educate and inform, among other functions.  But of late,  Mr. Speaker, people have expressed disappointment in holding a referendum.  

Two;  I want to say that my argument does not indicate getting an exit.  I was talking about getting exit by an entangled person,  using his or her own knowledge as a lawyer.  

Under both the 1948 United Nations Human Rights Charter and the Organisation of African Unity Charter for Human Rights and Peoples Rights, the freedoms of association and expression are guaranteed.  And I suppose,  Mr. Speaker,  Uganda is a signatory to this Charter.  What does that mean therefore?  That Uganda must comply to the conditions contained in this Charter wholly.  Such guarantees of freedom of association as in the Charter I am making reference to here are no gifts, they are not donations. They are fundamentally established rights which cannot be tampered with.  

During his contribution yesterday,  the hon. Member from Mbale Municipality made a remark amounting to having -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, your time is up.

MR. OMODI OKOT:  Let me conclude, Sir,  that the freedom of association can also be restricted.  I am saying that it is important we realise what the law says,  and go by the law.  

Finally I want to say, what is the way forward?  The way forward is one:  let us draw a consensus.  The people of Uganda should draw a consensus, not through a referendum,  because a referendum has already been an unpopular proposal.  We should seek other ways of drawing a consensus, but not through a referendum.  Our people are getting increasingly poor, they are having a lot of problems, they should not be thrown into further problems by a referendum.  I beg to move.

MR. OBIGA KANIA (Terego County, Arua):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let me assure you from the beginning that in order to comply with the requirements of the rules, I will restrict my comments to what is in this motion.  This motion talks about a referendum and I am going to comment on that because it is in the words of this motion.  It talks about the elections and why we should use the referendum.  I will also comment on the text of this motion in the Bill,  in as far as it is attached as part of this Bill,  and that is my right.  

To begin with, if you look at the last but fourth paragraph, this motion talks about a referendum being very costly and prohibitive.  I imagine in the mind of hon. Atubo and associates, they are interested in reducing costs for this country.  And therefore, if I find it necessary that we do not go to the Bill stage of this motion so that we do not waste public funds in this House debating something which is not going to be useful, I would recommend that this House should stop it there and not waste public funds!

It is simply this.  If I know that in the middle of the road the bridge is broken and I have fore knowledge, it would be foolish for me to continue to say I should go only to make a double journey.  That is why when a motion comes for a  Private Bill, the text of the Bill is included so that we can know whether it is actually a 'broken bridge', and instead of wasting time going ahead, we actually stop it.  

The gist of this Bill talks about preferring elections to a referendum in deciding the political system for this country.  That is what is said in the text.  Granted;  I will talk about what I think are the benefits of an election,  but let me say this.  In my view and understanding, the body (C.A) that arrived at that decision that we must use a referendum took quite a long period of time.  There was in this House a Parliament called the National Resistance Council.  In their wisdom,  which I respect,  they said,  'no, in making the Constitution we need the highest analysis, therefore let us set a task force which can look at the matters in detail.'  

When it came to this particular referendum issue, the debate was for four long days.  At the end of it there was a vote, a democratic vote.  Some people decided to walk out on democracy,  they walked out on democracy after a decision had been taken.  They walked out on the people of Uganda.  But even then this task force which was set for a deliberate function said,  'no, we the C.A are not adequately equipped, let us refer this to the people of Uganda.'  Yet today a Parliament that has better functions to do than amending a Constitution,  thinks it is competent enough to strike out the concept of a referendum by the stroke a pen.  I do not find that argument acceptable.  Therefore from this position,  I do not need to continue to the broken bridge.  That bridge is broken because it is taking away the power from the people.  Why else should I continue?  

The referendum is not about taking away people's freedom of expression, it is not.  On the contrary it is actually telling people, 'go and express yourselves.'  That is what the referendum is saying.  But I have had arguments here, some people say that the referendum is stifling expression.  Where on earth would you express yourself other than with the people?  Where on earth would you associate other than with the people?  So the referendum is actually entrenching the very freedoms that were put in Article 29.  And therefore I think it is the best thing that a democrat should support.  

The referendum is also not about the abolition of parties.  I have heard that argument.  People say, 'if the referendum is held, the political parties will be abolished.'  Who told you so?  The referendum will only abolish parties if the people so wish.  And what is mightier than the wish of the people,  except the gun?  And if you deny the people that might, then the gun will come in.  What I am saying -(Interruption).

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Speaker, I thank you and I thank hon. Obiga Kania for giving way.  I wanted to give information to the hon. Member holding the Floor, that even the gun is not mightier than the people,  because the gun is used by the people, and the people captured the guns when the NRM came to power.  I thank you.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Thank you very much, hon. Speaker and I thank the Member for the information.  The same Constitution which he is referring to guarantees not only the existence but the additional formation of parties within the law.  So, really whichever way you look at the referendum, it is the most ideal democratic process,  and the only way to run away from it is to be undemocratic.  

I have always known hon. Omara Atubo to be a democrat and I am sure he will continue to be one.  My argument against elections is this:  elections are about choosing an individual for an office.  If you look at the examples of the elections in 1996, hon. Kawanga Ssemwogere professed to multi-partyism, but he was not multi-partyism.  So, even if he was elected, it will be wrong to conclude that by electing Ssemwogere you would have elected multi-partyism.  For example, if you elected hon. Omara Atubo in 1993 or 1992, would you have elected the Movement?  If you elect Omara Atubo now, will you have elected multi-partyism?  The answer in both cases is no;  this will be the same individual.  So the point is, elections cannot be an alternative to the choice of a political process.  

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that when we go in for elections, we do not go in as individuals.  We also have what we call a manifesto,  where ideas in the programme are defined,  and we put that to the people saying,  'do you like what I am putting forward?  Can you come with me?  This is what I am presenting.'  It is not because I am 20 feet tall, one foot tall, fat, light or heavy, no, but because of the manifesto we have put forward.  So, I would like to inform the hon. Member that in future when he puts himself before the people, he should have what we call a manifesto.  

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  May be the example I gave did not suffice.  But suppose hon. Awori wrote a manifesto in 1984, will that be multi-partyism?  Suppose hon. Awori brought a manifesto in the year 1996, when he stood as a Parliamentary candidate, would that be the movement or multi-partyism;  because he stood under Movement System?  So the point here is that we are finding a way of 'choosing,' which accommodates everybody irrespective of individual programmes.

MR. WACHA:  Article 1(4) of the Constitution states as follows: "The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed,  through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through Referenda".  

And then Article 69 (1) of the Constitution says:  "The people of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice through free and fair elections or referenda."  The principle to me seems to be that referenda and elections are methods of choice which are enunciated in this Constitution.  Is the hon. Obiga Kania saying that the principles enunciated here are not correct? 

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The answer is no.  On the contrary I am saying that those are provided as methods of choice.  But your own reading as it is says, 'who and how'.  What does 'who' and 'how' refer to?  I am not a lawyer,  but if you interpret it,  you could safely say that the 'who' refers to the person and therefore the electoral process, whereas the 'how' refers to the choice of the system and therefore, the referendum.  That would be an interpretation of an assessor and I think it will stand the test of time.

Mr. Speaker, finally, -(Interruptions).

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, hon. Obiga Kania is trying to interpret Article 1 clause (4),  which is a general provision on the sovereignty of the people,  and he is using the words, "how" and "who" to correspond to particular - either elections or representatives.  But I am drawing his attention by way of information that he should look at Article 69 clause (1) which is more operative,  and where "who" and "how" are not used.  It says,  "People of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice through free and fair elections or referenda",  that is now the operative provision and it is in the Constitution.

Furthermore,  you raised the issue of choice of multi-partyist.  I wish to inform you that if you look closely at Article 71, it says, "A political party in the multi-party system...."  So,  the Constitution defines a political party not as a theoretical system,  but it is looking at the political party itself.  And it goes on to Article 72 - this is just for your own information -(Interruption).  

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Speaker, I wanted to tell the hon. Member holding the Floor that if he goes to number 74,  it clearly did come out and say, "a Referendum shall be held for the purposes of changing the political system."  In other words, after 69, it is further qualified - 74 is very clear.  So for purposes of changing the political system,  it is a referendum.  Thank you.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: I think with the comment from Capt. Babu, I will not comment more on the statement of 'Brother' hon. Atubo.

Finally,  what is hon. Omara Atubo asking us to do?  You look at the last but one paragraph.  After all the work of the Constituent Assembly and so forth, in his motion hon. Atubo says, "all that we need to do is sit here and deem that in the interest of peace, unity, security, democracy and economy, the people should choose and adopt a free system through an election.  Just sit here and deem?  Whatever the word deem means!  Ignore all the work that was done in the Constituent Assembly, forget about the masses of the people out there, just sit here and deem, and after deeming, amend the Constitution?  Hon. Members, I ask you not to deem, I ask you to do the right thing and throw away this motion with all the disrespect it deserves.  Thank you very much.

MRS. ATIM OGWAL CECILIA (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this very important motion.  

I shall base my contribution on paragraph nine of this motion which talks about the necessity of ensuring that we have peace, unity and security,  in the interest of our country.  Mr. Speaker, I am basing my argument on this preamble paragraph nine,  the last point but one - justification for the motion - purely because I believe if this House can allow an Amendment as requested by this motion, we would still have acted within the Constitution as provided in Article 69 which says that we can change the political system through free and fair elections.  So, there is no way we are going to violate the provisions of the Constitution.  But by allowing an amendment we would have taken care of the interest of the people of Uganda.  

Secondly, yesterday the NPC of the Movement made a fundamental statement.  He said the referendum has to do with the change of Government, and I think he is right.  But I want to be convinced as to how we can change Government by simply changing individuals within the same system.  I think the change of Government has to do with the fundamental change of policies and programmes, and that is what democracy is all about.

I beg this House to take serious note of the fact that intellectual deception and lies - employed by some Members of this House - cannot help us when we are talking about the future of the country.  Mr. Speaker, I want to the express my disappointment with the movers of this motion who have attempted to derail the House by talking as if the Bill had already been tabled in the House.  This has stirred the emotions of some people who are now talking about various political systems, comparing one system against the other.  Some have been condemning political parties,  while others have been referring to history and yet others have been talking about the merits and demerits of the referendum.  This was unnecessary and uncalled for, and I beg you, Mr. Speaker, that you bring us back on course so that this House should be given an opportunity to take a second look at certain provisions in the Constitution that are relevant to the referendum. 

Some of us Members of this House are in the afternoon or evening of our political lives, but we would like to leave the political stage when some kind of stability has been restored in this country.  We are already aware, Mr. Speaker, that there is tension and nervousness experienced throughout the country because of this debate on the referendum.  The churches are divided,  the people are divided,  even this House is divided on this matter.  So, this Parliament - which is the representative of the people of Uganda - can do something about it.  And I believe the only way Parliament can help the people of Uganda is to adopt a allow soft landing approach.  

MRS. BAKOKO:  The speaker holding the Floor is saying that there is already fear and tension all over the country.  Is she in order to mislead this House,  when in my district there is no tension over the issue of the referendum?  Is she in order to mislead this House that there is tension all over this country when she is possibly talking of a Municipality which is her constituency?

THE SPEAKER: My understanding of the situation is that the hon. Member was talking in generalities.  And if that is the case, she would probably get away with it.  But if she is implying that there is tension over the issue of the referendum in almost every corner of this country, when she has no evidence,  then I think she would be out of order.  I take it that you are taking of generalities?  

MRS. ATIM OGWAL: Of course, Mr. Speaker, you know how I can handle such matters.  My 'daughter' from Arua will soon learn much more with time,  and I do not blame her for her reactions because she is yet to discover how some of us can cover the whole country in a matter of a few days.  

On a serious note, I want this House to take note of the fact that Uganda has walked a long way in search of democracy.  So, any deviation however minor, must be checked, must be reversed and must be corrected.  I beg that if we are serious about democracy, then this motion must be taken seriously.  I have heard so many people refer to the Constituent Assembly, and I think this House has a lot to benefit if an opportunity can be given to look at what the Constituent Assembly did when they were deciding on this issue of the referendum.  You are entitled to do that.  Even if you decide otherwise, the important thing is that you would have looked at it again,  and you would have made your own assessment and decision as to whether we did the right thing in the CA or not.  By this action, this House would have been given the opportunity to correct, if correction is necessary, what was done in the C.A.

I would like to comment on some of the points that have been raised by some Members that political parties caused problems in the past.  Mr. Speaker, this is what I call 'intellectual lies'.  This is not honest because people know that there have been two dominant parties since independence:  the Democratic Party and the Uganda People's Congress.  Never in the history of Uganda have the two parties fought each other.  It is true that there have been incidences of personal conflict which happened during elections and are still happening today.  Where two personalities are fighting for the same thing, there are bound to be conflicts.  But this has nothing to do with the institutions of political parties.  

I want this matter to be corrected because I feel hurt when people I expect to know better continue to tell lies repeatedly, even at international fora.  I was hurt when in a meeting in the United States,  some of our friends who are Members of this House stood up to say that parties in Uganda are formed along tribal lines.  You ask yourself a simple question,  how many tribes do we have in Uganda?  You know very well that there have been only two parties,  and yet you are saying that parties have been formed along tribal lines.  Certainly, Mr. Speaker, some of us are not serious!  As leaders we have to correct our ways of presenting facts to the people if we want to persuade them to join our parties or ideological camps.

I would like to wind up by saying that we should not underrate the tension I talked about at the beginning.  You are aware that we have been having bomb explosions all over the place, you are aware that we have tension on the western border,  which has even forced us to send our troops inside Congo.  We cannot deny that we are not safe with Sudan,  and that is why we have continuously exchanged fire on the Uganda-Sudan border,  and it is just because of SPLA and Kony.  How can we ignore those facts, Mr. Speaker!  We cannot ignore the fact that innocent people are dying all over the country,  under the hand of the unruly gunmen.  The Government is supposed to protect innocent people.  This Parliament cannot ignore the fact that there is tension -(Interruption).

MISS. KIRASO:  Mr. Speaker, hon. Ogwal has referred to this constitutionally elected Government as unruly.  She has also gone ahead to sight the wars in the north and west while referring to this motion that we are debating. Is she in order to mix the two issues?  One issue of the wars,  which would also be here if we had political parties,  is it relevant to the issue of the motion that we are debating?

THE SPEAKER:  I am sorry, I did not get that point. I did not hear the hon. Member on the Floor referring to this Government as unruly.  But if she did so, it is a very grave matter and I think she would be out of order. But I am sorry I did not hear her say so.

MRS. OGWAL:  Mr. Speaker,  I referred to all gunmen as unruly.  But I am surprised that 'my princess' from Kabarole, the lady that I admire so much and who is so dear to my heart,  would ignore the fact that there have been many incidents of death in the district which she represents in this House.  I have attended several funerals of innocent people,  and I would advise her to look at things more pragmatically than -(Interruption).

MISS. EGUNYU:  Is it in order for hon. Ogwal,  whom I have great respect for,  to state that the wars in the west or throughout this country,  have been occasioned because of the likelihood of a referendum?  Is she in order to mislead this nation that those wars arise out of the referendum?  

THE SPEAKER:  I do not know, I do not have any factual presentation on the part of the hon. Ogwal that the wars in the west are a result of the impending referendum.  I do not know whether you really have any information to that fact,  but if you do not,  I think it could be a sweeping statement,  at based an opinion. 

MRS. OGWAL:  I have been very clear in my contribution, and I made it very clear that because of tension in the country,  we cannot plunge this country into further polarisation through the referendum.  This Parliament can definitely do something to defuse this tension.  I hope that is what my 'daughter' here wants.  

I want to end by saying that the talk about the referendum being a constitutional matter is an argument which does not hold water.  Everybody knows the genesis of the constitutional making process in this country.  Everybody knows that the movement which is today contending in the referendum to be adopted as a permanent system in this country,  is the same that stormed into Government by the gun in 1986,  and has maintained itself in Government through all sorts of manipulations and oppression.  It is the same movement which now wants to continue to manipulate the political situation in its favour for the purpose of winning in the referendum.  This is what I abhor, and this is what I condemn, and this is what I would like this House to stop, Mr. Speaker.  

I would also want to remind the House that we should learn to read history,  not only Ugandan history or Eastern African history,  but also the history of other countries.  We know that there has been one leader in the world that has been very conscious of constitutional matters and that is Hitler.  He never took any action unless he was covered by the law:  the gas chamber was covered by the law,  and all the torture chambers were covered by the law.  Mr. Speaker, are you not aware that even the apartheid policy of South Africa was covered by the law! Are you not aware that the discrimination policy against the blacks in America was covered by the law!   Do you want Uganda to go on record as having covered ourselves by the law in order to rob the citizens of their fundamental rights, derail this country from the democratic path and plunge this country into chaos?  This Parliament has an opportunity to reverse the situation, and I am appealing to it not to be emotional,  because the people who want -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, your time is really up and we are in a very serious problem. 
      
MRS. OGWAL:  Can I wind up?   Mr. Speaker, I would humbly like to conclude by saying that I myself would have supported the issue of the referendum, if the movement started its reign with the referendum,  mandating it to adopt a monolithic system of Government.  If it adopted a monolithic system of Government when it came to power, -(An hon. Member rose)-. I do not need your information, I am very well informed, I do not need your information,  Sir.  What information can you give me which I do not know? -(Interjections)-  I am giving you information because you need it,  but I do not need yours.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I do not want this House to be turned into a dialogue between Members,  please!

MRS. OGWAL:  Mr. Speaker, I humbly wanted to end by saying, if the movement started with the referendum, to adopt this monolithic system,  definitely I would have supported the move to go for the referendum in order to change the system.  But the movement came to power by force of arms and by the same gun the movement now wants to hoodwink the people to endorse what it planted by the gun.  This is dangerous and we should not allow it as a Parliament,  elected by the people.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. AKWERO ODWONG (Woman Representative, Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  From the onset I should inform my Colleagues hon. Members that my contribution will be simple, short and completely true.  

While commending hon. Omara Atubo for the motion on the Floor, I completely disagree with him on the issue he raised that the referendum undermines peace and security.  For me rather,  the referendum is the best way to decide,  in order to gauge the reality on the ground,  in this case the political reality.  Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, let us give the people, our people,  and all Ugandans the opportunity to choose to associate in order to consolidate the constitutional governance that we all crave for and cherish.  

The last speaker before me,  hon. Ogwal -(Mrs. Ogwal rose_).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I would like to reluctantly address myself to hon. Ogwal, that dialogue between Members is not allowed according to our rules of procedure. I draw your attention to rule 64, and I intend to enforce it.

MRS. AKWERO ODWONG:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to assure you and the House that I am making my own contribution.  I have not begged anybody for any contribution, and I am standing here to make my own contribution.  I was only referring to the contribution of hon. Ogwal about her opposing the referendum.  

If you recall,  about two months ago in an issue of Rupiny a local luo newspaper, hon. Ogwal told her constituents to fully participate in the forthcoming referendum.  She even went on to say that the UPC will trounce the NRM in the referendum  -(Interruption).

MRS. OGWAL:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for this hon. Member to quote a newspaper that has already been challenged in court for writing lies about me and about my party?  Is it in order that this hon. Member, instead of checking out facts with me,  would come here and quote a newspaper story, which matter has already been taken to court?

THE SPEAKER: Well, maybe the Member was not aware that the issue had been taken to court.  Now that you have mentioned that it is in court,  we will not discuss it further.

MRS. AKWERO ADWONG:   Mr. Speaker, as you rightly ruled,  I did not know that the matter had been taken to court, and I believe most Ugandans do not know that the matter is in court.

The 1995 Constitution has greatly and favourably handled the issue of consensus building and advancement of democracy.  We should therefore respect the Constitution.  The onus is on all of us.  We should make sure the issues of the referendum are clear and the arguments are not ambiguous.  We should make sure that the opportunities to inform the population on the various different views are equal in order for the population to make appropriate decisions.  Mr. Speaker, we should encourage people to come out in large numbers to vote for whatever side they wish to win.  

To me, the motion of hon. Omara Atubo and his associates is about political cowardice.  Why cannot the movers of the motion relate their wish to other examples from other African countries?  Why can we not for example look at Malawi?   Mr. Speaker, Malawi,  and Banda in particular,  through the internal security apparatus,  had a firm grip on the people. There was no press freedom,  even the type of newspapers, magazines and books Malawians read were determined by the State. Television was prohibited completely. In 1992,  when Banda decided that there should be a referendum, that a referendum should be held as to how the people of Malawi would want to be governed, and subsequently when that referendum was held in 1993,  the Malawians overwhelmingly voted for multi-party system  -(Interruption).

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that at the time they took to the referendum in Malawi,  Dr. Banda had been declared unfit mentally.  It was quite obvious,  he had been taken to the hospital and confirmed as senile. It was not he who decided on the referendum.

THE  SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think we should allow this debate to get to its conclusion.  Hon. Member, can you proceed?

MRS. AKWERO ODWONG:  Hon. Awori will agree with all of us that the initial steps taken were by Banda, the President then.

Why do I relate our situation to that of Malawi?  First, Banda stayed in power for 30 years.  When we look at our own situation in Uganda,  we have a free press, we have the other fora where multi-partyists can express their views, we have opportunities: even here in Parliament the fact that you could bring a private Member's motion is in itself testimony. (An hon. Member rose_). 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, can you allow the contributor to speak?  You had a lot of time,  I gave you an opportunity.  I think you should allow her to talk.

MRS. AKWERO ODWONG:   Mr. Speaker,  since yesterday I stayed put, I did not interrupt anybody's debate.  I therefore call upon my hon. Colleagues to give me these five or so minutes to come to the logical and truthful conclusion that I want to draw you to.  
Time does not erase a peoples' wish, time does not erase a peoples' conviction.  Why, Mr. Speaker, why cannot the multi-partyists in Uganda stand by their conviction and fully participate and honour Article 71 which is calling for an automatic referendum to be held next year to enable the entire people decide?  Why can you not relate your activities to the story of David and Goliath?  You have said that in the past elections 25 percent of the votes were for the multi-party or IPFC.  Really if we look at that scenario,  suppose you are the political David and the NIM were the political Goliath, why can you not use the sling or the catapult? The sling would be the people. Why can you not use the stone, the votes,  and hit the political Goliath? (Laughter).  

MRS. OGWAL: Is it in order for the speaker on the Floor to insinuate that political parties are cowards?  That they have political space but they have been incapable of organising themselves to compete in the referendum,  when,  Mr. Speaker, you are aware that this House passed the Movement Act which has conscripted all Ugandans into the Movement?  The chairman of every village in Uganda is automatically chairman of the Movement,  and everybody therefore is sealed by the Movement.  How do  you expect multi-partyists to organise  themselves with the ground sealed?  Is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to insinuate cowardice on the part of the political parties when she knows her history,  she knows that it is the political parties that gave this country independence?  It is the parties that fought for independence in this country.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to forget her history that without political parties we would not be enjoying independence?  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Let me dispose of this one this way.  I think the hon. Member on the Floor was giving an example to enrich her argument.  She was saying, 'here is a situation where one party feels that it is David the other one is Goliath.'  The hon. Member was advising the weaker party,  if any,  to use the stone - or the votes - to hit Goliath.  I think this was genuine advice which should be taken seriously -(Laughter).  Therefore the hon Member was not only constructive,  but I think she was in order.  Hon. Member, would you like to come to your conclusion?

MRS. AKWERO ODWONG: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your ruling. Indeed I was advising my other Colleagues to take this opportunity and give the opposing side,  which is a Goliath,  a technical knock-out through the votes.   

It does not help to portray the voters and hence the people of Uganda as political zombies.  The people know what they are doing,  they know what they want,  and I am sometimes perplexed as to why when we are elected into office,  we look back at the voters and say that they are ignorant,  they do not know what they want.  When we want votes we go to these ignorant people,  does it mean we were elected ignorantly hence fraudulently?

Last but not least, I wish to shortly recite a few lines of a religious song that, "they are watching," - the people are watching us Members of Parliament - "marking all we do, hearing the things we say."  And of course the last wish and the last word will be the peoples'. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omara Atubo,  the mover of the motion,  I call upon you to wind up.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  I am disappointed to see that we have continued to debate this motion when the House is almost empty.  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for us to continue debating this important motion without a quorum?

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Let me explain that when I went out,  I just went to prepare myself,  and I did tell the Speaker that I should be counted - for your information.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I confirm that the hon. Member did indicate that he should be counted.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker,  in winding up this very important motion,  I wish once again to thank all the Members for their very brilliant contributions.  I think this motion has provided all of us with an opportunity to chart the future of this country out by looking afresh at a decision which was taken four or five years ago.  I therefore do not agree with some Members who think that we were wrong to bring up this motion.  

I think this motion has given us an excellent opportunity,  we have really cleared a number of issues,  and even if the motion does not go through,  I am sure that you have sent a message to me -(Prof. Nsimbabi rose_)-  can you listen to me?  You have given me a message and that I will consider it in light of the decision taken.  

The motion has also given opportunity to some people,  including the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who in the Constituent Assembly had opposed the holding of a referendum, he is now having an opportunity to correct himself -(Laughter).

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Is the hon. Member in order to mislead this House by making atrocious statements and attributing them to me?  Is he in order to say that I opposed a referendum,  and can he prove the point that I opposed the referendum?

THE SPEAKER:  Well, I am in great difficulty.  I have not got a document verified statement,  and I was not in the Constituent Assembly.  Therefore I cannot say whether what the hon. Omara Atubo has said is true or not. But indeed if it is untrue, then it is a very serious matter. He would definitely be out of order.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, the record of the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly are there,  and I am sure those who are interested in establishing the truth will find it. I do not have it with me here,  but I am aware of it and I was very active in the CA.  I did not come with a record here, but I do know that the hon. Prime Minister had especially nominated -(Interruption).

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to continue asserting that there is a record,  when he is not even sure?  Some of us have even come with the minutes of the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly so he can be able to quote and make his point clear.  Is he in order to continue as he is?

THE SPEAKER: As I said earlier on,  I do not have any document to go by.  Hon. Member,  there is a document there and if you really insist that that is what the record says,  then you should refer to it.  Otherwise, I think to save time let us withdraw the statement.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, let me save time, after all that is not a substantive issue. I was just referring to it as a way for us to look back at what went on in the past, and an opportunity for us to think afresh,  that is all.  So, Mr. Speaker, about three -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member,  I am trying to help you to get out of this problem.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to proceed directly now.  -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but the point of order has been raised and there is a record there,  which you may not be interested in going through to cite. In the interest of saving time,  I would suggest that since I ruled that if indeed your reference is incorrect,  the best thing for you is to withdraw it and you proceed.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker,  that is not the only volume of the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly, there about 10 volumes.  However, due to the fact that I did not bring the record with me and this is off the cuff,  and in order to allow us to proceed, Mr. Speaker, with due respect to the hon. Rt. Prime Minister let me just get this thing off the record.  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker,  I withdraw.  This is a scientific way of saying I withdraw.  

In my summary, I will not be able to respond to each contribution made by my distinguished Brothers and Sisters in this House, but I will be able to refer to only four issues which actually encompass the centre of all contributions.  I hope that within the few minutes you have given me I should be able to complete that.  

The first area of contention has been whether Article 71 cannot be independently amended without amending Article 74.  This was raised by my good Friend hon. Wapakhabulo James,  who is a lawyer,  and hon. Baku.  I also read the more detailed contribution similar to yesterday's,  in today's New Vision,  in which hon. Wapakhabulo is trying to convince the general public about the unconstitutionality or the incorrectness of my motion. 
Mr. Speaker, we are not here to interpret the Constitution because that is really the responsibility of the constitutional court.  But for purposes of my argument I am saying that there is a provision in the Constitution which provides for automatic referendum.  At the same time in Article 69 of the Constitution,  two methods of choosing a political system are provided for.  

The Constituent Assembly in its wisdom, looking at the circumstances at that time,  said the best method out of this two shall be the referendum.  All I am saying is that now after four years,  I am asking this Parliament which is a successor to a large extent to the Constituent Assembly,  the Constituent Assembly finished its work and was disbanded,  and the  -(Interjection)-  I said to a large extent.  It can be compared to an estate you succeed to and administer.  This Parliament now - there will be no more constituent Assemblies possibly in the near future,  unless another regime comes and wants it,  but I do not foresee it. But for purposes of the Constitution now,  the responsibility was given by the Constituent Assembly to this august House.  We can reverse its decision, you are a sort of Appellant Court and I am appealing to you as somebody could appeal to the higher court.  After the court of first instance you move to the court of second instance and that is the way I am approaching it, and I do not see anything wrong with that.  

After you have handled that, Mr. Speaker, Article 74 is totally independent of 271.  It is a contentious issue,  we can continue arguing about it but in my honest opinion as a lawyer not as a politician,  that Article 271 stands on its own and Article 74 stands in its own.  Article 74 comes in when somebody wants to change the political systems.  For example if the political system is adopted in the next general election and a system is still subsisting, then if you do not want to wait for another general election in five years,  you can at the end of the fourth year of that ruling political system change it before the general election,  using Article 74.  This is the way I honestly see it.  So, we do not have to simultaneously or coherently amend Article 271 together with Article 74.  

There was this argument about the referendum - again by hon. Wapakhabulo and others - that the freedom of association can absolutely be delegated and examples of Malawi, Austria, European Union were given.  Let me make two statements of this because of limited time, Mr. Speaker.  First of all we must know the political dimensions, context and climate in which we are talking.  Under Banda we are talking of a one party dictatorship,  people there had been under a one party dictatorship for over 20 or 30 years.  Because of the struggles - peaceful struggles mainly - demonstrations, pressure of the World Bank, international community, pressures from foreign Governments, the Government of Malawi was compelled to open up to say that, 'we must move from dictatorship to multi-party democracy.'  But since they were in power,  they were not just going to open up like in Kenya where Article 2(a) of the Constitution of Kenya was ammended.  They wanted the people to decide and they went to the people to decide,  moving away from dictatorship to a multi-party democracy which was support by everybody.  It is the opposite of the situation here, if you want us to move from a relatively democratic position in which we are to a more restrictive democratic situation that is what I am arguing for.  

I am also saying that I do not know anywhere in the world where  - if you want to educate me you can educate me - a referendum has been held to restrict the freedom or to remove the freedom of political association. I do not know anywhere in the world, Uganda is going to be the first guinea pig on this matter of holding a referendum to move from a relatively democratic system transition period,  and say we want this system only.  That is really the argument I have.  For the other countries like Quebec it is issues like joining the European Union and so on, on which referenda are held.  So here when you want to be in the East African community one day and we hold a referendum,  I think this will be more relevant.  Some of us are arguing that if we want to join the East African Community or we want to join the East African Federation let us hold a referendum.  That type of referendum is the kind I may call co-operate association, it is not personal.  My freedom of association with you for purposes of political competition is a personal right and when the people of Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania choose to belong to the East African Community they are not infringing on any of their rights.  They are actually enlarging on their rights of association,  at the political co-operate level.  

It has also been argued that because freedom of association is not absolute the death penalty is there.  Yes, the death penalty is there and you know why the death penalty is there.  It is because in our Constitution it is very clear, even in the International Conventions,  your rights are only absolute and respectable to the extent that you do not injure the rights of another person.  And the death penalty is just not imposed,  it is punitive and it is imposed after proper judicial proceedings.  And when a death penalty is imposed on Omara Atubo because of the murder he committed,  that penalty is not automatically conferred on my hon. Friend Wapakhabulo.  I am arguing that the death penalty is personal to the convict and you cannot say that because there is murder in society, the whole society is condemned to death penalty.  Because the argument would be that because political parties historically contributed to the anarchy and confusion of this country,  therefore the death penalty is passed over all forms of political associations in form of parties, even those who wish to form new ones.  I am saying this is absolutely wrong.

I wish to remind this House,  and I wish to quote The New Vision of yesterday.  Our President was in South Africa attending that great day on our behalf and I want to quote what he said in Pretoria,  which appeared in The New Vision of Thursday, June the 17th:  "The successful second free election in South Africa on June the 2nd was an example to other countries in Africa.  I hope it is also an example to Uganda.  It is a good signal, a good example for others, those who want to cling to power, those who do not want democracy."  Mr. Speaker, I wish President Museveni could repeat these words in Uganda in the presence of some of us,  and allow us to respond to it. This is very good for international consumption and this is the success of some of this propaganda we sow around for international consumption.  I am saying that if surely South Africa is an example even to Uganda,  what do we have to learn from South Africa?

One:  South Africa emerged from a worse political dictatorial system than Uganda but what do we have in South Africa today?  ANC which sort of launched a liberation war like the Movement,  came to power, tolerated even their very tormentors, the very white people who were persecuting them and allowed the worst political party,  worse than UPC if you could say so,  to exist and compete with them.  They allowed all political parties total freedom,  and the President Nelson Mandela went ahead to form the Government in which even the former President was his number two. 
And what do we hear today?  The President's successor, Mbeki, offered a whole Vice Presidency to Buthelezi, his opponent.  Although Buthelezi turned it down,  he has accepted to continue to be the Minister of Interior.  Mr. Speaker, I am saying that this is the example we have to learn from,  South Africa.  Open up!  This is the only example we learn from South Africa.  Do not use that example simply for international consumption and when you come to Uganda you do something else.  

When we talk about the history of parties in this country, with due respect to the top leadership of the Movement, they should not wash their hands as if they were not part of this history.  Because of limited time really,  I would have wished to go into these details about the crisis of 1966 not only in this House but also in Mengo,  and I am sure that Mayanja Nkangi would help us a lot about this matter.  I am also sure that hon. Wapakhabulo as a UPC youth winger and so on,  and Museveni as very active in UPC,  would be extremely useful and they are the children of both.  I am sure that hon. Kirunda Kivejinja would be a consultant on this matter.  But Mr. Speaker, let us not talk about parties as if it is in isolation of our own life and history.  Some of us have been part and parcel of this mess and let us not now use the advantage position of being in the Movement and say, 'yes, we are in the Movement now,  and because sometimes parties persecuted individuals, let us lock them out.'  I think the consequences of this may not be very good for this country. 

I want to say that it has been argued,  Mr. Speaker,  that let us make the referendum law as just and fair as possible.  The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs argued this way, the Prime Minister,  hon. Kategaya said, 'look, instead of wasting our time on this motion, bring the law on referendum quickly so that we can make it as fast as possible.'  What you are telling me as a multi-partyist who knows that the referendum is a death sentence to me,  is to choose how nice I want to die.  'Do you want to die through injection of poison?  Do you want to die by hanging?  Do you want to die by gun shot or you want to die by electric shock?'  Mr. Speaker, no sensible person let alone whether he is a multi-partyist r not, can be a party to the choice of the method of his death,  and I will not be party to that.

Let me conclude with a quote from someone who I would say took words from my mouth.  We were in a seminar together and I liked his presentation.  Not many of you were there, I think we were only about five or ten Members of Parliament,  and Rev. Dr. Father John Mary Waliggo made a very interesting observation.  It was a seminar at the Sheraton hotel,  on the 2nd of June this year.  I want to quote him verbatim as my conclusion,  because I share that conviction with him,  absolutely.  He is also as you know a very strong supporter of the Movement, he was active in the Constitution making process, and he supports the Movement, contrary to practice of the Catholic clergy.  

He said this on the referendum.  "This is a very important matter.  Before we either speak about majorities or minorities, we should always begin with the interest of Uganda as a whole.  This concern for the common good, for peace for everyone, for satisfaction for everyone, is so central for our nation.  It is for this reason that we put efforts on conscious building on every issue on which we are,  as a nation,  sharply divided.  The search for conscious obliges us to seek principle compromises whenever possible.  Our society needs more genuine negotiators, reconcilers, peace makers, listeners to each other than confrontationalists, absolutists, non compromisers.  On this issue, the international human rights instrument can only offer advice.  The real work must lie with each people in each nation. Dangerous polarisation is never healthy."  'Dangerous polarisation is never health,'  this to me is the greatest challenge to our current debate on the referendum.  My hope, that is his hope and now I share it with him as well, is that we shall achieve the principle compromise,  acceptable to all sides and capable of respecting the sovereignty of the people as a whole,  and the rights of minorities at the same time. 

As I conclude,  Mr. Speaker -(Interruption).    

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Speaker, I did not want to disturb the hon. Member who was on the Floor,  because I am enjoying his submission. As you know, he is an exemplary talker and I enjoy listening to him but I wanted him to remember that when we were in the CA, the position we have in the Constitution was a compromise position.  Had we taken the vote in the CA,  it would have been the Movement system through and through.  We took this compromise position of putting a referendum in the Constitution so that the future generation of this country could choose between the minority view and the majority view.  Therefore what we did in the CA,  and I am very proud I was a member of that Constituent Assembly together with my Friend hon. Omara Atubo, was a compromise position.  I am also happy that he has quoted Fr. Dr. Waliggo for having said that we should compromise where we can,  and we did so in the CA.  That is why we must have a referendum.   Thank you.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, let me just say that I was in the CA with my good Friend hon. Babu, and we did not compromise.  If we had compromised we would not have walked,  out and I would not have brought this motion again.  I just wish to inform this House that there was no compromise.  

I must say finally,  Mr. Speaker,  that I am happy, I really feel happy today that I have played my part, history is there to judge,  my conscious on this matter is clear and it was brought surely in the interest of this country,  in the interest of peace,  stability and democracy.  Whatever decision we make here, it will be of great importance to this country.  But I can assure you that the cause for freedom is a greater cause than merely winning or defeating a motion and the struggle will continue.  I thank you,  Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, we have spent a long time here and I hope that you have given enough treatment to the motion.  I regret that not each and everyone of us had the opportunity to contribute,  but I think that is not abnormal.  Otherwise we would take maybe one month here, just debating this matter.  I now put the question that -(Interruption).

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker,  I just want you to guide me on this matter.  You know, I raised it with you when we were trying to get this motion on the Floor - the voting method,  under rule 73.  May I be guided by this House that since this is a matter that touches on the Constitution,  and I do believe that when rule 73 was made it had the intention of saying that any matter affecting amending the Constitution should be by secret vote.  That to me is the interpretation I give to that, but if it is not so, if you rule that rule 73 (a) does not apply, then I will move a motion under rule 73 (c).

THE SPEAKER:  Proceed.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, I still want to hear your ruling on whether this motion is not automatically covered under rule 73 (a) so that we vote by secret ballot.

THE SPEAKER:  My ruling, hon.Members,  and maybe for the benefit of those of you who do not have the rules,  I will read rule 73.  "There shall be secret voting in the House in respect of the following - (a) a Bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any provision of the Constitution;  (b) the election or removal of a person holding office under the Constitution or under a law made under the Constitution;  and (c) any other matter if the House so decides."  My position is that (a) does not apply in this case,  because we are voting on a motion to give leave to you to bring in a Bill to amend the Constitution,  and obviously (b) is inapplicable,  but I think (c) is applicable.  So we can proceed on that basis.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, thank you for giving me this privilege and this opportunity to move this motion.  I beg to move that this House do vote by method of secret voting under rule 73 (c),  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Seconded?  It is seconded.  Can you speaker to your motion?

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker,  -(Interjection).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, it is not my intention to curtail your capacity to debate, but I would like you to take into account that some of us have been here for several hours.  Proceed.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, you recall we were told that democracy is very costly and I think this is part of the cost of democracy.  All the same,  I move this motion very conscious that the motion to amend the Constitution is an extremely important motion,  very important indeed,  and that is why in rule 73 (a), it is said that a Bill - which I agree with your ruling - that a Bill itself for the amendment of the Constitution shall be by secret ballot.  

My argument, Mr. Speaker is that by deductive logic, by reasoning, anything related to amending the Constitution of which a motion is one,  should be by secret ballot.  Why do I say this?  I say this because those who made this rule,  this Parliament which made this rule,  deemed it necessary that other intervening factors which may stop somebody from exercising that complete freedom in the choice,  should not be there and therefore the secret ballot is the best.  It is a way by which you really pronounce yourself,  because you are deciding on the highest law of the country.  I therefore beg this House and plead with them that let us set a precedent that a motion which is affecting a Bill should also be by a secret ballot.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

MR. MAO NOBERT:  Mr. Speaker, I rise to second the motion by the hon. Omara Atubo and I urge my Colleagues to support this proposal that we decide on this motion by secret ballot,  because freedom is ultimate in these matters.  

When you are alone with your conscience, you do not have to look at those who have lobbied you,  and you fear to disappoint them.  You do not want to feel that you have disappointed somebody.  We have done this before in cases of censure,  where people have probably misrepresented their positions to the subject,  and then their consciences later corrected them.  Alone with our consciences we will be able to make the best decisions and I think we will then have the real position of this House on this motion.  I beg to second the motion.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Miss. Alitwala Kadaga):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to oppose this proposal and to defend the rules of this House.  We had eloquent testimony this morning from hon. Okulo Epak and others enjoining us to distance ourselves from the Bill,  and to concentrate on the text.  Now we are being told, 'please marry the Bill to the text for purposes of voting.'  In my view this is stretching logic too far.  It means that any contribution made in this House touching on a Bill which might touch on a Constitution will fall under 73 (a)!  This is not how we do things.  This is a motion,  it is not a Bill.  It does not qualify under 73 (a),  and I would urge the House to concentrate on the motion and leave the Bill alone,  as we were urged by the presenters of the motion this morning.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. EGUNYU ASEMO:  Motion.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that we put a question to this particular motion.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the question on this particular motion be put.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  what you have decided is that the question on hon. Omara Atubo's second motion be put.  I now put the question that the House decides that the motion on the Floor be voted on by secret ballot in terms of rule 73 (c) of the rules of procedure of this House,  as moved by hon. Omara Atubo.

(Question put and negatived)

THE SPEAKER:  I now move to the final stage of your decision.  I now put the question that leave of this House be granted to enable the hon. Member for Otuke County,  hon. Omara Atubo,  leave to introduce a Private Member's Bill entitled "The Constitution Amendment Bill, 1999",  as provided in rule 89 sub rule (1) of the rules of procedure of this House.

(Question put and negatived)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  before I adjourn the House,  I would like to thank the hon. Omara Atubo for his conviction and commitment to what he believes in,  and also for hon. Members for having effectively contributed to enable this House decide from an informed position. Thank you very much indeed. The House is now adjourned until 2.30 p.m on Tuesday next week.

(The House rose at 2.15 p.m and adjourned until 22nd June, 1999 at 2.30 p.m.).
