Tuesday, 11 June 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairperson, Ms Kadaga Rebecca, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCIAL YEAR PRESCRIPTION BILL, 1996

MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr Mayanja Nkangi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: The Financial Year Prescription Bill, 1996, be read the first time.

MOTION SEEKING TO SUSPEND 
THE NRC INTERIM RULES OF PROCEDURE

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Madam Chairperson and hon. Member of the NRC. In accordance with rule 85 of the NRC Interim Rules of Procedure,  I beg to move that rule 55 sub-rule 1 which requires a period of 14 days between publishing the day in the gazette and its Second Reading, be suspended to enable me to proceed to the second reading of the Bill.

Madam Chairperson, I seek this indulgence because it is necessary if we are going to have a Budget at all for the next Financial Year. The time is such that, I could not have done this otherwise.  I did foresee the problem, and I contacted personally, Mr Akabway the chairman of the interim elections commission, and did indicate to him the problems which would arise unless the dates of the Parliamentary elections, were so adjusted that, a Bill in our Budgets could be presented here. However, in the end, it would appear that the Commission could not arrange for the elections in such a way that, the Budget could be presented.  I am referring to article 155 sub-article 1 of the Constitution.  It reads as follows, ‘The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament each Financial Year but in any case, not later than the 15th day before the commencement of the Financial Year estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government to the next Financial Year.’ 

So, the elections have been arranged in such a way that I could not come here on behalf of the President to present the Budget; and I now need time to - in fact I need to be given opportunity to come here so that I can present that Budget; not me but the Minister for Finance, can present the Budget to Parliament. I am in accordance with the constitution. Madam, I beg to move.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I stand to support the Motion moved by the hon. Minister for Finance; and in doing so, I believe that this is one of the items which is reflected in the constitutional transitional provisions whereby the NRM Government and its organs can adjust various scenarios in the constitution to conform with the exigencies of the day that require an action of this kind.  Madam Chairperson, if we look at the constitution, it is very clear.  Article 257 of the constitution defines a Financial Year as meaning the period of 12 months ending on the 30th day of June in any year, or, and I emphasize the word or, such other day as Parliament may by law prescribe.

MR NTIMBA: Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to debate the actual Bill which has not yet been passed.  Instead of debating the suspension of the regulations of the House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You had not yet given him an opportunity. Please, debate the Motion for suspension.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Madam Chairperson, my remarks were for justifying the extension of the rules In order to suspend the rules, one must justify why they should be suspended, and that is what I was doing, Madam Chairperson. The Point I was making is that, where there are exigencies requiring a different period from that set in the Constitution.  Parliament has the power to elect a new Financial Period; and as the Minister explained, it has become necessary because of the Parliamentary elections we are now in the middle of, to elect a new period as our Financial Year and I think that is so vital that requires to suspend our rules in order to debate this Motion as a matter of urgency.  I very strongly support the Minister’s Motion to suspend our rules.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the Motion seeking to suspend NRC interim rules of procedure be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Madam Chairperson, and hon. Members, I am greatly indebted to you for this indulgence which I need. I now proceed to the second reading of the Financial Year prescription Bill, 1996.


Before I go in detail, I would like to remind hon. Members that at the appropriate time of committee stage, I should move an amendment to section 2 of the Bill as it now stands. So that when you urge the Bill can see what in fact is standing for. The whole of the section as it is now in the Bill, I should ask the NRC to amend it to read as follows; The Financial Year shall be a period of 12 Months ending on the 31st day of July in any year. Madam chairperson, and hon. Members, you will recall that article 155 (1) of the constitution mandatorily requires the President to lay before parliament at least 15 days before the commencement of the Financial Year estimates of the revenue and expenditure of Government for that Financial Year.  

You will further recall that, the life of the current 9th Session of the NRC technically comes to an end on June the 12th this year.  Which implies that even the Budget proposals due were tabled in the NRC before the 12th of June, the debate of those estimates could not be completed before the end of the current session.  This means that, the debate on the subject like all unfinished business of any session of Parliament, would lapse in the end of that session. The implication of this is that, the whole process will have to be repeated afresh in the new session of Parliament with the Minister for Finance representing the Budget to the new Parliament. 

The Government has decided that the best way out of this problem is to request the NRC to enact a law extending the duration of the Financial Year, 1995/96 by one month to 31st July 1996. Such an extension is provided for in article 251 of the Constitution which provides as follows, ‘A Financial Year means any period of 12 months ending on the 30th day of June in any year, or any such other day as Parliament may by law prescribe.’  

Now, Madam  Chairperson, the current Financial Year as indicated, will end on or about June the 30th. It is, therefore, Government’s view that the time is necessary in view of the crowded programme of forming a new Government by the President including appointment of the Speaker of the House and Cabinet to be undertaken first before the Budget is presented to the new Parliament sometime early July.  According to article 155 sub-section 1 afore-mentioned, the Budget must be laid before Parliament 15 days before the commencement of the new Financial Year in order to enable the Government to grapple with this problem, -which I have just indicated was really caused by the arrangements for the Parliamentary elections.  

I, now request this Honourable House to enact that the Financial Year shall now end not on June 30th, but on July the 31st in any one year.  This is in conformity with article 155 sub-section 5 (b); and I quote: “Notwithstanding the provisions of Clause 1 of this article, the President may cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament estimates of revenue and expenditure covering periods exceeding one year.” 

Therefore, what I am asking NRC to do, is to extend the period beyond 12 months. This being so, hon. Members, we have got powers to extend under article 264 of the Constitution, NRC has got powers to extend or to pass this Bill in article 264 of the Constitution; and I quote: “The appropriate organs of the NRM Government shall take such measures that are necessary or practical to give effect to the provisions of this Constitution”; and we have already done this when were considering the issues of the electoral laws as electoral commission.  On those grounds, Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Madam Chairperson, I rise to support the Bill; and I believe it is a short one which should not take us very long. Although I believe it should have been anticipated that this problem would have arisen by the Members who were in the CA at the time, when they decided that we have a Government by July and did not consider that if there were a problem, we would have had a problem of getting the Budget in time. 

I have only two small questions, Madam Chairperson, that although we pass this Bill, I think we should have been given what will be the expenditure in the two months.  Because, the Budget we have now ends at end of June; and we are extending it to 31st July. What would be the expenditure in that one month. It should have been roughly given to us as a figure consolidated so that we know what we are going to pass. Otherwise then, it will be some kind of supplementary which would need another Parliamentary passage. Secondly, Madam Chairperson, the time for VAT to start was 1st July 1996.  Now that the Budget is extended, we should not leave it vague and by statutory instrument as the Minister may appoint, but we should specifically say whether we are going to serve VAT on 1st September or 1st August.  So that we are specific about this law and when VAT should come into effect.  Otherwise, I feel we should pass this on very quickly and go back to other duties. I beg to support.


MR RUTAROH: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support the Bill.  Before I support the Bill, Madam Chairperson, allow me to congratulate the hon. Members and the rest of Ugandans for having successful steered through the first Presidential elections, the country has ever had. (Applause)

I imagine part of our Bill today, is to do with that success. Because amongst the things the President promised involve expenditures like that on Primary schools, Imagine it might have necessitated to adjustment with the Ministry of Finance and the time available for as such that, they could not have anticipated it in the usual way when they are making budgets.  I also have one or two questions to pause which minister did not elaborate clearly. First is his intended amendment if he talks about the Financial Year ending every 31st of July that would tantamount to amendment of a Constitution. That is my own interpretation and I will want to be guided about that.  Because, in the constitution it is defined that a Financial Year shall be 12 months, and it starts from a particular date to another date.  Now, if we amend this particular aspect, my interpretation will be that we are actually amending a constitution.  Previously, we have had -(Interruption)

MR WAPAKABULO: Point of information. May I take opportunity to draw the hon. Member’s attention to article 257 of the constitution, more particularly in the definition of Financial Year?  ‘Financial Year’ means the period of 12 months ending on the 30th day of June in any year, or such as other day as Parliament may by law prescribe. So that either we accept 30th June as the ending of the Financial Year as the question says, or Parliament in their deliberate choice can choose to shift it to any other time; and in this case, whereas the power is being given to Parliament, we are saying that because of 264 - the power conferred by article 264 - for the organs of the Movement to take such measures that are necessary and practical to give effect to the constitution then, it is necessary and practical for this House to define the Financial Year to be able to bring into conformity and into force the provisions of the Constitution, and to enable the Budget to be read in accordance with the new situation. Thank you.

MR DAMIANO LUBEGA: Point of clarification. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I seek clarification from the two hon. Members who have been on the Floor as to whether under the interpretation, Provision 257 which where Parliament is entitled to move as the Minister proposes, whether for that purpose we are now a Parliament. I seek clarification.  Because the underlined word in the interpretation section or provision is Parliament; and when you look at articles, I think 78 and 79; you will find what Parliament actually is.  So, I am seeking clarification whether we are now Parliament for purposes of this Bill.

MR RUTAROH: Madam Chairperson, I will attempt to give the clarification.  First article 264 of the constitution allows us to enable another Parliament to proceed. So we have to make adequate preparations for them to be able to proceed. If the hon. Member can refer to article 264, I think the question will be answered. I wish also to thank the hon. Minister without portfolio and former Constituent Assembly Chairman for the information given to me.  The only problem was that a few Members who went to the CA continued to remind us that this House was never constituted in such a way as to handle matters of the constitution. So, anything that referred to it that did not fall in line exactly with 264, I have every reason to question.  This is the position I was taking.  

The second point is to do with what we are already listening to. Towards the end of every Financial Year you have difficulties of releases from Ministry of Finance because money is not forthcoming, and particular after the vigorous exercise of electioneering, revenue collection could have been very difficult to come by.  What the Minister did not say is, where the money for this remaining period is going to come from?  In today’s paper, The Crusader to be precise, when you read an article about Mulago, then you have many questions to pause to the Minister when an ambulance cannot move from Mulago to Nakasero Blood Bank because there is not enough fuel, and a patient dies. They tell you patients have not seen any blood**.  So, in practical terms, where does the money to run the month of July come from?

MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information. Madam Chairperson, we are currently running a cash budget, and that means, therefore, that we use the money of this month in the following month. Which means that, the collections for May, may be used in June or July depending on whether it has already arrived -depending on how many months we are having as a backlog.  That mean, therefore, Madam Chairperson, that, if we pass the amount as requested, then whatever collections will be collected now, will be actually used in the months that we shall extend.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Further information. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I think there is no problem on that one technically.  What has happened even up to now, and even in past, is that Government has come here before us with a document called Schedule No.1.  Schedule No.1 end of the year spells out excess expenditure beyond the previous Budget.  So, what will practically happen, is that just before a Minister presents a budget - I hope he will remember - in July he will come here with the supplementary Schedule No.1 giving details of excess expenditure beyond the Budget.  That is practically what would happen.

MR RUTAROH: Madam Chairperson, of course the Members who have given me information should bear in mind that, that is supposed to be approved. Number two, is that there is a fraction of the approved Budget beyond which they are not supposed to go unless we approve it.  Now, the question I was going to ask the Minister is, Is he going to recall us to enable him go beyond the promised fraction? That he should not go beyond the approved Budget; and with that, I wish to support the hon. Minister.

MR ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It should not surprise us that we have been asked to extend the Financial Year; this is a Government of extensions and interim arrangements. (Laughter) But, Madam Chairperson, I am worried about two things.  One is the proposed amendment to the original Bill. The Minister is now asking us to permanently make July 31st the end of the Financial Year.  Madam Chairperson, as you know previously all our Financial Years ended on the 30th of June. This change will necessarily mean altering a lot of statistics and data and other calculations in the Government which will unnecessarily cost money.  Whereas I may support the Bill, I would prefer that we revert to the original suggestion - may be not to the end of August but to the end of July - but than revert back subsequently to the 30th of June, so that we are in conformity with all other Governments around us. Madam Chairperson, as you know there are moves to co-operate with other Governments around us in the East African Co-operation, and all these Governments have the same year as their Financial Year; and will cause a bit of problem if we have different Financial Years in our Co-Operation. 

The other one which worries me has already been mentioned by the two speakers who have spoken, and that is the money required to run the extra month that we may be granting today.  I would have been very happy if the Minister coming to ask us today to extend the day also came with a supplementary budget to ask us to approve money for the extra month. Otherwise, what is going to happen is that, we are going to give a free hand to the Government to use any money available for anything during that month.  We know there are already excesses and I will not be surprised if even before the end of the year, we are going to have requests to approve supplementaries some of which will be beyond what we have approved -even double the amount that we have approved.  So, I would be very unwilling to give that one extra month without accompanying estimates for the period. Madam Chairperson, is it not possible for the Minister to have produced this supplementary so that at least, we give some approval as to what the Minister should spend during that time. It would be dangerous indeed, Members for us to give this free hand to the Government to just spend as they like.  Madam Chairperson, unless, therefore, I have been assured that this is going to be given to us before we break off, I am very unwilling to give that one month. I know there is a constitutional problem, but it is a problem that can be avoided if the Government thought of acting properly. I am therefore, for the moment withholding my support. Thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I am speaking on this Bill with a view to getting clarification from the Minister and from the Lawyers as a guidance, and may be this is in my case - may be my last speeches here before I go on my Sabbatical leave without pay. I am looking at this Bill on the provisions of the constitution.  I remember when the CA had finished, we came here and wanted to make the Chair a Speaker; and we introduced the idea-and in fact your predecessor or the person you are deputising for, the former Right Honourable Prime Minister actually insisted on being a Speaker for sometime.  Some of us said from the analysis and the talk we heard, he did not qualify to be a Speaker.  As you have not qualified to be one, and we have continued to call you Chairperson or Chairman.  The reason was that, constitutionally, this House is not in position to be regarded as a Parliament.  We even went further; granted people to be called Parliamentarians and not Members. We were again told that we did not qualify. Because we did not fit in the Bill of the definition of a Parliament as provided in the constitution under I think article 77.  

Now, the Amendment of any part of the Constitution stipulates that the Parliament should be doing that; and this is not the Parliament which should be doing that.  It is not the one. It is only to deal with transitional things and as stipulated in article 264.  Article 264 just gives the limits as to what we can deal with; and the provisions are specific, they deal with arrangements for elections, and they are re-enforced by article 264 of the Constitution.  Madam Chairperson, are we going to be in order to continue and amend the constitution without the stipulations in Chapter 18 of this Constitution? If so, shouldn’t we now start addressing you as Mr Speaker or Madam Speaker? Could we then go back and deal with the issue of why we could not deal with other parts of the constitution as we had thought we would?  I would like that clarification made and clearly understood by this Honourable House.

Madam Chairperson, I am having another problem.  The stipulations in Chapter 18 are very specific on those things which we can change and how we should change them. Procedurally we are supposed to have certain things in place even for those Clauses which need referendum and do not need other stipulations by being passed by the districts. I would like guidance from the Minister and his Colleagues, especially now that we have the ex-Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, and a man who has been returned unopposed and I also congratulate him for that.  So, I would like to-and the Attorney General is here, I would like these things cleared so that we do not start this constitution on a bad footing. 

Now, Madam Chairperson, there is another item which I would like to address -(Interruption)
 
MR BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  The information I want to give hon. Kanyomozi concerns the definition of Parliament. We should look at the definition of Parliament Clause 257.   ‘Parliament’ means the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. That is the definition of Parliament.  Now, the question is, is this National Resistance council as we are, is it not a Parliament? Madam Chairperson, if you look at the transitional   provisions, and you read it together with definition, there is no doubt at all this House is Parliament; and, therefore, it has the competence to change the dates of the Financial Year.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of order. Madam Chairperson, the point of order is this.  A Motion to amend the constitution of Uganda, 1995 was brought to this House, and it was rejected on the authoritative interpretation by the Attorney General that this House is not the Parliament envisaged in the constitution, that this House has got certain limited authority or limited competence to deal with certain limited things to enable the constitution to be implemented.  Now, is it in order for hon. Butagira to come and confuse the House, and say that this Parliament, when we have been told that it is not? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, matters to do with budgeting in this period are matters that give effect to the Constitution. So I think that we are in order to proceed.

MR KANYOMOZI: We are in order to proceed with the debate as the Chairperson has ruled, and I am proceeding with the debate; and I am looking at Clause 77,and I had had a quick advice from the hon. Butagira before I stood up as to what a Parliament is, and with the definitions of a Parliament; and given the background that we had been defined not to conform to the requirements of a Parliament, I can understand the problems facing the Minister for Finance and facing this country. I am also aware that in actual fact, the Budget could be read.  We normally take a long time before we start debating the Budget.  The Minister, since we have been blessed by having the present administration - at least to the leadership of this administration to continue, the policy guidelines are already in place.  The Manifesto was approved by 75 per cent of those who voted. Leave alone the 40 per cent who did not vote or voted against it. But I am saying that, we could have had the Budget read without changing the Financial Year.  We could wait for the Parliament which is going to be elected, some of whom 12 Members are already in or 14 by now.  Then those people would come and debate the Budget without tampering with the Constitution, and without tampering with the Financial Year. In any case, Madam Chairperson, when the Budget is read we always have votes on account, and that is similar to what we are going to do for -(Interruption)

 MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Point of information. I wish to inform the speaker on the Floor that if the Budget is read, then the Parliament rises or the business lapses.  So, even if the Budget is read a Bill is presented with the new Parliament, all the old business would lapse and require re-tabling the same Bill. So, it will not have any purpose of bringing a Budget whose business would lapse with the rising of the Parliament.  

MR DAMIANO LUBEGA: The fear of Bills lapsing was hinted at by the hon. Minister for Finance, and it has been liaised to by hon. Nkalubo Wasswa.  This fear is just within the arm beat of procedures.  It is the rules which prohibit a Bill to be extended into the next Session. These are rules of procedures. Rather than amending a Constitution which I think is in appropriate in my conviction by interpretation of the Constitution, the Budget should be read and when new Parliament comes, they should weave rules, whatever rules would be there for making something lapse. It is easier to go round rules,;they are just hand made in the Ministry of Justice. It is easier to go around rules rather than to go into an amendment of a Constitution when we are not properly constituted as pointed out under article 77 and 78, and under the section which hon. Butagira quoted without being comprehensive, because I believe that hon. Butagira with due respect would have also extended himself into the areas of article 77 and 78 which I hinted at earlier. So, I think that fear should not be held very strongly. We could weave the rules of procedure and continue to the next Parliament. 

MR KANYOMOZI: I just wanted to re-enforce whether what I have been saying by looking at article 279 of transitional arrangements, and also knowing fully well that we can bend the rules of procedure rather than changing the articles of the constitution. 279 allows that flexibility for things which are not finished because the Minister for Finance can read the Budget, we conform with the constitution business which have not been finished can be carried over, and handled by the new Parliament when it comes in. That one I think procedurally; and I am here talking as just a simple technician not a constitutional Lawyer. I am saying, 279 would allow that flexibility and it also allows us to suspend the rules because the rules are easy, the new Parliament can make new rules because the rules which we are having which insist on us to suspend everything, those ones can be easily changed by the new Parliament, and I am sure the new Parliament any way should not go by the rules now currently prevailing.

MR WAPAKABULO:  Thank you for seeing me at last.  I think it would be wrong to invite the House to proceed under 279. 279 relates to any matter which was in the pipe line as of the 8th of October last year. Something that was in the pipeline before the coming into force of the Constitution.  But what we are talking now are matters which are happening when the constitution is already in force.  So, we cannot rely on 279.  Secondly, I would like to urge the Members to desist from suggesting that by prescribing a Financial Year we are actually amending the Constitution, we are not. All that is happening, it is not even an alteration of the Constitution; it is an exercise of a power conferred. The constitution confers the power on Parliament to do certain things. In this case, the power is conferred by 257 under the definition of Financial Year. It was a drafting laxity in that, the power was given in the definition but it is there. It is a constitutional provision which says, a Financial Year is the 12 months ending on the 30th day of June in any year, or such other day as Parliament may by law prescribe.  When you make a law prescribing pursuant to a power given by the Constitution, you are not amending the constitution. You are only exercising a power.  The only argument which has arisen is whether it should be the NRC or it should be the Parliament to prescribe that.  

Now, we are saying NRC is not the Parliament. Because of the provisions here, it is very, very clear, composition and so on and so forth.  But, the constitution also does recognize a number of things. There are those things which we call immediate provisions. For instance, it says, immediately upon the coming into force of this constitution, the Supreme Court which was there before, shall be the Supreme Court immediately. So that is an immediate provision. It does not say that the NRC which was immediately before in the force shall be the Parliament, it does not say that. So NRC remains NRC as an organ of the Movement.  Then it says they are transitional.  So, they are both immediate provisions and transitional provisions; and transitional provisions are essentially to carry from one order to the next; and we are having a practical situation where we are moving from one Financial Year to the next; and we find that the practical reality is that, we cannot comply with provisions of article 155 (1) of the Constitution. 155 says, the President shall cause to be prepared and lay before Parliament in each Financial Year but in any case not later than the 15th day before the commencement of the Financial Year, estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next Financial Year.  Then you go for the destination of Financial Year. The practical reality arises from there. So, having got a practical difficulty then you say, how does a Constitution seek to cure that? The Constitution seeks to cure it by providing in article 264. 

Now, 264 is being misread by many of the Colleagues who are making a contribution here.  The provisions of 264 are wider, and the interpretations they are putting on it are much narrower than it should be.  264 is a very wide provision, it was intended to catch all in events of difficulties like these ones arising.  It says, -first it defines in 263 (1) the Government of NRM, and it says it shall continue for another 9 months after the coming into force of the Constitution; and then, it says in 264, the appropriate organs of the NRM Government, and NRM Government includes all the organs including the NRC. Shall take such measures that are necessary, if necessity has arisen or practical in a difficulty like this one to give effect to the provisions of the Constitution, and then, what is confusing my brother Kanyomozi is the next leg of it; and in particular.  But of course the draftsman was very clear to say, but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing i.e. the general position is to take measures that are necessary where it necessitated or are practical where it so requires because of the difficulty such as this one.  

But we would like to draw your attention to have priority of the following; i.e. you must have a Government elected. Make laws which will provide for the election, establishment of the an interim commission, the interim laws for elections, and also tribunals for determining any disputes i.e. while you are doing those things that are general, and which are practical and necessary to give effect to the constitution, pay special attention to the following.  In other words, -(Interruption)

MR NEKYON: Point of order.  Madam chairperson, is it really in order for the Minister to indulge in making a long contribution under the guise of giving information?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Minister was only giving necessary explanations for the guidance of this House. (Applause)

MR WAPAKABULO: I thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I will be very brief now for the benefit of the House so that I do not annoy my “Mukhwasi”. The point is, Madam Chairperson that 264 should be read as a general power to do things necessary and convenient or practical to give effect to the provisions of the constitution.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information. Madam Chairperson, as a Lawyer you know the Jusidem Jeneris** rule; the mention of certain things means the exclusion of others. That a power to prohibit the importation of arms, ammunitions, gunpowder, does not include a power to prohibit the importation of photographic materials. (Interruption)   Now, when you see these general things but you specify, then whatever you say must come within those which have been mentioned. The mentioning of these things means the exclusion of others which have not been.

MR WAPAKABULO: Because it is a gross -(Interjections)- with due respect to my Learned Senior hon. Abu Mayanja, the Jusidem Jeneris rule will apply in situations where words of the nature and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-going do not apply. Once you have those words, then effect has clearly and openly rejected the **Jusidem and Jeneris** rule.  The point is that, we have a general power under which this House then, can face with a practical problem; take measures practical to give the effect to the provisions of the Constitution with regard to the presentation of the Budget as we have faced now.  I thank you. (Applause)

MR KANYOMOZI: Madam Speaker, even with the Learned inform brilliant Lawyers whom we have here, you can the see the gray area of conflict; and I am just saying that, article 279 would help us a great deal, we would not then be involved in amending the constitution when we as a House fully constituted few months ago, sat here, and said we are not fit to alter anything in this constitution, we said so. In broad daylight, when everybody was listening and hearing, it is history; and those who do not understand history make terrible mistakes, Madam Chairperson; and I would not like my colleague to forget lessons of history.  History is important because, if you do not look at it, you fall into the same ditch which we would otherwise avoid; and I am saying we want to avoid falling in ditches; and since we have a provision under this Constitution, the budgeting process is a continuous process the Minister of Finance can argue; and if you look at clause - could I read it, Madam?  “Where any matter or a thing has been commenced before the coming into force of this Constitution, by any person or authority, having power to do so under the existing law, that matter or thing may be carried on and completed by the person or authority having the power to do so on or after coming into force of this Constitution and unless the President in case otherwise directs.”  It shall not necessary for the person or authority to commence the matter or a thing afresh.”  

So, the Minister can read his Budget, we can go and those of who come back by the grace of the electorate will debate his speech, pass the Budget and continue as if nothing has happened; we have the provision in the Constitution, and I am sure that this would avoid issues which would give us more problems on the interpretation and the role of this House.  Now, I have a second issue, I hope if I suggest this Amendment to the Minister in the course of time, because this thing has just come, he will accept that Amendment that we go with the clause 279, he proceeds on the 30th of June or on the 28th after the elections to read his Budget, and we go on because changing the Financial Year and also putting us back in problems since we are looking at the harmony of East Africa; the Budgets in East African countries have always been read in June and we want synchronisation of our financial, fiscal and monetary policy. Let us not change the Financial Year, Madam Chairman; let us keep the same Financial Year; let the Minister read his Budget on the 28th if it is necessary, or even tomorrow or next week; we will clap and go home, we are always given two weeks after his reading the Budget, to go back and tell the people that we represent the contents of that Budget.  This is a reasonable proposition and it should be accepted.

The second item is the issue of this one-month extra; the month extra becomes a problem.  We are not given estimates to approve, and there is a whole month which we should approve as a Parliament, unless that one is given it becomes very difficult.  But if he reads the Budget and the estimates are there, and they can be amended, mini-budgets are not uncommon even in civilised world, and this one is one of them.  So, we could a mini-budget to modify -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of information.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor on two things; one, on why read a Budget to the body that you are reading it to.  It is for that body to discuss it and pass it.  So, what would be the use of reading a Budget to a body that is not going to pass it?  That explains that it is not practical.  The provision of 264 is talking about practical things.  Madam Chairperson, this House is not composed of lawyers only of interpretation, but there is what is commonsense as the Constitution tells us.  Simple things like I explained in 264 are; the appropriate organs of the NRM government, which this organ is, shall take such measures that are necessary.  Is the Budget arrangement a necessary thing or not, it is very necessary; or practical.  The practical aspect of this is that the Budget should be brought, read to the body that is going to discuss it and passed, and it is only practical after the Parliament is in place.  Thank you, Madam Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Kanyomozi, please wind up.

MR KANYOMOZI: Yes, I am going to wind up; just as a matter of courtesy to hon. Tumwine, it is only steps which 264 is dealing with, not the process; the process I am saying which necessitates us amending the Constitution is not necessary, and that one I stand by it; and since the process and government are continuous -(Interjections)- those who do not want to be convinced and are shallow enough not to be convinced will remain unconvinced.  I am saying that since the process of budgeting and government is continuous, and since we have provisions in the Constitution under Article 279, I would request the Minister to proceed that way, for reasons which I have given.  One, not to amend the Constitution; two, to keep harmony in the East African territories on the issues for fiscal and monetary policy which are normally pronounced in the Budget; three, we have ourselves said that we are not a Parliament which would amend the Constitution.  These three reasons, even my colleague at the back who says he is not being convinced, should be able to convince anybody who wants to be convinced and who sees sense including him.  I am saying this in order to enable us to move on; and I think, on consideration these are strong points which should enable the House to see that what we are doing is right.  

Let us use clause 279, the Minister reads the Budget, we go back, we finish the elections, we come back, that House debates the issue; in any case, as I said, we are lucky we have already finished the President, the policy guidelines of the President are contained in the manifesto which has been approved by this nation.  So, there is nothing in the issues of policy which we need really to be hanging on.  I beg, Madam Chairperson that this should be the position and I thank you.

MR KIGYAGI (Isingiro County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Madam Chairman.  In the spirit of article 264 of our Constitution which provides that the appropriate organs of the NRM government shall take such measures that are necessary or practical to give effect to provision of this Constitution, and since NRC is an organ of the NRM, I would like to support this small Bill.  Madam Chairman, according to article 155.1, 155.5 and article 257 of our Constitution, I think, the tabling of this small Bill is in order and I would like to support it.  Just like hon. Manzi said, it would have been very healthy if a schedule of estimates was attached for approval of the Parliament; because, Madam Chairperson, I am sure the Minister of Finance has by this time, worked out the estimates that will be involved for the next 30 days, beginning 30th of June or 1st of July, up to the end of July.  So, it would have been very health for us, I would have been very grateful if a schedule of estimates had been attached, otherwise I have no problem with the supporting of this small Bill.

Madam Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to find out from the Minister from one of the committees on which I sit, I got information that Cabinet had decided that the SGS contract will not be renewed.  Madam Chairman, recently through the same committee, I am made to understand, that the Ministry of Finance has renewed the SGS contract for another six months.  I would like to find out whether the Cabinet decision was again reversed or whether the Minister of Finance took this decision in disregard of the Cabinet decision.  I would be very grateful if this explanation is given by the Minister.  Otherwise, Madam Chairperson, I support the Bill tabled and I hope the House will go along to support it because it is just normal and practical that we will have to extend the period of our Budget.  Thank you very much.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE (Historical):  Thank you, Madam Chairperson for giving me this opportunity also to say farewell to our Colleagues in this House with whom we have together for ten years or so, or some for shorter period.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to, I think, treat the activities we are engaged in between 8th October and 7th of July this year, as really matters of changing houses; we are simply shifting from one house to another, and in this shifting you cannot maintain neatness.  If you are moving houses you cannot maintain neatness, some of things will break, others will be disordered; you cannot re-arrange your house where you move in exactly the same fashion with the same kind of neatness as you were in a previous house.  So, I think, this house really should politically view the activities in this transitional period in this kind of light, and especially, if you are changing houses after a long time there are likely fixtures which are bound to cause difficulties.  We are moving from a house with historical to one which is not going to have - and several other aspects of changes that are going to take place.  

Madam Chairperson, I would, therefore, like to invite this House -(Interruption)

MR OKWERA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that we are not changing the house but we are only changing the occupants, the house will remain the same.  Thank you very much.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Madam Chairperson, we are, actually, changing both; the occupants may even not change but the House will certainly change.  The House will change from those of us who came by our own means -(Laughter)- yes, without any invitation to that one where you are now busy appealing for the people to send you.  This is an obviously fundamental change in the composition of the House.  

Now, Madam Chairperson, I would like us to separate politics from technicalities.  If the technicality is that this House is incompetent to pass this Bill, I think short of a ruling by a court of law, the competent authority we have established, both in this Constitution and otherwise is the Attorney General to guide on what the legal position is.  If the Attorney General misguides us, then of course, he can be corrected by a court of law.  I take it that with the movement of this Bill, it is a statement from the Attorney General that it is technically competent, and whoever wishes to challenge it on technicality, on a question of law, whether it is technically competent, legally to be moved, or otherwise, I think we can only have a competent ruling from a court of law; not by ourselves, otherwise we shall simply argue on what is law.  You can hear hon. Wapakabulo arguing with hon. Mayanja and we can continue; all of us have legal opinions on what this provision says, whether we are lawyers or not; with lawyers it is just a question of experience, that is why they even have precedence and so on.  So, the competent judgement can only come from a court of law, short of that we take the advice of the Attorney General on the matter of technicality, matters of law.  

I may as well add that personally, I am satisfied with the competence of this House as explained by hon. Wapakabulo, that what we are doing is really not an Amendment of the Constitution which would have created problems, what we are doing is giving effect to the Constitution by using the interpretation clause in 257.  Now, what technically I am not satisfied with and, maybe, which they can advise me on, is whether in that interpretation where you say 12 months ending 30th day of June, or such other day, whether that such other day also means that it can be such other day beyond 12 months or less than 12 months. Can we have a financial year of five years? Can we have a financial year of one month?  Or the 12 months in the definition remains operative and what changes is that day; but the day should change without substantially changing the 12 months.  In other words it could be on the 31, on the 29 maybe, on the 28, which would still be 12 months on average, or maybe, it could shift from 30th to the 3rd of July, but without significantly affecting the 12 months.  This allowance of such other day; has it got limits?  I would like a clarification on that, whether this other day has limits within the law.  Now, having said that, I would also like to join -(Interruption)
 
DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairman.  The information I would like to give the Member on the Floor in support of what he is saying, is that on page of the Bill, section 2, looking at it, the financial year is being described in three different ways; 2.1(a) is describing the financial year to be 14 months; then (b) describes it to be 10 months, and then going to 2, we revert back to 12 months, and yet the Constitution is saying 12 months as the description.  So, I support him that we need clarification on this.  Thank you.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Yes, Madam Chairperson, but the Minister amended that; there was a circulated Amendment which, I think, the hon. Member did not have time to read.  But that does not still remove the clarification I am seeking on the time limit within which such other period -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Point of information.  If I may be allowed to assist the hon. Member and gallant gentleman, it says that financial year means the period of 12 months; a financial year, in other words, must be according to the Constitution, a period of 12 months; not 13 months, not 30 months, not - that is clear, it means a period of 12 months ending on the 30th of June or - now the lee way given to Parliament is to change the 30 of the June to the 15th of June or the 12th of June, but not to extend of vary the period of 12 months.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Madam Chairperson, as I had already indicated, I would rather rely on the Attorney General for interpretation, because before long I will have another interpretation talking about a different version.  So, apart from that interpretation, I would like to join the other Colleagues really to demand that the Minister of Finance avails to this House the estimates -(Interruption)

MR BAMBALIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  The information I would like to give is that we should not look at this law in isolation, the effect it will have to the district and urban councils, because financial years of district administrations follows one month after the financial year of the central government.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  No, no.

MR BAMBALIRA:  Yes, it is going to have an effect on them; three months after.  If you are to make an Amendment to this law, you should into account of the district administration; because it also follows the arrangement which is in place.  So, I am giving an advice to the House that while we are thinking of amending this law of amending the financial year, let us take consideration of district administrations and urban councils. 

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  I think that information should be treated by the Attorney General when he is responding to our clarification together.  Now, I was saying that I would like to support the Colleagues who talked before on the need for estimates of expenditure to be availed to us in advance, since we now know that it is going to necessarily expend beyond what was appropriated in this financial year.  It is alright to come with the schedule which hon. Rwakakooko was talking about.  When an expenditure has been incurred and you are rectifying the situation.  But now that we know before hand, it is necessary and I think it is even a requirement of the law that we approve that expenditure in advance so that the expenditure comes with the right authority rather than now saying we are adjusting the financial year, implicitly giving him power to spend beyond what we appropriated without giving him that express authority to spend and in which areas.  So, I think, he should be kind enough and, maybe, if he does not respond in his winding up in remarks of the second stage, maybe, we will respond by demanding it more formally that he tells us what this additional expenditure is going to be and where it is going to be expended.  

So, the main thrust of my remarks, Madam Chairperson, is that we really look at these measure, not as measure which can be neat in all corners, but as measures which are necessary for moving from one order to the other.  Once you have successfully moved from one order to the next, I hope that the next Parliament will not bend laws; will not try to manoeuvre in order to suit political expedience.  At that stage, I will certainly join any person who will insist on utmost neatness and straightness following the law to the last letter; but that cannot be possible within this time, this is why we have Ministers of NRM and President of the Movement system, who is saying he is alone in government while, actually, there are ministers there.  So, these circumstances are expected within this period, some of which we created ourselves, some of which were inevitable, but let us treat them as matters of shifting houses until the 8th of July, and we shall watch guard after that.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

DR MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality East, Jinja):  Madam Chairperson, I will be very brief, and I would like to refer my Colleagues, to article 156 of the Constitution, with particular reference to 156.2 which I think covers the idea of supplementary estimates.  I am hearing some contributions to the effect that supplementary estimates must be approved before hand, that is erroneous, because if you read article 156.2;  “In respect of any financial year, if it is found that the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient, or that a need has arisen before expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act, or that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which amount has been appropriated by that Act, a supplementary estimates showing sums required or spent shall be laid down before Parliament as long as it is within four months.” -(Interruption).

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, in my contribution I was aware of this provision, but this provision talks about supplementary estimates to be provided or which have already been spent.  My contribution is that where the supplementary estimate is anticipated, where it is known in advance, it ought to be approved in advance; where it is not anticipated and something urgent comes, then it can be spend and you give a retrospective approval.  So, this is an anticipated expenditure, we are extending the period of the financial year, knowingly we anticipate expenditure within that month, we should approve it in advance.

MR ELYAU:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  This is really disturbing; I thought the Minister should have given this House to know whether we want to borrow next financial year.  The year we are talking currently ends in June, this very year, and elections are going to be held this very month.  July next year is different.  So, if we are borrowing that annual time, I think, the Minister should be able to tell us exactly as other Members are demanding, how much do we need for that one month?  Because the calendar here were are talking about now is over, the next Parliament might say we have done a mistake by interfering with a new financial year, which is their own financial year.  So, I think, we should be cleared by the Minister telling us whether this year we need July for the sake of this and this what amount is there, because it is not even a supplementary, we are borrowing a new season which is not ours.  So, we want a very clear information from the Minister.  I find it difficult to follow because it is robbing the next 12 months to make this one 13 which we have already finished, discussed and then budgeted about.  Can I get that clarification?

DR MAGEZI:  I will just continue with my last remarks, and that is where I feel that the Attorney General/Minister of Justice could have probably guided me better as to why we did not proceed under 155.5 whereby notwithstanding the provisions of clause 1 which refer to the 12 months, etc, etc; the President may cause to be prepared and read before Parliament, fiscal and monetary programmes and plans for economic and social development covering periods exceeding one year;  (b) estimates of revenue and expenditure covering periods exceeding one year, and then three, that Parliament may make laws for giving effect to the provisions of this Article.  Whereby if we then go to Article 264 whatever we do here would be giving effect to 155 subsections 5 and 6.

Thank you.

MR RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.  I rise on this occasion to support this very short Bill.  Madam Chairperson, in my view I think we should depart from a combative legislative role we have taken in the past, one of statesmen.  Since 8th October 1995, we have had a Constitution; that Constitution was new and, I think, envisaged that there were going to be roadblocks, and for those roadblocks, provisions were made how to overcome them.  We have today landed on a roadblock; a roadblock because today we have a President elected under the Constitution without Parliament under the same Constitution.  We have Parliament under the previous arrangement.  So, my view would be that we probably think about how to solve this road block so that we can have the new Constitution that begun on 8th October 1995 operating smoothly in the interest of this country.  It is one thing to be legalistic but another thing to also be realistic in the context of how governments operate.  Supposing we have the Budget prepared for probably submission and reading on 15th of this month.  Now, the question is would the same arguments that are going today go also for the application of clause 155 and 156; because in those clauses there are procedures how the Budget should be handled; in other words you will need to have submitted proposals for expenditure through the various committees before the Parliament has considered.  You will need those committees to have looked and examined those proposals and made recommendations.  Now, if we had the Budget presented now would we not land again the same debate of whether we are not violating the same Constitution -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, hon. Rwakakooko; may I inform you through the Chairperson that with the art of government you have one government succeeding another, the arrangement in place now ends on the 7th of July as per 1995 Constitution.  May I inform the hon. Members that if we make a Budget now for four months which will be practical way of the way things are being done and are done in the world over, all this road block which is being talked about may not necessary arise, because the next government will take over from the Budget that has been submitted and probably for four months I would request the Minister of Finance to do us that obligation.  Thank you.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  I am not going to debate that information.  It is possible; what I am talking about is how realistic it is for us now to have a Budget presented and debated according to the constitutional provisions; it is very difficult -(Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I have been sitting here listening.  It seems, actually, there is a problem.  If you Article 155, if you listen to what hon. Kiiza Besigye was saying, that extra one month or so, government is going to spend without authority, there are problems. The clarification I am seeking is this; we have been reading Budgets to this current NRC year after year. What is the problem of not reading the Budget to this present NRC?  Madam Chairperson, if that is done and you look at article 279 of the Constitution which actually allows any business that has been left over to be taken over by the succeeding Parliament and it will not be treated as a fresh matter, it will be a continuation.  What is the problem; why are we being confused by bringing this Bill; why not continue as we have been doing?  I am really seeking clarification; I do not know what the Minister of Finance is bothering us with. (Applause)

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  I have said that it is possible, but what I was alluding to was a situation which was on the Floor that we must strictly follow the constitutional provisions legally as they are presented, and I was saying in practical terms, in government business for the benefit of Ugandans, it is our duty to make smooth transition to a proper functioning of the system of government.  The Minister of Finance if he is ready, I am sure were are in town here, we can listen to the Budget, and finally the committee, as long as they are put in place according to this Constitution, can scrutinise and finally pass both Appropriations Bill as well as the Finance Bill.  But we would like to listen to the Minster, what is it that caused this request so that we can know and give support, because I said for me now, since October last year, I have conducted myself as a statesman.  So, we would like to listen to more because intricacies of conducting government business may demand that the Budget is delayed.  I think, I also recollect that some years the Budgets were read in July; so, what happened then?  Supposing this sitting was not called until July -(Interruption)

MR WAPAKABULO:  Point of information.  Prior to 8th of October last year, the power to alter the period of financial year was by virtue of the interpretation Decree vested in the President, and therefore, prior to that time, the President could vary the financial year in accordance with requirements of the interpretation Decree.  But now that the Constitution has specifically said it is Parliament, it is no longer available for the President to vary the period of the financial year.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Madam Chairperson, let me also assign my own interpretation of definition of the financial year, under clause 257.  I think that the provision is clearly for 12 months; I also think that we cannot expand 12 months to 13 months, neither can we contract 12 months to 10 months.  I think that it is within our powers if we decided that from today we want to adopt a period of 12 months, after 13 months, because here is a problem, I think, we can say our financial year will now run from 1st August to 31 July subsequently.  But for us to first assign 13 months and then come back to 10, I do not think we have got that leeway, because it will be problematic, it will require constitutional provisions.  So, Madam Chairperson, I want to end like this; I would like to request the Minister of Finance to give a detailed position why this change is not necessary and why we cannot comply with the Constitution; two, if it is within the possibilities and with your indulgence, Madam, I would like a committee of the House to be appointed to night to be able to go into details of why this expenditure cannot be presented; if it cannot be presented now so that it reports back tomorrow on Thursday.  I beg to support, Madam Chairman.

PROF. KABWEGYERE (Nominated Member): Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I think, Madam, we are witnessing something rather unique.  We are trying to debate a Bill which is trying to help the delivery of a new situation.  Madam Chairperson, are we not very happy to have a former presidential candidate in this House who is here sitting with us, and all is going on normally.  Madam Chairperson, the preamble of this Bill expresses the importance of the Bill.  The Bill is saying in the preamble, and whereas it is necessary to alter the financial year for the purpose of giving practical effect to the Constitution, and whereas article 264 of the Constitution enjoins NRM government to take such measures as are necessary or practical to give effect to the Constitution and so on; now, therefore, the reason for this Bill is clearly presented.  The conditions which demand this extension are very clear.  I am surprised that some people are saying that we could now engage in a full blown debate of a Budget when we are supposed to have elections on the 27th of this very month; when the majority of all present are candidates.  We have had to break an election campaign programme in order to come here to enable a Constitution to be implemented.  Now, yet there are some people who are saying we can sit here and fully debate a Budget!  How practical is that; should we now sit here and postpone the election or should we just simply extend the date of the Budget?  

That is point one. Point two, in the CA -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM:  Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  To the best of recollection nobody has suggested here that we have a Budget and fully debate it.  There are to suggestion that have been made; one is that a Budget could be presented and then debated by the next Parliament.  The other one was that, at least, we should have an estimate for the extra period that the government is asking.  So, we have not heard anybody here in this House today who said we should have a Budget and fully debate it.  That is the information I give.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Obviously, Madam Chairperson, my ears are different from hon. Ongom’s.  Certainly there has been a suggestion that the Budget should be presented and debated, and if it is not completed that the next Parliament completes it –(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  No, no;

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  That was made;  Madam Chairperson, could I say the following:  If the debate is that we are amending the Constitution by extending the date, I think, the logic presented on this Floor, by hon. Wapakhabulo to me convinced me that we are not amending the Constitution at all.  Secondly, the reading and interpretation of 264, surely how do you facilitate the implementation of this Constitution if you cannot have a Budget, and if you remember, Madam Chairperson, the extension is supposed to go on until the 7th of July?  Now, this is no longer a question of saying we are ending earlier or later; the period that we are supposed to extend the present arrangement is up to the 7th of July.  So, my own view is that by that time there has to be machinery that enables the government of today to continue.  

Now, there has been an argument that we can have one month’s Budget now already provided in the Constitution; there is an annual Budget but not a monthly Budget.  Now, if we are going to say now, let us have a Budget of July, then we are also again to be debating whether it is technically correct to have a Budget of one month -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  May I inform Prof. Kabwegyere that we have been getting four months votes on account, and that does not necessarily mean that we debate a Budget.   I thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  For me what worries me is not so much that we are extending the date of the Budget, because, I think, the logic, the conditions for extension are very clear; if you are giving a first delivery you may have an abnormality in which case you may have a civilian; there is some reason for this extension, the reason is very clear; we are starting a new era and the Constitution itself must be enabled to start.  It is just like when you are making a -(Interruption)- in the process you may have to sharpen it, even when you cut it thinking it will fit in the hole.  But I do not believe that we are worried about destroying the essence of the Constitution.  What worries me more is actually when the time of the Budget comes and the Budget is discussed; because there are already things which will distort that Budget in my opinion.  There are already conditions which have distorted our direction like the increase now in mobilisation of soldiers and so on and so forth, which may have to require more expenditure that anybody would have wished.  But rather than concern ourselves with that, some of us seem to be saying we should do this.  

On the other hand, someone was suggesting that we could have a Minister read the Budget, as if to imply that even the next round of government the same person will be the same Minister to defend the Budget.  Now, as if to say if it is presented now, it does not matter who next round defends it.  This surely does not augur with the normal way of democratic governance.  When a Minister is a Minister of Finance and presents his or her Budget, it is upon him or her to defend it in the House.  We surely do not get somebody -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Madam Chairman, I would like to inform the Professor that what he is saying is logically incorrect.  It is not that the Minister who presents the Budget is the one who must defend it invariably and that nobody else can do it.  Suppose circumstances happen so that the Minister is not able to defend it?  What does the professor suggest should then happen to the Budget?  Do we appoint a new Minister and he presents a new Budget which he will be able to present?

MR SIBO:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, all expenditure must be appropriated by this House; otherwise it cannot be paid out of the consolidated fund.  Now, if that expenditure has got to be appropriated by this House, the Minister must come here to this House.  It is true that the Minister of Finance has powers under the Finance Act to authorise expenditure and come to this House afterwards, and presumably that is what he is thinking.  By extending the financial year to 31st of July, the expenditure during that month will be incurred having been authorised by him, but he will come here to Parliament to seek appropriation for that expenditure.  

What the Members of Parliament are now asking is that now that we know that you are going to spend and you do not have what you have got to spend, why do we not appropriate it now, and the appropriation of that expenditure does not necessarily need debate as we know the debate in the Budget.  He comes here with a supplementary schedule indicating how much is to be spent by which department, as he has done before; and once that is known we will be then appropriating the global amount for each ministry, and that is what I think Members of Parliament are asking for.

MR BITAMAZIRE:  Thank you, Madam Chairman; there is a problem of taxation also, because when you talk about appropriation you are also assuming that the population is being taxed.  Now, I can see a problem that how does taxation continue and how do you continue making appropriations when you have passed the taxation policy in Parliament here.  That is the information I wanted to give, Madam Chairman.  Thank you.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  I think the suggestion being made by hon. Sibo simply would be that when the Minister brings those expenditure proposals he has also actually got to read the Budget itself; he has to read so that the taxation measures take effect that time when he brings those proposals.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Madam Chairperson, I think we can now see how complicated now it becomes, that it is not an issue of reading a Budget of one month, but it is also going to involve taxation; it is actually going to be a mini-budget, and how do you expect the Minister of Finance to now read into the one month budget all the implications of legislation of taxation and so on, that may come out in the course of the year.  

So, I feel, Madam Chairperson, that the conditions in which we are operating, knowing we are and why we are where we are.  The Bill as presented justifies a decision by this House that the Minister’s proposal is approved, and then we go ahead to have a Budget as proposed later on, and at this period machinery of government is put in gear to make sure that the expenditure that is incurred will, as hon. Sibo has said, be brought to the new House by the new Minister of Finance to, actually, approve it or challenge it, as the case may be.  

We are beginning a new era, and that new era as hon. Besigye pointed out, the neatness is really in question but the essence is not.  I do not think here we are talking of breaking the Constitution in the manner that has happened in the past.  We are talking of making it possible for the Constitution to be implemented, and I think, we are talking of Uganda now entering a new era, and there is an entry point; the door has to be opened.  I think if there is a bit of noise in the opening of the door it should be understood.  I thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA (Busujju County):  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I have shown to uphold the Constitution and to give true advice to be best of my ability, and this is the advice that I want to give or that I am capable of giving.  I advise the Minister of Finance to withdraw this Bill for the following reasons.  There is no way - I mean we are lawyers, we have spent time studying law, and we have experience, and we have brains and we understand the English language, and there is no way merely by bringing a lot of recitals to camouflage the fact that really what is sought here to be done would be to amend the Constitution.  Now, if we think that this House has power to amend the Constitution, let us say so sincerely, openly and amend it, in no time, I would be very willing to do so.  But to pass things for which our descendants will call us fools when we see very clearly something which to some of us appear objectionable.

Madam Chairman, there are only three ways we can do it, and I will start with the best.  The Minister of Finance who has been to the University of Oxford, and knows that in England when parties are going in for an election year, the government normally presents what are known as election budgets.  They present budgets which they know would not be implemented; they give away a lot of money, they give away taxes; they reduce burdens from the tax payers in order to attract votes.  As soon as they have been re-elected they bring in new budgets to undo the budgets which they had presented before the elections.  So, what the Minister of Finance must now do, if he has not done it already, let him concoct what appears to be a Budget for 12 months; well, this is the only it can be legally done; let him concoct, it need not be very fine -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA:  I just want to inform hon. Mayanja that much as the Minister of Finance is a graduate of Oxford and he knows what they do in England, he happens to be a born again Christian


(Incomplete)
