Thursday 10th June, 1999          

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in the International Conference  Centre, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order.

PROCLAMATION          

THE SPEAKER:   Whereas clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution provides that a session of Parliament shall be held at such a place within Uganda, and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may, by proclamation, appoint;  

and whereas at the commencement of this 1st Session of Parliament, the Speaker proclaimed that the Session of Parliament should be held in Parliamentary Chambers,  Parliament House, Kampala;  

and whereas it is expedient that Parliament changes the place in which it should sit, to enable the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to deliver the Budget speech for the financial year 1999/2000;  

now therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is now proclaimed that the 3rd Sitting of the first meeting of the 4th Session of Parliament shall be held in Uganda International Conference Centre Main Hall,  at 2.00 p.m on the 10th day of June 1999.  

Given under my hand at Parliament House this 10th day of June, 1999.  Signed:  F. J. Ayume, Speaker of Parliament.

          (The House was adjourned for five minutes).

(The House resumed, the Speaker, presiding).

NATIONAL ANTHEM

THE SPEAKER:   Your Excellency,  President of the Republic of Uganda,  hon. Members of Parliament, Article 155 sub article (1) of the Constitution stipulates that the President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year,  but in any case not later than the 15th day before the commencement of the financial year,  estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year.  I am authoritatively informed, your Excellency, that you are in position to fulfil this constitutional requirement today,  at this Sitting of Parliament.  May I now invite the hon. Minister, whom you have entrusted with this responsibility,  to move his motion?  Hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:-
 
(1)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 1998/1999

(2)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 1999/2000

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC PLANNING  (Mr. Ssendaula Gerald): Your Excellency, President of the Republic of Uganda, your Excellency the Vice President, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen.  I beg to move that Parliament do dissolve itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of:-
(i)  The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 1998/99.
(ii) The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 1999/2000.

PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY

Last year I ended my Budget speech by stating that Ugandans should be confident that our economy will continue to grow at a rapid rate.  I am pleased to report that despite the pessimism about our economy that has been expressed recently in some quarters, the economy has rebounded strongly during the current fiscal year.  The past year has not been easy for the economy, but we have successfully overcome a series of adverse shocks during the course of the year,  in particular the stability in foreign exchange markets, problems in the banking industry,  and low coffee prices in the world market.  

There has been a lot of ill informed speculation of the effect that our economy is in recession.  I have heard several complaints in recent weeks about poor sales in one or another industry, but in any large diversified economy, there would be cases of firms or industries which are not doing very well at any point in time,  co-existing with other firms and industries which are doing very well.  I do recognise that some industries have suffered a temporary slackening of sales in the last two months, but that does not,  by itself,  indicate that the whole economy is in recession.  On the contrary, there is firm evidence to indicate that for the economy as a whole, demand has been very buoyant during the current fiscal year.

This financial year,  private investment expanded in real terms by 13 percent.  Coffee exports rose in volume by 24 percent.  In volume terms, sales of soda for the first ten months of the current fiscal year rose by 10 percent compared to the same period last year.  Sales of beer were 19 percent higher, sales of fuel were 21 percent higher and sales of spirits were 25 percent higher.  Increases of this magnitude,  hon. Members,  are definitely not consistent with an economic recession.  

This year, the Gross Domestic Product in real terms is projected to have increased by 7.8 percent.  This is more than twice as fast as the average for all developing countries,  which is estimated by IMF at only 3.3 percent.  That we have managed to accelerate our growth rate in the current year at a time when other developing countries have suffered slow down is testimony to the underlying strength of our economy and the progress we have achieved since we began implementing economic reforms,  over a decade ago.  

The economic growth in the current fiscal year was led by agriculture and manufacturing.  Agricultural production bounced back very strongly after two consecutive years in which production was hit by bad weather.  Production of cash crops rose by 14 percent in the current year, production of food crops rose by 10 percent.  In both the cash and food sectors, output was higher this year than at any time this decade.  

The expansion of the manufacturing sector continued at a vigorous pace,  with the output growth projected at 11 percent.  However, economic growth has not been confined to agriculture and manufacturing, but has been broadly based,  with most of the major sectors of the economy achieving real growth rates exceeding five percent in the current fiscal year.  The construction sector expanded output at a rate of eight percent, the wholesale and retail trade at nine percent,  the transport and communications sector at seven percent,  electricity and water at five percent.  

The high rate of growth is easily explainable by the very strong rebound in agricultural production after the setbacks that farmers suffered as a result of very bad weather in the two previous fiscal years.  However, even if the weather related effects of food production are removed from the GDP growth rate for the three year period 1996/97, 1997/98, and 1998/99, the underlying domestic product growth rates of, 6.4 percent, 5.7 percent and 5.7 percent respectively,  are still remarkably high.  
In addition to recovery of agriculture however, there were other reasons for the strength of the economy in the current fiscal year.  First, private investment increased from the already buoyant level attained in 1997/98,  as I have already mentioned.  This is proof that the private sector remains very confident about the future prospects of our economy and is prepared to back this confidence by investing its own money in long term productive investment. 

Secondly, the depreciation of the exchange rate boosted the competitiveness of our tradable goods sectors,  that is sectors that produce goods which are exported or which compete with imports on the domestic market.

Inflation
While economic growth accelerated in the current fiscal year, we maintained a tight control over inflation, as a result of budgetary discipline and prudent monetary policies.  The headline inflation rate which includes the volatile food crop prices, was actually negative for most of the fiscal year,  because food crop prices were falling back from the abnormally high levels attained in 1997/98,  when production was hit by drought and El Nino.  The average annual headline inflation rate for the first 11 months of the fiscal year was negative 0.7 percent.  The average annual underlying inflation rate,  which excludes food crop prices and is therefore less volatile,  was only 3.5 percent in the first 11 months of the fiscal year.  

The fact that we have kept inflation under control despite the depreciation of the exchange rate,  demonstrates how effective our macro economic management has been,  and will strengthen the credibility of the Government's commitment to anti-inflationary policies.  Hon. Members, the credibility of our commitment to anti-inflationary policies is an invaluable asset to this country,  because it allows the private sector to invest for long term, confident in the knowledge that the viability of their business will not be put in jeopardy by macro economic instability.

Exports and Imports
The country faced a difficult international economic environment in 1998/99.  Coffee prices were on average some 12 percent lower,  in US dollar terms, than they were in 1997/98.  This inevitably dampened the recovery of the export earnings.  Nevertheless, coffee production in 1998/99 is projected to be about 24 percent higher than last year and export earnings 12 percent higher.  

Besides coffee, there were increases in export volumes of cotton, tobacco, fish, cereals, beans, hides and skins and electricity, although production of tea remained at the same level as last year.  Total exports in 1998/99 are projected to have risen by about US$ 91 million, from the level of 1997/98.  As would be expected given the sharp depreciation of the exchange rate, the growth of imports, when valued in US dollars, slowed in the current fiscal year.  

The Exchange Rate
In common with currencies of many countries throughout the world, the Uganda shilling depreciated sharply against the US dollar during this fiscal year.  The depreciation is partly attributable to the same international factors which have caused other countries' currencies to depreciate,  in particular the depressed state of primary commodity prices on world markets and the strength of the US dollar against almost all other world's currencies.  

The impact of these factors was exacerbated in Uganda because of regional insecurity, which may have adversely affected confidence in the currency, the well publicised setbacks suffered by the two important foreign exchange earners, the fish and tourist industries, and the fragility in the banking sector.  In addition it is evidence that in recent weeks,  the slide of the shilling was exacerbated by speculation.  However, prompt action by the Government and the Bank of Uganda,  to tighten liquidity and then to intervene in a timely and decisive manner in the foreign exchange market,  halted and then reversed the depreciation of the shilling.  In the process, speculators learnt a costly lesson that speculation against the shilling is not a one way bet.

In an export oriented economy, an orderly depreciation of the exchange rate can bring important benefits.  Our concern over the past few weeks has been to dampen the volatility in the exchange rate,  which was excessive and disruptive to some sections of the economy.  In the long run depreciation will have a positive impact on the Ugandan economy.  First, it will make our non traditional exports more competitive on export markets.  It will also make the production of exports more profitable, thereby stimulating investment in export industries.  

Secondly,  the depreciation will make our domestic manufacturing industries more competitive against imports, and thereby assist them to expand and capture a larger share of the market.  

Thirdly,  the depreciation will encourage domestic industries to make greater efforts to find local sources of supply for their inputs,  instead of relying so heavily on imported inputs.  The depreciation will therefore give a long term boost to domestic production, to employment creation,  and to our balance of payments.

THE PROBLEMS IN THE BANKING SECTOR

The banking sector has experienced a very difficult year,  with the closure of three banks by the Bank of Uganda,  and the temporary closure of two others which have since reopened.  The bank closures have understandably generated heated debate as to whether they were necessary.

I want to make it clear that the Bank of Uganda had no alternative but to close these banks. The banks that have been closed down were all insolvent and generating large ongoing losses as a result of gross mismanagement, insider lending and other forms of fraud and abuse of depositors' funds.  The fact that one of these banks was still liquid at the time it was closed does not mean that it was in a sound financial condition. A bank can often appear to be in a sound condition because it is liquid enough to temporarily continue normal operations.  But no insolvent bank can remain liquid indefinitely. It will inevitably fail to meet all its liabilities to its depositors and other creditors.

Given the scale of insolvency, mismanagement and fraud in these banks, the losses they incurred would have escalated to even larger levels had they remained open, and would consequently have imposed even higher costs on the economy and the taxpayers.  Closing banks is inevitably painful and creates disruption to innocent depositors, but it is far less costly in the long run to promptly close down insolvent banks, than to bail these banks out with public funds in order to allow them to remain open and to continue accumulating losses.  Closing insolvent banks is also essential if we are to build a banking industry which is managed in a competent and professional manner and in which depositors can place their money with confidence.

Hon. Members, although responsibility for bank failures lies squarely with the owners and managers of the failed banks, we must recognise that banking regulation and supervision must be strengthened.  I will shortly place before this House a new Financial Institutions Bill which will rectify, in a comprehensive manner, the existing weaknesses in banking legislation.  The Bill will raise minimum capital and ongoing capital adequacy requirements for banks and deposit taking non bank institutions.  It will strengthen restrictions on insider lending and tighten limits on large loan exposures.  It will impose limits on ownership concentration to prevent banks being owned and controlled by one man or one family.  

The Bill will also introduce a requirement for mandatory prompt corrective action to be imposed by the regulators on distressed banks and financial institutions, to remedy financial and managerial problems as soon as they are detected.  Banks will be required to publish their audited annual accounts, compiled in accordance with international accounting standards.  In addition, the Bill will stipulate penalties for directors, management and auditors who violate the banking law.  I trust hon. Members will give their full support to this Bill when I present it to this House.

When the banks were closed,  Government made a commitment to repay all deposits, whether or not they were covered by the Deposit Insurance Fund, which currently covers net deposit liabilities up to a maximum of Shs 3 million per depositor. I wish to announce that the depositors of these closed banks will soon be repaid.  The Bank of Uganda will repay the Greenland Bank depositors next week and the uninsured private sector deposits of the International Credit Bank,  on the 25th of June. The Bank of Uganda has also invited bids, from soundly managed and well capitalised commercial banks,  for the purchase of branches of the Cooperative Bank. If this exercise is successful, the deposits in the branches which are sold will be transferred to those banks which acquire the branches.  All other deposits in the Cooperative Bank will be transferred to the Uganda Commercial Bank.  This will ensure that all depositors of the Cooperative Bank have access to their deposits by mid July,  1999.

The decision to repay all depositors, irrespective of whether or not their deposits were covered by the Deposit Insurance Fund, undoubtedly helped to calm fears among depositors, but we must recognise that it is very costly for Government to repay all deposits in failed banks.  It is correct that Government should provide deposit insurance for small depositors, but it must place a maximum limit on the size of deposits which are insured.  If Government continues to repay all the deposits in failed banks, large depositors can choose to put their money in weak banks where they will earn very high interest rates, safe in the knowledge that the taxpayers bear all of the risk.  This undermines prudent bank management, because it enables badly managed banks to attract deposits by offering unrealistically high interest rates, at the expense of soundly managed banks which take care to protect their depositors' money.

Hon. Members,  Mr. Speaker,  at the start of the new financial year, on July lst 1999, we will revert to our publicly announced policy of only paying insured deposits in the event of any further bank failures, which is in line with the Financial Institutions Statute.  Government will always protect small deposits,  because that is justified on grounds of equity and to promote savings by small depositors.  But we will not repay deposits in excess of the maximum amount covered by the Deposit Protection Fund.  The Bank of Uganda will do everything it can to ensure that banks are managed in a safe and sound manner, but no bank regulator, in any country in the world, can possibly prevent all bank failures.

Hon. Members,  it is regrettable that the privatisation of Uganda Commercial Bank unravelled.  UCB was grossly mismanaged by Westmont Land Asia,  who extended loans in violation of both the Financial Institutions Statute and the basic principles of prudent bank management.  Because of the mismanagement of UCB, which has almost certainly caused large losses to the bank, the Bank of Uganda placed UCB under statutory management and removed the Westmont management from the bank.

Government is in the process of repossessing the 49 per cent equity stake from Westmont and suing Westmont for damages because of losses they caused to the bank.  Once this has been achieved, we intend to re-capitalise the bank and re-privatise it by selling a controlling stake to a reputable financial institution with resources, expertise and incentives to manage this bank in a prudent and competent manner.

BUDGET PERFORMANCE FOR 1998/1999

Revenue Performance Fiscal Year, 1998/99
After two years of substantial revenue shortfalls in 1996/97 and 1997/98, this year's revenue performance has improved.  This improved revenue performance means that we will have increased revenue as a percentage of GDP by almost half a percentage point, to this year's projected outstanding of 12 percent of GDP.  Within total domestic revenues, Uganda Revenue Authority collections are expected to exceed their target of Shs 914 billion, which represents a marked improvement of revenue collection.  However, the non tax revenues, not collected by URA, have continued to perform poorly.

There are several reasons for the improved revenue performance in the current fiscal year.  The exchange rate depreciation was an important factor,  especially for the import tax components.  Income tax collections were also very strong,  reflecting the benefit of the reforms made in the 1997 Income Tax Act.  The losses from duty rate reductions in last year's budget on fuels, beer and sodas, were offset by gains from higher sales volumes.  I am pleased to say that improved tax administration in the Uganda Revenue Authority has also made an important contribution to this year's revenue performance.

Expenditure Outturn
Government expenditures under the recurrent and domestic development budgets are projected at around Shs 1,127 billion in the current fiscal year, in line with the approved budget of Shs 1,131 billion.  Nevertheless, Government expenditures were 28 percent higher than the outturn in the previous fiscal year.  

Government spending was higher in this fiscal year than last year for three main reasons.  First, there were increased expenditures on key poverty sensitive sectors which included expenditures under priority programme areas and Poverty Action Fund programmes and projects.  

Secondly, there was a large rise in the wage bill which arose partly because of the increased number of teachers brought onto the payroll.  

Thirdly, there were increased expenditures on defence owing to the need to bring forward purchases of equipment for the UPDF, originally scheduled for future years,  in order to deal with the threat to national security.

Out of the total Government expenditures during the current fiscal year, the wage bill accounted for a third, and the development budget 14 percent of the total.

In order to keep overall expenditures within budgetary targets, it was necessary to reallocate expenditures between sectors during the fiscal year, to accommodate the large volume of supplementary expenditures, particularly for defence.  Supplementary expenditures requiring additional resources approved during the fiscal year amounted to Shs 89 billion.  Despite this, we were successful in maintaining overall expenditures within our budgetary targets, thereby ensuring that fiscal policy was consistent with the maintenance of macro economic stability.  

Hon. Members, in spite of all these budgetary pressures during the year,  Government has remained firmly committed to protecting poverty reduction programmes and projects.  As such, the Priority Programme Areas in the recurrent budget, which include primary education and health, were fully protected from expenditure cuts, and received their budget allocations in full, as did the Poverty Action Funded component of the development budget.

Turning to specific achievements during the current year,  the main health sector outturns were the completion of three hospitals at Adjumani, Bwera and Kaabong.  In the main roads sub sector in the current year, 8,800 kilometres of road have been manually maintained and a further 7,500 kilometres have been mechanically maintained,  under the routine maintenance programme.  A further 170 kilometres were covered under the periodic maintenance programme.  These programmes together were carried out at a cost of Shs 34 billion.  

In addition, on the feeder roads sub sector, during 1998/99,  a budget allocation of Shs 30 billion was applied in rehabilitating 740 kilometres of feeder roads across the country.  A further Shs 12 billion was applied in carrying out routine and periodic maintenance to 10,000 kilometres and 1,000 kilometres of feeder road respectively.  

For the Police Force during this fiscal year,  a total of Shs 5.5 billion was budgeted for purchase of vehicles and communication equipment.  The achievements in the financial year include carrying out major repairs in Nsambya Barracks, partial payment on Kireka Barracks and construction of new Police Headquarters in the districts of Mpigi, Masaka, Ssembabule, Katakwi, Apac and Nebbi.

Poverty Action Fund.
Hon. Members will recall that last year I established the Poverty Action Fund.  The objective of the fund is to direct funds from the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) debt relief initiative, together with resources mobilised from donors,  to the financing of projects which have a very strong impact in terms of poverty reduction.  These include projects in sectors such as rural feeder roads, agricultural extension, primary education, primary health care, and water and sanitation.  I am pleased to inform you that the Poverty Action Fund has been very successful in both mobilising resources and ensuring that we are able to increase expenditures on programmes which have direct and substantial benefits for poverty reduction. A total of Shs 83 billion was mobilised and spent on programmes in the Poverty Action Fund in the current fiscal year compared to original projects of Shs 57 billion in the budget estimates.

Domestic Arrears.
I understand the concern that has been expressed in this House and by the public over domestic arrears owed by Government to the private sector.  I wish to report to this House that this year Government has cleared Shs 80 billion of the outstanding verified domestic arrears.  I will come back to the issue of domestic arrears later in my presentation.

Fiscal Deficit.
The overall deficit,  including grants,  was limited to a very modest 0.9 percent of GDP,  while the deficit excluding grants is projected at 6.6 percent of GDP.  We have taken great care,  hon. Members,  to ensure that our fiscal deficit can be financed primarily by grants or by loans which have a grant element of 80 percent.  This will ensure that fiscal policy is consistent with both macro economic stability and long term budget sustainability.  

MEDIUM TERM ECONOMIC AND BUDGETARY STRATEGY

Our medium term economic budget objectives are to provide the economic policy framework and the public goods needed to support private sector development and to focus our budgetary policy on programmes and projects which can make the greatest contribution to increasing household income, hence reducing poverty.  

Private Investment.
Rapid and broad based growth requires high rates of private investment.  We have already made substantial progress in the last few years in raising private investment rates in this country.  From an average of only nine percent of  GDP in the first half of this decade,  private investment has increased to an annual average of 14 percent of a much larger GDP in the second half of the decade.  This increase in private investment has been made possible primarily because we have maintained macro economic stability and liberalized markets.  The challenge facing us as we enter the next decade is to accelerate the private investment still further.  

A recent survey of firms in Uganda found that the most important constraints they faced were the poor quality of utility services, corruption, deficiency in tax administration, weakness in legal system and the lack of long term finance.  

I would like to assure Members of this House that Government will take decisive steps to tackle these constraints to private investment.  First,  Government will tackle the deficiency in utility supply,  notably by encouraging private sector investment in the utilities.  Government will implement a series of measures to expand and improve the quality of services in the electricity industry, will attract private sector investment into the electricity industry, restructure the management operation systems of Uganda Electricity Board,  and divest its non core businesses.

Second,  Government has decided to establish a single independent utility regulator to handle all regulations in power, water and telecommunications and ensure fair competition among service providers.  A draft Bill to set up this institution is already before Cabinet and I will soon present it to you in this House.  
Third,  Government will reform the legal system applicable to commercial transactions.  The main is to ensure that the private sector can enter into contracts in the confidence that they will be enforceable.  Much progress has already been made in preparing updated commercial registration in Uganda.  Future key reforms will include the overhauling of the companies and land registries and strengthening of the commercial courts. 

Fourth, the Tax Tribunal is now functioning and will provide private sector with an independent channel of appeal in the event of disputes related to taxation.

Finally, when the proposals to extend the life of the Non Performing Assets Recovery trust are put to this House,  it will be possible to conclude the restructuring of Uganda Development Bank and thereby make important strides towards enhancing the supply of long term finance for private investors in Uganda.  

The Privatisation process.
Government is committed to implementing the agreed policy on reform and divesture of the remaining public enterprises,  to promote private participation in infrastructure and to fully cost the potential budgetary impact of all major commitments. Improvements in the efficiency and viability of the parastatals would free up resources to finance poverty eradication programmes.  One of the largest expenditure outlays in the coming year pertains to the cost of reform of parastatals and divesture of utilities including payment of our arrears due to UPTC, National Water and Sewerage Corporation, UEB, URC, SCOUL and Uganda Airlines Corporation.

In addition, substantial progress has been made towards the implementation of the divesture action plans.  In a few weeks from now, Uganda Clays Limited will be privatized.  This will be the first privatisation carried out through the floatation of shares on Uganda Securities Exchange.  It is our conviction that providing the Ugandan public with the opportunity to purchase shares in privatised enterprises will boost investor confidence and build public support for privatisation.  

The reforms I have just outlined will remove some of the key constraints to private investment and thereby help to sustain rapid economic growth rates.  

Poverty Reduction.
Central to our economic policies is the objective of reducing poverty.  Our poverty reduction strategy,  as outlined in the Poverty Eradication Action Plan, entails raising household incomes and improving the quality of life by enhancing access to basic social services.  Household incomes must be raised by promoting growth in sectors of the economy where poor people earn their livelihood,  in particular small holder agriculture.  

Second we must improve the life of poor people by enhancing their access to basic social services such as education, health care and reproductive health services.  That is why we are placing so much emphasis,  within our budgetary policies,  on expanding the rural infrastructure through,  for example,  the construction of rural feeder roads.  We are also focusing our budgetary policies on human resource development because that will give poor people the means to raise their labour productivity and thus their incomes.  It will also directly improve the welfare of the poor people through improvements in the health standards.

Hon. Members, if we have the patience to continue with our prudent economic policies, if we can deepen our structural reforms particularly privatisation of utilities, and if we can ensure that scarce budgetary resources are concentrated on areas where they generate the maximum impact on poverty reduction, we can be confident that Ugandans will continue to benefit from a steady increase in our living standards in the coming decade.

BUDGET STRATEGY FOR 1999/2000

The Government is following a strategy that restricts total expenditure commitments to less than the sum of domestic tax and non tax revenues and net inflows of external donor finance.  We intend to continue pursuing this policy in order to deliver the medium term macro economic objectives of high rates of broadly based economic growth with low inflation,  sustainable external balance and poverty reduction.

The medium term expenditure framework continues to be one of the main tools in our finance armoury, enabling us to plan our activities not only on an annual basis but also in their medium term,  over a three year period.  This in turn enables Government to draw up realistic medium term sector plans to implement public policies taking into consideration the constraints of the macro economic framework.  

BUDGET EXPENDITURE PROPOSALS FOR 1999/2000

I now turn to next year's proposals,  Mr. Speaker,  this is to say,  the financial year's achievements.  

Security.
It is imperative that the issue of security continues to be accorded the highest priority in the budget,  and I have provided Shs 177 billion for Defence in the next fiscal year,  excluding arrears payments.  Regional security problems and the need to provide security to national parks will require additional funding by way of salaries for new recruits in the UPDF.  Non wage expenditures have, however, gone down because a one time investment to equip the force has been carried out in the current year.  In order to increase the cost effectiveness of expenditure by the UPDF, the recommendation of a study on defence procurement financed by the United Kingdom will be implemented in the next fiscal year.  

Government has made a provision of Shs 15 billion for gratuities for demobilised soldiers,  making a total of Shs 33.5 billion paid so far.  The balance of arrears owed to them of Shs 11 billion will be cleared in the financial year 2000/2001.  

Government has continued to provide assistance to the Police to eliminate the major bottlenecks in the efficient operations of the Force.  I have provided over Shs 5 billion for the next fiscal year for various development activities in the Police Force to cater for the enhancement of logistics.  

The Prisons Service,  like many Government institutions,  suffered from past neglect leading to dilapidation of buildings and facilities.  Since financial year 1995/96,  Government has carried out renovations and emergency repairs to various prisons countrywide.  

The Poverty Action Fund has demonstrated its potential as an effective vehicle for donor support.  The level of funding will increase from Shs 83 billion this fiscal year,  to Shs 154 billion in 1999/2000,  an increase of 85 percent.  The Poverty Action Fund will continue supporting targeted interventions for enhancing the potential income generation to the poor,  and improving their quality of life.  The improvement of the monitoring and accountability of the Poverty Action Fund will be a major challenge in the forthcoming year,  as we are committed to undertaking physical and financial accountability of Poverty Action Fund programmes.  It will ensure that funds have the maximum possible impact.  I call upon all stakeholders, especially the Local Government officials,  to put in place and implement the requisite reforms and measures to improve accountability for these increased resources. 

MEASURES TO INCREASE HOUSEHOLD INCOMES

Roads.
We have a ten year road sector development plan that sets out our main road objectives until well into the next century.  For 1999/2000 I have provided a sum of Shs 48 billion for maintenance programmes catering for an expected output of 9,600 kilometres of main road routine manual maintenance,  9,400 kilometres of main road or routine mechanised maintenance,  and l70 kilometres of main road for periodic maintenance.  

It is expected that the recent commencement of operations of the Road Agency Formation Unit will accelerate the implementation programmes to construct and rehabilitate our main roads.  Due to the expensive and mechanised nature of such work,  Government has mobilised donor support, and during this financial year, this support is valued at about US$ 200 million.  This has been applied to various stages of our main road building and rehabilitation projects,  covers a total of 385 kilometres of road network.  During 1999/2000,  a number of projects will be starting including selected junctions and road sections around Kampala for which approximately US$ 6 million has been mobilised.  
A comprehensive strategic investment plan for the feeder roads programme is expected to be completed in the next financial year, Mr. Speaker.  During 1999/2000 620 kilometres of feeder roads will be rehabilitated whilst 10,000 kilometres and l,000 kilometres will be routinely and periodically maintained respectively.  I am providing Shs 25 billion for this work.  I am glad to report that tenders have now been awarded for the supply of the necessary road equipment for six districts.  Suitable contractors have also been identified for constructing bridges at Budumba, Kabambiro, Buhindagye, Katonga and Muzizi in 1999/2000.  

Government is committed to introducing fundamental technological change in the agricultural sector, and the plan for the modernisation of agriculture is expected to be completed by December, 1999.  Government will continue to facilitate good agricultural practice through research and the dissemination of research results,  using agricultural extension services.  These tools are aimed at improving the level of household incomes of the farmers.  The overall outcome is expected to be that subsistence farmers will move out of subsistence and begin producing for the market.  

The higher incomes that result from this process of modernisation will enable farmers to spend more on non farm output,  which in turn stimulates none agriculture growth in the rural areas and provides purchasing power for the products of the industrial sector, thereby increasing national income in the non agricultural sector of the economy,  as well in agriculture.  

For some time, Government has been discussing with donors a proposed reconstruction project for Northern Uganda.  I am pleased to report that within the last few days we have been able to agree with the World Bank that we will jointly prepare a project costing US$ 100 million which will involve the settlement of displaced persons, reconstruction of public infrastructure, rehabilitation of agriculture including re-stocking of animals and provision of improved planting materials  and other inputs including the introduction of coffee in the North.  This project will be discussed with all stakeholders so that the details can be fully worked out and the project negotiated with donors during the course of the next financial year.  

As an interim measure and in order to demonstrate Government's commitment to this project, I have provided Shs 18 billion towards the re-stocking component of this project,  which will be supervised by the Prime Minister's Office and implemented by non Governmental organisations.  It is estimated that this provision may be adequate to cover 10 percent of all households in the targeted areas.  Recruitment of graduate extension officers at the sub county level will be completed during 1999/2000.

MEASURES TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF LIFE OF OUR PEOPLE

Education.
Government's priority in the sector, Mr. Speaker, remains universal primary education,  and this will continue to affect the level of resource transfer to tertiary institutions.  In fiscal year 1998/1999, the component of primary education accounted for Shs 219 billion of which salaries was Shs 100 billion for primary teachers,  and Shs 41 billion was for development.  In 1998/99 630 new classrooms were constructed and 920 will be completed shortly. In the next financial year we intend to spend Shs 35 billion to complete 4,700 half finished classrooms,  and 1,400 new classrooms will be constructed.  

The programme on purchase of text books has brought the average book to pupil ratio to 1:6.  Additional funds amounting to Shs 15 billion will be given in the next fiscal year in which Shs 5 billion is earmarked to replace worn out text books,  and Shs 10 billion for the purchase of new instructional material.  I am happy to inform you that enrolment in primary schools has increased from 2.5 million before the inception of the universal primary education programme,  to 6.5 million as of April 1999. 

In 1999/2000 the Government will develop a strategy for expansion of the secondary schools sub sector to cater for the increasing number of primary school leavers arising from the universal primary education.  Within the sector,  an emerging critical issue is the wage bill for secondary school teachers.  The budget provision for this item has had to be increased sharply by over Shs 5 billion this year to fund the unexpected and substantial increases in numbers added to the payroll.  This increase underlines the urgent need to set and enforce affordable structures for each school,  which Government will implement next fiscal year.  

Government is to introduce cost sharing in tertiary institution, Mr. Speaker,  to enable them supplement transfers from Government which have been inadequate for years.  I would like to reaffirm Government's commitment to sponsor 7,844 students yearly at Makerere University - including 2,000 new entrants for three years commencing in the next academic year.  With effect from the next fiscal year,  Makerere University will be given a one line subvention for university management to allocate to their activities.  In other words, responsibility of allocating the funds given by Government would be entirely in the hands of university authorities.  

Health.
Although a major effort has been made in the primary health care sub sector, health status indicators remain disappointingly low in Uganda compared with the sub Saharan Africa.  Access to health centres is recognised as one of the main constraints in ensuring that health care is available to all.  

To address this concern,  Government is - among other considerations - ensuring that there are adequate Level IV health centres nationwide.  During the current financial year,  40 health centres have been upgraded and the 1999/2000 budget caters for a further 47 health centres.  This leaves a further 47 Level IV health centres to complete the process.  These will be catered for in the budget for the year 2000/2001.  Within the medium term,  it is also intended to start tackling the need for health centres at Levels II and III.  Two days ago I signed an agreement for a Spanish loan of US$ 24.5 million on concessional terms for the construction of health centres in Kisoro and Kamuli districts.  

There is also an urgent need to put competent staff in place to enable the health centres to operate effectively.  A manpower audit carried out in 1998 indicated that only 34 percent of the staff positions are filled.  To address this issue I have made a provision of Shs 7 billion in the 1999/2000 budget to double the number of qualified staff working at health centres of levels II, III and IV.  Recruitment to fill the remaining vacancies will take place over the medium term.  Local Governments should ensure that adequate provision is made in their budgets for staffing lower health centres during the next financial year.  

The Government policy to support non Government hospitals will be enhanced next year to the level of Shs 3.3 billion.  I repeat, the Government policy to support non Government hospitals will be enhanced next year to the level of Shs 3.3 billion.  

I would like to highlight the fact that Government has for a number of years put considerable emphasis and effort into educating the people of Uganda on the subject of HIV and AIDS.  Indeed the recent statistics indicate that this policy is certainly paying off and therefore the upward trend of the number of Ugandans effected by this terrible disease has been reversed. Government is committed to continue supporting this process.  

I now turn to water and environmental sanitation.  Hon. Members,  access to safe drinking water for Ugandans remains a priority of Government as it is a major factor in the improvement of health in particular and the quality of life in general.  I am providing Shs 18 billion to this sector in the next fiscal year.  This represents a threefold increase in the sector budget since 1997/98. During the next financial year 214,000 people are scheduled to benefit from completion of piped water supply systems in ten selected towns and fifteen rural growth centres.  
It is also planned that in rural areas,  ongoing construction work on 1,000 boreholes, 900 protected springs, 1,000 shallow wells and 22 gravity flow schemes will be completed.  These fresh water sources will benefit a further 719,000 people.  The current coverage is 46 percent in rural areas and 65 percent in urban areas.  When these programmes are implemented,  the coverage at the end of next year will be 50 percent in the rural areas and 68 percent for the urban areas.  

In the next financial year I am introducing a district water condition grant amounting to Shs 4 billion to tackle problems faced by user communities who are unable to meet costs of operation and maintenance of water supply systems.  I expect 1,200 boreholes, which are in need of major repairs,  to be rehabilitated.  This will enable 360,000 people to benefit from the water supply.  For the urban water supply system, the grant will cover the shortfall in revenue collected relative to the operation and maintenance requirements, thus avoiding the degradation of facilities.   In order to effectively implement this programme, every district will be required to employ a district water officer.  

IMPROVING THE PERFORMANCE OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE

Pay Revision.
Allow me now to turn to the public service,  Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Members,  as part of our on going pay reform programme,  I am glad to announce the following salary increments:  public officers in salary scales U5c to U7, that includes most teachers and medical workers,  will get an increase of five percent.  While the lower grades in U8 and Support Staff which include Police Constables and copy typists, will receive a 10 percent increase.  

Due to resource constraints, I am unable to increase salaries for staff in U1 to U5b.  I will however consider them when revenue is improved within the financial year.  This review, will not cover those at or above Permanent Secretary rank. 

Pension
I would like to inform the hon. Members that the failure to revise the pension formula has resulted in inadequate funding of the pensions and in the accumulation of pension arrears.  The Attorney General will study the problem and give a legal opinion to enable Government to consider viable alternatives.  I am providing Shs 5 billion for pension arrears payments based on the recent census.

Filling vacant posts in Government:  Government will complete filling vacant posts in the approved ministerial structures during the next financial year.  Restructuring the remaining Government bodies including secretariats of constitutional commissions,  semi-autonomous and autonomous bodies and bodies yet to be divested will be concluded by December, 1999.  Government will ensure that all public officers in the service both at the centre and Local Governments,  are properly appointed by the respective service commissions so that they can quickly access the payroll.  

Delays in the payment of salaries.
Government has been very much concerned about the delay in paying salaries to public officers,  especially teachers.  I would like to retaliate that the salaries have the first call on central and Local Government resources, and any excuses for not paying salaries on time is not acceptable.  

To increase transparency and accountability in salary payment,  Government has now directed that from 1st July 1999, all public officers both at the centre and under Local Governments must receive their salaries by the 28th of every month.  Salaries are released automatically by the Treasury every month and are never constrained by cash flow problems.

MEASURES TO IMPROVE ACCOUNTABILITY AND EXPENDITURE CONTROL

The Government is still very much concerned about accumulation of the domestic arrears - this is the issue I said I will return to later - lack of expenditure control and accountability. Arrears have continued to accumulate every year despite substantial funds released for arrears clearance during the last two years.  Continued creation of arrears is not only illegal but also represents a serious breakdown in budget discipline.  In addition, such arrears are a constraint on the private sector and run counter to Government's strategy for private sector development.  

In order to tackle this problem, a commitment control system has been established and introduced on a pilot basis with effect from April 1st 1999, for four votes.  A commitment control system enables accounts officers to manage and control commitments and expenditure within the quarterly expenditure limit and monthly cash releases,  thereby avoiding a build up of new arrears.  This new system will be extended to all votes from 1st July, 1999.  New letters of appointment to accounting officers have been issued today,  clearly specifying the officer's duties and his responsibilities, and stipulating the penalties for non compliance.  In addition to pecuniary liability,  failure to comply with any of the financial and accounting instructions will attract disciplinary action from the Public Service Commission, which shall result in demotion, retirement or dismissal of the accounting officer.

Hon. Members will be pleased to hear that Government has discontinued the system of credit purchases and from 1st April 1999,  all Ministries and departments were directed to pay for goods and services within 30 days after delivery.  In the fiscal year 1999/2000,  expenditure estimates, priority expenditure items such as public utilities and rent have been provided for adequately.  From 1st July 1999, all bills for electricity, telephone and water, will be settled in full using budget provisions.  Swap arrangements and issuance of promissory notes for the utility bills have been discontinued.

The ongoing process of verification of accumulated arrears by the Auditor General is progressing well.  It is estimated that the outstanding stock is worth Shs 261 billion.  Of this amount,  only Shs 136 billion is due to private sector supplies to Government.  I repeat, of this amount,  only Shs 136 billion is due to private sector supplies to Government.  The balance of Shs 125 billion is for wages, pension arrears, court awards, payment to former East African Community employees, gratuity for demobilised soldiers and subscription to international organisations.  I am providing  - in the coming financial year  - Shs 120 billion to clear nearly half of the arrears.

Hon. Members,  I am convinced that greater transparency will help to foster good economic performance,  in part by encouraging more widespread discussion and analysis of our country's economic and financial policies by the public,  and also by engendering trust in policy making which can enable timely and decisive decision making.  It is now recognised that the adoption of internationally accepted standards of codes of good practise,  can make an important contribution to improving policy making.  For this reason,  we have agreed to participate in a series of experimental case studies of transparency practises conducted by staff of IMF in conjunction with the Government in each of the participating countries.  I am proud to point out that Uganda will participate along with the United Kingdom, Austria and Argentina in this exercise. 

To increase transparency, I will soon issue new procurement regulations to replace the Central Tender Board regulations which have become outdated.  The new regulations will encourage competition, assign primary responsibility to each procuring entity for procurement within the funds allocated to it.  In the next financial year,  all accounting officers will be required to constitute a contract's committee which will be responsible for awarding contracts, a function hitherto performed by the Central Tender Board.  In addition,  the services of a third party monitoring body will continue to be used for all public procurement.  

To continue to strengthen our fight against corruption,  Mr. Speaker,  I have increased the budget provision for the Auditor General by 39 percent relative to the approved estimates and the Inspector General of Government by 47 percent. 
 
Fuel Cards.
The introduction of Smart Fuel cards had led to considerable savings throughout Government.  The savings that were effected were about 80 percent in some organisations.  I have therefore agreed with the proposal from the Standard Chartered Bank to offer these services to the Government,  with effect from the first quarter of next financial year.  I must emphasise that this venture with Standard Chartered Bank is not meant to be a monopoly.  I will consider other proposals as and when they are made.

Travel Abroad.
In order to cut down on the high cost of travel abroad,  I have decided to call for tenders from travel agencies to offer services to all Ministries and Departments of Government for purchase of tickets at competitive rates.  The new system will be put into operation from 1st July, 1999.  I expect the system to bring about considerable savings on this item and bring about more transparency in the purchase of tickets.

Constitutional Autonomous Bodies.
With the authority of His Excellency the President, in compliance with Article 155 (2) of the Constitution, I have received the budgetary proposals of five self accounting bodies.  In compliance with Article 155 (3) of the Constitution,  I have made comments on them and I hereby lay both their budget proposals,  and my comments on them before the House,  as required by the Constitution.  

In order to enable me to submit a complete National Budget, for your consideration in accordance with Article 151 (1) of the Constitution, the budget provisions of these self accounting bodies incorporated into the medium term expenditure framework are in accordance with the resource envelope conveyed to the self accounting bodies during the course of our discussions.

LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TRANSFERS

In keeping with our policy on decentralisation,  three important decisions have been taken to give greater financial and administrative powers to Local Governments.  The first that was taken during the course of the year was to lend support to Local Governments in the planning and budgeting process,  through the introduction of the Local Government budget framework papers. This support from the Central Government will be enhanced next year with a view to building up capacity in planning and budgeting in Local Governments,  starting at district level.

Secondly, the Constitution provides for equalisation grants to be paid to Local Governments for giving subsidies or making special provisions to the least developed districts which shall be based on the degree to which a Local Government is lagging behind the national average for a particular service.  The data required to complete the level of the grant required to fulfil the constitutional obligation is not available.  However,  we have decided to make a modest start.  I have made a provision of Shs 2 billion and its implementation modality will be decided shortly,  in consultation the Local Government Finance Commission.

The third important decision is to decentralise the development budget in a phased manner.  I intend to pilot a Local Government Development Programme which will be released to Local Governments, using specific areas, after certain access conditions have been satisfied by them.  

I am aware,  Mr. Speaker,  that districts are concerned about the proliferation of conditional grants and the constraints that this imposes on the allocation of funds.  In order to simplify the process,  I have consolidated several conditional grants.  The introduction of the Local Government Development Fund will increase flexibility in allocations to programmes chosen by the Local Governments. 

THE MILLENNIUM BUG

As we prepare to enter the new millennium, one of our concerns is the possible effect of the so-called millennium bug.  We are taking all possible measures,  as Government,  to ward off the anticipated problems.  I would urge all those outside the Government sector to cater adequately for the problem and keep abreast with the developments taking place elsewhere in the field so that this does not adversely affect them.

I now come to the budget revenue and tax proposals for 1999/2000.  Hon. Members, I now turn to discussing revenue and taxation issues.  In last year's budget speech,  we talked about the urgent need to improve our revenue performance.  Some of the issues here are worth stressing again.  As hon. Members are aware,  our revenue to GDP ratio of 12 percent is one of the lowest in Africa.  It is well below the average of 16 percent for sub Saharan countries.  This severely constrains the Government's ability to provide much needed services.  We are under intense pressure from all sides to provide more and better services.  But with the current revenue performance,  our hands are completely tied.  We cannot spend what we have not got.  Without resources, the Government simply cannot meet the endless demands for more spending.  

Furthermore, the pressures for tax reliefs and induction are intense. Sometimes I feel that there are serious misunderstandings about the impact of tax reduction on revenue.  Indeed some people say tax reduction will even increase revenues. While I fully appreciate that excessive tax rates can undermine compliance and as a result reduce collection,  this argument is no longer valid in Uganda.  It is because after many years of reforms,  our tax rates are now very low and are by far the most competitive in this region and even comparable with the best in Africa.  

I do recognise that investors still have serious concerns about tax issues,  but the bigger problems are with tax administration, not high tax rates.  But even with tax administration, some positive progress is being made.

Let me illustrate how competitive our tax system is.  Our company tax rate of 30 percent and our maximum personal tax rate of 30 percent are among the lowest in Africa.  Indeed, in the broader world context,  you will find very few countries with rates of personal and company tax lower than these.  The same is true for our trade tax regime:  export taxes have been abolished, import taxes have been slashed and restrictive non-tariff barriers have been removed.  Since 1993, we have made continuous reductions in our excise duties,  resulting in our rates being comparable with the lowest in the region.  Taken together,  these reforms have given credibility and predictability to Government's tax strategy,  which is what investors want.

I now wish to discuss the various tax headings and the measures I am proposing.

Income Tax.
I do not propose to make any income tax changes for 1999/2000.  While I am well aware of the pressures for income tax reliefs, the budget pressures are even greater and leave me with no room for action.  In last year's speech,  I explained in some detail the Government's position with regard to income tax.  I do not want to go over this ground again now,  except to say that the case I presented last year still remains very valid today. 

By keeping inflation under tight control,  the real value of the personal tax threshold has depreciated very little in recent years.  Our present threshold of Shs 130,000 per month allows about 80 percent of all employees in Uganda a completely tax free income.  This fact surely dispels the myth that we need a threshold increase to cater for low income workers.  

An increased threshold would naturally mean reducing a tax base which is already very small,  and as a result would greatly reduce revenue.  For example, a new threshold of Shs 235,000 - as some people have called for - would mean that over 75 percent of people currently paying some tax would drop completely out of the tax net,  causing a revenue loss of about Shs 25 billion.  We can ill afford an income tax system which taxes only a tiny minority of income earners.

Value Added Tax.
I am proposing a number of improvements in our Value Added Tax arrangements,  the details of which will be found in the Finance Bill.  The most important of these changes are as follows:

First, I am providing relief for bad debts in VAT registered businesses.  

Second, I am widening the definition of business entertainment to allow input credits for expenditure related to provision of staff canteen facilities at places of work. 

Third, I am extending the period for investment traders to accommodate long term projects like mining,  oil exploration and power generation.

Finally,  to facilitate VAT refunds,  which still remains a cause of concern for many businesses especially exporters, I have instructed Uganda Revenue Authority to implement a number of additional measures to speed up payments.  The most important change will facilitate taxpayers with a good Value Added Tax filing record who will get automatic refunds of small claims.  For large claims which are certified by an auditor, fast-track treatment will be given.  With effect from 1st July 1999,  Uganda Revenue Authority will start paying taxpayers an interest penalty on late refunds.  

To allow Uganda Revenue Authority to concentrate on collecting current tax liabilities, I have decided to allow an amnesty for all arrears of Sales Tax, CTL and the Coffee Stabilisation Tax.  The details of provisions in this regard will be found in the Finance Bill.

Tariff reform and trade liberalisation.
I wish to inform the House that Government remains committed to further trade liberalisation, especially in the East African context.  However,  the plan for the zero tariff on internal trade in East Africa, which was to commence in July 1999,  has been postponed until next year, to allow time for further preparatory work on many related issues.  The most important of these are the East African common external tariff,  harmonising customs nomenclature,  agreeing on the list of goods to be subject to the 10 percent surcharge,  developing a uniform exemption regime,  agreeing on rules of origin for goods to be subject to the preferential tariffs,  and putting in place systems for policing/monitoring the new East African trade regime.

Fuel duty.
I wish to inform the House that our tax rates on fuel have now been brought more into line with tax rates in neighbouring countries.  Let me illustrate my point with figures for diesel fuel.  Currently,  our duty on diesel is Shs 370 per litre,  which is only about Shs 50 higher than Kenya's tax for diesel.  Two years ago our diesel duty rate per litre was about Shs 300 higher than in Kenya. This represents dramatic progress in harmonising tax rates.  However, for the price excluding tax,  the differential with Kenya remains high.

To increase competition in the industry and to reduce the excessive non tax element of pump prices, I wish to announce three measures:
                          
First,  by 1st July 1999, all filling stations will be required to display fuel prices prominently outside their premises;                                                                      Second,  Government is taking steps to liberalise fuel importation and supply system,  in line with the Petroleum Act.

Third, Uganda Revenue Authority will speed up clearance procedures at the border to allow fuel trucks to complete the journey to Kampala with minimum delay.

Excise duties.
I am proposing, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members,  a modest reduction from 25 to 20 percent in excise duty rate for soft drinks.  All soft drinks made from imported concentrates will be subject to the new rate of 20 percent.  Similarly,  all imported soft drinks will be subject to excise duty.  These measures will take effect on 1st July, 1999.

To strengthen incentives for development of a drinks industry based on our excellent range of indigenous fruits, this excise duty will not apply to drinks made from locally produced fruits like mangoes, passion fruits, pineapples and so on.

Tourism Vehicles.
I have decided to reduce import duty from 15 percent to seven percent for specially adapted tourist vehicles,  to promote the tourism industry,  Mr. Speaker.

Traffic Act.
To make administration and control easier,  the expiry dates for vehicle licences will be changed to end-month, with effect from 1st July, 1999.  In addition, the arrangements for procuring vehicle number plates are being liberalised.

Entebbe Airport.
I wish to announce some measures to reduce costs and promote traffic at Entebbe Airport.

First, I am revising the method for calculating taxes on air freighted imports.  At present, only 50 percent of the air freight elements of the CIF 'mark-up' is included in the tax base.  I am now reducing this to 30 percent.  This means that importers will be charged customs duties on the basis of the cost of their goods plus insurance,  plus only 30 percent of the freight cost.

To help with reducing costs for airlines using Entebbe Airport, the CAA levy on jet kerosene will be reduced from 9.5 US Cents per gallon to 5 Cents per gallon,  with effect from 1st July 1999.

The US$20 airport service charge payable by departing passengers at Entebbe will,  with effect from 1st July 1999,  be included in the cost of the air ticket and transferred directly to the Civil Aviation Authority.

I am raising the traveller's duty free allowance for miscellaneous goods from US$ 100 to US$ 300,  with effect from 1st July 1999.

Uganda Revenue Authority Administration.
The monopoly previously enjoyed by UCB in handling Uganda Revenue Authority revenues is being abolished with effect from 1st July, 1999.  The objective here is to facilitate taxpayers to pay their taxes with minimum inconvenience and to ensure faster and more efficient transfer of funds.

1999/2000 Revenue Estimates
Taking account of all of these adjustments,  I am budgeting for total revenue of Shs 1,119 billion for next year,  which is equal to about 12.5 percent of GDP.  Of this total,  Shs 1,100 billion will be provided by URA,  with the balance coming from non URA sources.

For the URA collections, the breakdown is as follows:

I expect to raise:  Shs 205.8 billion from Income Taxes,
				Shs 121.1 billion from Customs Duty,
				Shs 377.0 billion from Excise Duty,
				Shs 344.3 billion from VAT, and 
				Shs  51.8 billion from Fees and Licences.

You will find,  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members,  attached to the Budget Speech, when it is distributed, a set of 11 tables which summarises the Budget and provides estimates for Recurrent and Development Budgets as well as the estimates for the Consolidated Fund Services and for Revenues. The tables also contain the Medium Term Expenditure Framework, the District Recurrent Grants as well as the Poverty Action Fund.  I hope you will agree that this level of detail will help to increase budgetary transparency and to facilitate informed debate.

On the tax side, some may feel that without a long list of tax cuts, the budget lacks fizz and colour.  However, I want to present another view.  What business and investors want now is a steady and predictable tax regime with no sudden U-turns.  Today's budget delivers just that.  We can also celebrate the fact that despite very severe expenditure pressures,  I am able to present a budget without tax increases.  Over the past five years or more,  we have made significant tax reforms and reduced tax rates steadily.  Now the priority is to consolidate, not to make unsustainable changes.

I am confident Ugandans will also appreciate my expenditure proposals.  Government spending will increase next year by 25 percent and by 20 percent in real terms. I can assure this august House that there are few countries in the world which can afford that rate of increase and yet justly claim to be managing their budgets in a prudent and sustainable manner.

Not only will Government expenditures increase,  Mr. Speaker,  but my expenditure proposals will further strengthen the focus of budgetary policies on poverty reduction, which is the Government's principal economic objective.  Expenditures on Poverty Action Fund funded programmes will almost double in the coming fiscal year.  Next year the Government is initiating a far reaching programme to rehabilitate the North including,  a substantial Shs 18 billion programme for restocking.  

Next year our budget provision for the road building programme will rise by 50 percent and our capital development programme for primary education will more than triple.  As a result of all these initiatives,  large numbers of ordinary Ugandan households will be able to benefit now and in the future,  from greater opportunities to increase their production and thus to raise their incomes.

Finally, hon. Members, our economic policies have proved their worth in guiding the economy through a very difficult year.  We have overcome several major shocks and yet still achieved rapid economic growth and record levels of private investment.  In the last two months we have managed the transition to a more competitive exchange rate and implemented the two most critical, and long overdue actions required to reform the financial sector.  We can now enter the next financial year, and the next century, with a tremendously strong foundation for further rapid economic growth, structural transformation and poverty eradication.

Hon. Members I commend this Budget to you.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.  For God and my Country.

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President,  what the Minister of Finance has done,  on your instructions,  does not amount to usurpation and abdication of your constitutional responsibility.  Neither does it prohibit you,  Mr. President,  from clarifying, amplifying,  commenting on what is essentially your Speech,  where appropriate.  Mr. President, may I now invite you to do so if it pleases Your Excellency, the President.

H.E THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament,  I have just a few comments.  Comment number one is on the paragraph of the Minister's Speech which points out that the share of the GDP rate of growth is 7.8 percent.  This is a very high rate of growth,  by international standards.  So, this shows the people who have been going around telling all sorts of uninformed lies,  that our economy is robust,  and it will continue to grow.  In fact, I think given the measures we have taken now, it may even grow faster.  Because 7.8 percent is a quite high rate of growth! 

Secondly, on the Poverty Action Plan which is in paragraph 56, the US$ 100 million which the Minister read as the money we are putting aside to rehabilitate Northern Uganda, that same amount of money will also be used for Luwero.  So, I think you should clarify that in your speech.  Government will put in Shs 18 billion to start that programme off,  but this money is specifically for restocking.  

You know we have been having a tag of war between some of us and some other people in Government,  over our priorities.  Some people think that spending money, as I said yesterday, only on safe water and things like that, without improving household incomes,  is the right way to move forward.  I do not agree with that,  and this time I am insisting that my views are fully incorporated in this Budget, because I have done a lot to build the economy.  I think my view should be reflected much more clearly.  So, the US$ 100 million includes the Shs 18 billion to cater for Luwero.  This was because in the past, a lot of money was spent in Luwero,  but it was spent on boreholes, on stores, on community centres.  I believe that if you want recovery,  you should start at the homestead,  and emphasize very clear items like cows, like goats, like pigs, like coffee, like perennial fruits - things that can give a homestead a sound base where to start from.  

Another point to draw your attention to is in paragraph 58,  on UPE.  As you heard the Minister saying,  the enrolment in the primary schools has risen from 2.5 million to 6.5 million children.  This is a very big jump and I am very happy about this.

Finally on Paragraph 70, the Minister did not receive the enthusiastic reception from the Members of Parliament when he was talking about the salary increases for the small people down there,  of five percent,  and of 10 per cent for the even smaller people.  We had quite a debate on this within the Government,  and we said, 'we must get money to help the peasants to restock their cows.'   We the people in Public Service already have a job.  It may not be paying as much as we would like, but at least you will be in that job for the next 15 to 20 years or so if you are in the Public Service.  If you are a politician,  you do not know. Then even five years is good,  it will give you entandikwa.  If you do not go to the night clubs very much and you keep the money carefully, it will give you a push.  But the peasants, especially given what we went through in some parts of the country,  do not have anything.  Therefore,  when some people talk of the national cake, this is the national cake.  When we come to sharing resources, we must say, 'this is for the peasants, this is for the public servants, this is for the investors,'  so that we can develop our country in a balanced way.  

I am also glad to hear that the Minister and the rest of the Cabinet are now coming out strongly to support local industries.  You heard him talking about giving preferential treatment to inputs into the beverages,  if the inputs are procured locally.  You heard that he had put 20 percent tax on the imported sodas, but that on the locally procured inputs he would put no tax.  This is the correct thing to do,  but I do not know whether you said anything about textiles.  

Our textile industry should be protected and given encouragement,  plus other industrial products.  The big problem of the backward countries like Uganda is that whatever we do in improving agricultural production,  it would normally be nullified by the decline of the primary commodity prices.  For instance we have increased the production of coffee, we have actually doubled, because we used to export 2.5 million bags,  but we are now exporting something like 4 million bags of coffee - 60 kilogramme bags each.  But our export earnings are not going up or if they go up,  they go up only slightly.  That is why we must metamorphose from being producers of raw materials to industrial producers,  starting in the soft areas like textiles, like and leather,  where we can be competitive.  

We have also discussed it in Cabinet and said that Government will henceforth give support to industrial products.  This will diversify our products not only in the agricultural sector, exporting tobacco and all that,  but qualitatively change the nature of our exports from just being raw materials to industrial products.  

We are continuing to discuss the question of the zero tariffs in East Africa,  because we want to sign a treaty and also implement  the COMESA requirements.  I have however made it clear to partners in East Africa that the Luganda saying of mpa nkuwe,  must be fully implemented.  You give me something,  and I give you too.  There is no way I can give to somebody,  I only give, give and he never reciprocates,  and you think that is a sound basis of sustainable trading arrangement!  

Recently when I was attending a COMESA meeting I told everybody there that when Uganda buys what somebody produces, we are supporting that person by giving him a market.  We are enabling him to sell what he produces in his factories,  therefore he will be able to collect more taxes from those factories.  He will also be able to employ more of his people,  so we are actually supporting somebody by buying what he produces.  We are  supporting the Japanese - all these cars you see here mean jobs for the Japanese,  mean taxes for them.  So, we must also get something in return.  

I cannot quarrel with the Japanese,  they are too far.  I however think that one day that issue will be discussed.  It is only a pity that we are only 20 million people in Uganda.  So even if we quarrel with the Japanese,  they will not even hear us when we are quarrelling, we are too small a market to send a message to the Japanese that, 'we cannot go on buying what you produce without you buying what we produce.'  but when we are the whole of COMESA, 400 million people in COMESA, I think we could send a clear message to people who think that we shall be their market until eternity.  

You cannot depend on exporting raw materials only.  The example is very clear.  We have doubled the volume of the export of coffee from 2 million bags to 4 million bags a year.  But we are getting almost the same amount of money as we were getting before we doubled.  Therefore, I am glad that the Ministers have agreed to support local manufacturing industries.  I hope that hon. Members of Parliament will do the same,  and that within East Africa we are going to have a thorough dialogue with our East African partners.  

Kenya for example, we buy a lot of things from Kenya.  Kenya should buy our electricity, we have got a lot of electricity potential.  I expect support from Kenya,  because I give them support by buying what they produce.  I have mentioned before that Kenya should help us with our phosphates.  They buy a lot of fertilizers from abroad,  yet our phosphates are rotting here in the ground in Tororo.  We should develop them so that we export phosphates to Kenya,  in form fertilizers.  

These are the few elements in the budget which I thought I should highlight for your attention.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  Your Excellency, hon. Members, this brings us to the end of today's proceedings.  I would like to take this opportunity,  on behalf of Parliament,  to thank you Your Excellency,  and the Chief Justice,  for gracing the occasion with your presence.  The House is adjourned to Tuesday 15th of June, 1999 at 2.00 p.m,  in Parliament House.

  (The House rose and adjourned to June 15th, 1999 at 2.00 p.m)   




