Thursday, 13 June 2002

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m in the International Conference Centre, Kampala.

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is my greatest pleasure to welcome His Excellency the President to the House. This is the second time this week that His Excellency the President is performing his constitutional functions. Today, His Excellency the President is here to perform a function under Article 155(1), which provides as follows:

“The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year.”  

You will also remember that last year we passed the Budget Act, which also requires the President to do the same thing as stated in Article 155(1). 

Now, it is my pleasure to invite the Minister to whom His Excellency the President has delegated this particular function, to present the Budget to us.  

MR JOHN ERESU:  Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I beg to establish through your office from the office of the Sergeant-at-Arms whether Members of Parliament need to be invited to the House - in this case the Conference Centre, which has been proclaimed the precincts of Parliament since the 11th of this month - through invitation cards.  

Secondly, may I know from you whether it requires Members of Parliament, when they come to Parliament, to undergo rigorous checking? Even when they do not have the said invitation cards but they can produce identity cards they are turned away!

Mr Speaker, may I know whether you issued these orders to be followed by Members of Parliament wherever they are coming to the House when we went to recess? I beg to be guided. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: First of all, you have made two points for which you have raised a point of order, and which require me to make a ruling. It appears you are stating facts that are not within my knowledge.  

It is true, even the Speaker received an invitation card. This was an initiative of the Minister of Finance. It had nothing to do with you coming here. If you were here last time when we received the State of the Nation Address, I adjourned the House to today, in this place.  So, the question of inviting you by cards does not arise. (Applause).  

As for security checks, what I know is that even in the Parliamentary Buildings, we put in place gadgets to deal with this particular issue. If it was intensified, that is a duty that could not be ruled out of order. (Applause).

Now, hon. Members, it is my pleasure to invite the Minister to whom His Excellency the President has delegated this function, to present the Budget Speech. Hon. Minister.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gerald Ssendaula): Your Excellency the President, Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I beg to move that Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of:

1. The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2001/2002; and 

2. The budgetary proposals for estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2002/2003.  

Under Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the President shall cause to be prepared and read before Parliament, estimates of revenue and expenditure for each financial year. I am accordingly performing the duty on behalf of the President.  

Mr Speaker, let me take this opportunity to congratulate you and all the honourable Members of Parliament, on your election to represent the people in this august House. You will recall that the current budget was presented before the parliamentary elections were completed. My Ministry has had a fruitful working relationship with this Parliament, particularly in the operationalisation of the Budget Act, 2001.  

The budget I am about to present gives a report on what has been achieved in the first year of the five-year term of the President, and what the Government intends to do in the second year to enhance the implementation of the President’s manifesto.  

The overriding goal is to make Uganda secure for lives and property, and a safe base for public and private sector investments, and to promote rapid export led growth with the objective of reducing absolute poverty. Therefore, the theme for this year’s budget is “Increased Production for Increased Exports, and the Eradication of Absolute Poverty”

Performance of the Economy:  
The implementation of sound economic policies and reforms and the maintenance of macroeconomic stability, have been key to ensuring the success we have achieved over the last decade. This success is demonstrated in the strong growth of our GDP, the low and steady inflation, the increasing per capita income, marked decline in the incidence of poverty and the adequate level of foreign currency reserves. 

It is imperative that we continue with the same economic policies, including disciplined fiscal policy. This means planning Government’s spending within predictable and available resources, redoubling efforts to produce and export more, and ensuring that the expenditure that we undertake provides value for money and produces benefits that can be equitably shared by all Ugandans.  

Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth: 

Real GDP growth this year is estimated at 5.6 percent. It is worth noting that most parts of the world have suffered recession over the last year, yet Uganda has been able to sustain strong growth despite the continued weakness in the price of our main export crop, coffee. Economic growth has been evenly balanced across agriculture, industry and services. High rates of increase are reported in tobacco, cotton, sugar, food crops, and communication and education services.  

Next year, we are projecting real GDP to grow by 6.6 percent, but our medium term objective is to restore GDP growth to 7 percent per annum. To achieve this objective, Government will maintain macro-economic stability and will deepen and accelerate reforms aimed at removing bottlenecks to production at all levels.

Inflation: 

Consumer price inflation has remained low for most of the year. The annual headline inflation rate, which includes food crop prices, was actually negative for most of the fiscal year because of the steep foreign food crop prices as a result of good weather conditions. The outturn for underlying inflation, which excludes food, is projected at 3.5 percent.  

Exports:  

This year, total exports are projected at US $450,000,000 and remittances from abroad at US $540,000,000. Unfortunately, while profit export volumes have increased by 6.7 percent, the value declined by 23 percent due to a 30 percent drop in the international price of this major export crop, costing Uganda about US $30,000,000 in lost export earnings.  

Due to vigorous policy on export diversification initiated by this Government, the strong performance of non-coffee exports is gradually making up for the lost coffee earnings. For example, this year the non-coffee exports have provided US $372,000,000.  

Medium Term Economic Budget Strategy:

Mr Speaker, the four pillars of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan are the foundation that supports our medium term economic and budget strategy. I will now turn to the key strategies and issues that underpin the budget for the medium term, moving us closer to achieving the goals of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan. 

You recall that we have identified the four pillars of this plan to be:

1.Creating a framework for rapid economic growth and structural transformation.
2. Ensuring security and good governance.
3. Measures to increase the income of the poor. 
4. Measures to increase the quality of life of the poor.

Production for Export: 

One of the highest priorities for the medium term is to increase exports in support of rapid economic growth and structural transformation.  This will require significant expansion of production, diversification, quality control and adding value to export products, and instilling the virtue of savings in our people as an important base for domestic investment. The principal Government programmes to supporting exports are the Medium Term Competitive Strategies (MTCS), the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA) and the Strategic Export Programme.

To achieve our export drive objectives, concerted efforts on all fronts and the co-operation of all stakeholders, including our development partners, is critical. Our partners have already given signs of support for this objective through specific trade initiatives including the European Union’s “Everything But Arms” (EBA), the United States Africa Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and the recent Trade Agreements completed with Japan. Unfortunately, there are worrying signs of half-hearted commitments to these initiatives on the part of some of our partners, as illustrated by increased subsidies to the very products we are capable of producing and exporting. 

Government is also exploring how to effectively attract large pioneer investments in strategic areas of great export and import substitution potential, and how to survive and take advantage of all the possible opportunities in the international markets. We will continue the dialogue with all stakeholders, including both Parliament and development partners, and ensure that the momentum already built to attracting investors is not dampened.  

Improving Budgetary Efficiency and Effectiveness: 

We are committed to improving fiscal discipline at both the budget planning and execution stages. These involve the following key undertakings:

1.Reduction of supplementaries to only emergencies;
2.Reduction of domestic arrears through Commitment Control;
3. Strengthening financial management;
4. Pay and procurement reform;
5. Strengthening fiscal decentralisation;
6. Strengthening monitoring and evaluation.

I shall now expound on all these elements.  

Strengthening Financial Management: 

Mr Speaker, the Public Finance and Accountability Bill, 2002 was recently approved by Cabinet and is due to be considered by Parliament. When enacted into law, it will replace the 1964 Public Finance Act, taking into account the 1995 Constitution. A major feature is the requirement that all proposed supplementary expenditure must be approved by Parliament, prior to the release of funds. I am confident that Parliament will fully support this Bill, which provides for greater control over the implementation of the Budget by this august House.

To support the implementation of the Public Finance and Accountability Bill, Government has started an extensive training program for accounting and financial management staff in both central and local Governments, and in the office of the Auditor General. In addition, a strong team of professional accountants and auditors has been recruited to support the entire programme for strengthening financial management in Government.  

The new Integrated Financial Management System is to be introduced to enable Government to more efficiently plan and execute the budget and account for all financial activities. The design phase was recently completed and the pilot phase of the system is planned to start on July 1, 2003.  

Extension of the above to all ministries and local Governments will take place over a number of years. This is a very significant step, and must have the full co-operation of all the technical and political level stakeholders.

An integral part of the Integrated Financial Management System is a new budgetary classification system incorporating international best practice in public sector accounting.  This will be introduced at the beginning of the next budgetary cycle.

Commitment Control and Arrears Reduction:
The Commitment Control System (CCS) has continued to assist in the reduction but not in the elimination of accumulation of domestic arrears, since some accounting officers are not operating within the financial resources available to them.  As a result, during financial year 2002/2003, we will focus our attention on the defaulting ministries and their accounting officers, to ensure that they comply fully with the Commitment Control System and take full responsibility for arrears created.

The effective fight against arrears requires reliable data to identify the causes of arrears and those causing them.  In this regard, I am very concerned that suppliers are not responding to my calls to cease supplying extended credit outside the Commitment Control System.  

Continued accumulation of arrears to utility companies is a shared responsibility between Government departments and utility companies, mainly due to failure to bill accurately and regularly and to collect promptly.  In order to resolve this issue, effective 1 August 2002, Government shall commence release of funds for telephone and water services on a prepayment basis, against the approved budget.  Therefore, from 1st July, all accounting officers are requested to reconcile their accounts with the utility companies prior to introducing the new system.  

Salary and pension arrears, especially those under Local Government, plus court awards, remain a very serious problem and these will be the subject of close scrutiny in the next financial year.

Mr Speaker, while it would not be prudent to predict zero new arrears by the end of financial year 2002/2003, this must nevertheless be our firm target.  It is a target that will only be achieved if all those involved, including the business Community, play their part to stop the accounting Officers from over committing the Government.  Arrears are a clear sign of budget indiscipline and are a very serious and growing burden on the community.

General Areas of Concern in Public Expenditure:

Mr Speaker, His Excellency, the President, concerned about the cost of public administration, vis-à-vis other priorities, a view shared by Parliament, commissioned a study on the cost of public administration. The report of the study identifies possible areas of savings for possible reallocation to other Poverty Eradication Plan priorities, including comprehensive public service reform.  The Government will in the near future announce how and when to implement the recommendation of this study.

Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy:

Mr Speaker, in order to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the fiscal transfer system, Cabinet recently approved the Fiscal Decentralization Strategy.  This new strategy will provide a framework that will streamline the transfer of resources to local governments, reducing and standardizing the reports required, halt the proliferation of bank accounts and related bank charges, and increase the flexibility with which local governments can spend their resources, while maintaining a focus on national priorities. In order to stimulate the local Government revenue generating effort, which has stagnated in recent years, the new system will include incentives linking local revenue performance and the autonomy in decision making with transfers from the center.  The implementation of the Fiscal Decentralization Strategy is to be piloted in 15 local governments, effective financial year 2002/2003.  

The Census and the National Planning Authority:

Mr Speaker, the census enumeration will take place in September this year.  This is a very important exercise, the results of which will be a complete updated baseline of social economic data.  This will, in turn, provide the basis for our future plans and for updating the Poverty Eradication Action Plan.  

The census is divided into four modules: household, community, agricultural and micro and small enterprises.  I urge all Ugandans to support this exercise.  It is intended that the exercise of the registration of births and deaths, which is covered by an Act of Parliament, will be reactivated, to ensure continuous provision of essential data and statistics for national planning.  

The long awaited National Planning Authority will commence its operations during next financial year 2002/2003.  The data provided by the census will obviously be invaluable for the work of the National Planning Authority in guiding the long-term development plan and strategies.

I now wish to turn to the achievements in financial year, 2001/2002, and to highlight the major planned activities and expected outputs for the next financial year.  I will do this using the framework of the four pillars of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan. 

POVERTY ERADICATION ACTION PLAN (PEAP) PILLAR 1: Creating a framework for rapid economic growth and structural transformation

Mr Speaker, as I intimated in my budget Speech last year, Government has developed a five year strategy to promote the production, processing and marketing of a number of strategic exports to form a basis for faster and broader economic growth. These areas include: coffee, cotton, textile, tea, fish, beef, hides and skin, horticulture products, and Information and Communication Technology, (ICT).  These interventions will have multiplier effects in the economy, by removing structural bottlenecks to production, storage and marketing.

In developing this strategy, Government has been careful to ensure that it not only represents an efficient use of resources but also that the interventions compliment the activities of the private sector. Sector specific studies were commissioned in each of the identified areas and a final report was produced and discussed by all the stakeholders, to enhance dialogue on the priority activities, specific interventions and the timing of such activities.

The bleak world markets for traditional exports have not only necessitated the need for strengthening the export base through diversification but also to ensure that Uganda’s products are competitive in the global market.  Under this initiative, the focus is on the following strategic components: institutional capacity; formulating and enforcing policies; standards and regulations; provision of critical equipment; improving infrastructure for trading in commodities such as maize, beans, rice and groundnuts; and producing high quality and competitive products, particularly textile and garments for the export market.  In addition, we are undertaking investment in an Information and Communication Technology (ICT); Incubation Center for enhancing ICT related export earnings; and supporting petroleum exploration and mining.  These interventions will boost export earnings significantly from the current level.

In the current financial year, a total of Shs 52.5 billion was provided to support the above Strategic Export Programme (SEP), and we intend to provide the same amount in the next financial year.  

Government interventions in these areas have enabled thousands of poor households to access planting and stock material for coffee, tea, cotton and cocoa during the financial year 2001/2002, enhancing their capacity to generate incomes and diversify their livelihoods.  Specifically, distribution has been made of 16.5 million coffee seedlings to 85,000 households, 1.1 million cocoa seedlings to 2,933 households, 2 million tea seedlings to 1000 households, and 5 coffee nurseries have been established.   

Government interventions in the tea sub-sector were intended to increase the volumes and value of tea exports through increased acreage, the importation of improved tea clones for multiplication and distribution of seedlings to poor households, the revival of tea research and involvement of a tea policy framework.  

In the cotton sub-sector, production increased by 15,000 bales last season.  Value addition through the production of textile garments for the export market, and indeed for the local market, is a major area being promoted.  With the introduction of block farming in the medium term targeting large-scale commercial production, higher cotton production is expected.  

The horticultural sector is the fastest growing export sector in Uganda, adding value from US $ 2.3 million in 1995 to US$10.9 million in 2001, with volumes tripling over the same period.  Exports of vanilla have been boosted by the present high world prices.  Maintaining quality is essential if our farmers are to continue to benefit from this buoyant market.  

Improvements in infrastructure and the provision of fish fry have contributed to the continued good performance of the fish industry, taking advantage of the lifting of the ban on fish exports to the European Union.  The intervention aims at increasing production, export volumes and values, and restoring confidence in safety and quality in Uganda’s fish and fish products.  Fish exports for 2001/02 are projected to earn US$78.5 million, a substantial increase over the previous year.  

In the current financial year, the Uganda Development Bank is capitalized to the tune of Shs5.7 billion. Furthermore, an arrangement has been made with the Development Finance Company of Uganda Limited (DFCU) to enable farmers to access affordable capital for purchasing machinery and equipment for agricultural production and processing.  In addition, in April this year, Sino-Uganda Beijing Chenao Company (BCC), a joint venture between Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) and the Beijing North Star Industrial Group opened a coffee shop in China to promote Uganda’s “Crane Coffee”.  Interventions in the ICT sector   generate earnings for services being provided through Call Centres and Data Entry and Processing Services with North American Companies.   

The Uganda National Council for Science and Technology is developing initiatives aimed at practical application of indigenous knowledge, with the aim of adding value and commercializing it.  Mr Speaker, this is a very worthy endeavor, and I propose to support it in the next financial year by establishing an Innovation Fund to be managed by Uganda Council for Science and Technology.  

More detail on the activities initiated this year under the Strategic Export Programme are provided in the Background to the Budget.  

Strengthening the Financial Sector:  

For the economy to sustain a high rate of investment over the long term, our domestic saving rates must rise.  Reducing our fiscal deficit will help to raise the savings rate, but we should also encourage the mobilization of private savings through pension reform.  

A consensus has been reached among stakeholders that the pension industry should be liberalized to allow reputable, well-capitalized private sector pension providers to offer their services to the Ugandan public.  This will both stimulate private savings and boost the capital market in Uganda, as the funds mobilized by the pension providers will be availed for investment in long term securities.  

To protect the public, liberalisation of the pension industry will proceed gradually and will be accompanied by the development of a regulatory structure for the industry.  NSSF will still have an important role to play, but the monopoly of NSSF must be removed if there is to be a genuine competition and reform of the pension industry.  

As a further effort to strengthen the Capital Market in Uganda, effective July 2002, Government, through the Bank of Uganda, will introduce a long term bond of three to five years monetary policy purposes.  Accordingly, I am proposing an amendment to the Treasury Bill Act to provide for this new instrument.  The details of this amendment are contained in the Finance Bill.  

Starting in August, the Bank of Baroda will float 20 per cent of its equity on the Uganda Stock Exchange, in line with the privatisation agreement reached with the Government. This will give a timely boost activity in the capital market and provide another opportunity for the Ugandan public to participate in the future success of private enterprises in this country.

Privatisation and Utility Reform: 

Mr Speaker, the programme for privatisation has continued, and as of June 2002, 110 divestitures of public enterprises will have been concluded, leaving a further 40 to be divested.  It is worthwhile to note that, through divestiture, Government has reduced overall subsidies to public enterprises from Shs 208 billion in 1994 to Shs 80 billion in 2000/2001.  Reports on divestiture activities will continue to be submitted to this Parliament as provided for by the relevant law. 

This year, an independent power regulator, the Electricity Regulatory Authority, was fully operationalized.  The concessioning of Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited and Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited to private investors, which commenced in this year, will be concluded next fiscal year.  This is essential to the reform of the power sector, and vital for the modernisation of our economy.  

Government intends to concession out the rail operations of URC’s successor company by the end of the year 2003.  The preparation for private sector participation in water service delivery in urban towns is in process.  It is expected that water systems in 33 large urban towns will be privatized under an operating lease.  

Electrification:  

Remedial works on Owen Falls Dam were concluded this financial year, at a cost of Shs 17 billion. Work started on the third unit at the Kiira Power Plant, adding 40 MW to the national grid upon completion.  Funding for the fourth and fifth units was secured, enabling a further 80 megawatts capacity to be installed by the year 2004, bringing total capacity to 400 megawatts from 280 megawatts at present.  Rehabilitation of the distribution network in Kampala, Jinja and Tororo has commenced, and is expected to sharply reduce transmission losses, upon completion.

Mr Speaker, the Bujagali Falls Project is very much on course. Over US$200 million for financing from international development banks was obtained in December 2001.  Commercial and political risk coverage has been obtained from official multilateral and bilateral agencies.  The Purchase Power Agreement was approved by Parliament. The project is expected to start next Financial Year. 

Main Roads:  

In the financial year 2001/2002, 91 per cent of the planned routine and period maintenance activities were carried out on the 10,000-kilometre main road system. In addition, the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication up-graded and improved the national roads between Kyotera and Mutukula, where 90 per cent of civil works were completed; Pakwach-Nebbi, where half of the planned civil works were completed; and between Nebbi and Arua, where the targeted programme was achieved. 

In addition, 50 per cent of the works on the Ntugamo-Kagamba Road has been completed while the upgrading and improvement of the Busujju-Kiboga-Hoima road is ongoing and scheduled for completion by the year 2004/2005. The road to Kapchorwa was upgraded. 

As agreed with our development partners at the recent Roads Conference, Government will increase the main road maintenance budget each year by US$2 million equivalent until we have reached financial self-sufficiency. The ten-year main road programme was also extended to financial year 2010/2011 from 2005/2006. The Budget next year will provide for upgrading work on: the Karuma-Olwiyo-Packwach Road (107km), the Katungulu-Kasese-Fort Portal Road, the Kasese-Kilembe Road and the Equator Road. 

In addition, 71Km of the Jinja-Bugiri Road will be rehabilitated and improved between September 2002 and September 2004. Upgrading of Kagamba-Rukungiri road (37Km) is to commence in March 2003. Upgrading of Gayaza-Kalagi Road (21Km) will start in July 2002 and 107Km of road will be opened up under the Northern Roads Emergency Programme. We expect to commence upgrading of the Kabale-Kisoro road, and funds have been solicited for upgrading the Fort Portal-Bundibugyo Road. Valuation studies related to construction of the Kampala Northern By-pass should be completed next fiscal year, and the funds for the resultant compensation will be provided thereafter.

Commercial Justice Reform Programme: 

An efficient system of commercial justice is critical to the function of the business sector for which the reliability of contracts and protection of the law is essential. Accordingly, the Commercial Justice Reform Programme began this year under the Justice, Law and Order Sector. Notable achievements this year are:

• The establishment of the Commercial Court;

• The equipping of Judges with computers and research facilities;

• The development of rules of arbitration and dispute resolution by the Centre for Arbitration and Dispute Resolution.

Higher Education:

For financial year 2002/2003, Shs400 million has been allocated to facilitate the start up activities of the student loan scheme to enable intellectually gifted but financially disadvantaged students to undertake a post- primary education. This will be complimented by the planned contribution of 14 community polytechnics to provide trade and other practical skills to students who are unable to join secondary education.  

The Open University of Uganda is in an advanced stage of establishment, and the Gulu University is scheduled to open in October 2002 for studies in Agriculture and Environmental Science. (Applause). Furthermore, I have allocated funds for the expansion of Mbarara University.  

In order to address the quality of education, Government will take measures to include the training of new trainers and instructors, the provision of additional equipment, particularly for teaching of science and the establishment of the National Council for Higher Education. Government is also studying the possibility of introducing long distance education.

Petroleum and Mineral Development:

Government spent Shs1.7 billion this year under the Strategic Export Programme in support of petroleum exploration programmes in Lake Albert, Semliki Basin and the Rhino camp basin areas. Shs800 million was spent on mineral development activities, mainly providing extension services to private sector companies involved in mining wolfram, coltan and gold; issuing licenses, monitoring earthquakes and constructing a seismological station at Hoima. The number of mineral licenses issued increased to 176 from 147.  

PEAP PILLAR 2: ENSURING SECURITY AND GOOD GOVERNANCE
  
Security and good governance are essential not only to the well being of all Ugandans, but also as a pre-condition for business environment.  

Defence / Security:

Progress has been recorded in achieving total peace this year in Northern and Western areas of Uganda. Efforts are now geared towards consolidating this peace by maintaining internal security and implementing special programmes for the disarmament of the Karimojong and pursuit of Kony rebels. These programmes are both going well and UPDF and other security organs must be commended - (Applause). 

Government is committed to professionalising the UPDF and to transforming it into a modern, efficient and accountable Army. Arising from the Uganda Defence Efficiency Study (UDES), Government is re-assessing the country’s security interests and considering the necessary reforms From this review, a Defence White Paper will be produced next year leading to a work plan for the medium and long term. 

Good Governance:

Good governance is a pre-requisite for economic growth. This year, the Inspectorate of Government (IGG) Bill and the Leadership Code Bill were enacted into law by Parliament. The Leadership Code now caters for a wider group of key leaders, closes the loopholes in the earlier code and provides avenue for citizens to access leaders assets and declarations. It also provides for sanctions for non-compliance, including disqualification from office. The budget for the IGG will be increased in 2002/2003, and in the medium term, to ensure full implementation of this law.  

Administration of Justice, Law and Order:

Achievements have been substantial this financial year under the Criminal Justice Reform Programme. Progress has been registered with a backlog of High Court criminal cases falling to two years from seven years. The Prisons pilot farms are providing increased savings on prisoners’ food. Access to justice in rural area was improved through construction and renovation of police stations, prisons, training schools and opening up of rural offices for the Director of Public Prosecution and the Judiciary.  

The backlog of criminal cases at the High Court is expected to be fully cleared in the financial year 2002/03, and the number of people staying on remand will have significantly reduced to less than a year.  An estimated 20,000 cases will be embarked on at the magistrate court level, causing a significant fall in the backlog.  The new police vehicle fleet management system is expected to save 30 percent on fuel consumption.

The Justice, Law and Order Sector has been allocated Shs141 billion for the financial year 2002/03. This is 11 percent more than the current year, providing an extra shs14 billion to start addressing critical needs, including fire-fighting equipment and police vehicles. (Applause). The completion of the criminal justice baseline survey will enable the sector to finalise this development plan.

Public Service Reform:

Mr Speaker, Government is committed to improving the quality of the civil service as a prerequisite to improve service delivery.  Accordingly, in this budget, I am providing Shs17 billion to implement the Pay Reform Strategy for the second year and, therefore, provide further significant salary increments for critical managers and professionals. The budget also provides Shs10 billion to pay wage increments for the lower cadres.  The wage bill next year will therefore rise to Shs627 billion.  I am also providing shs49 billion for pension reliability next financial year. (Applause).

During 2002/03, I look forward to the agreement on staff structures within the districts.  In the interim, the Ministry of Public Service has issued a circular restraining districts from recruiting until after the completion of the on-going restructuring exercise.  

With regard to the provision for the payment of wage arrears during 2002/03 in the absence of verified information from the Ministry of Public Service, the budget for arrears will be based on the performance of the wage arrears during 2001/02.  

A recent study on the Civil Service Pension Reform has recommended a higher annual budget provision for future pension liabilities, and a downward adjustment of the formulae for computing these obligations. Under the present system, Government’s future pension liabilities are completely unaffordable, and thus we must commit ourselves to implementing the necessary reforms to make them affordable.  

Procurement Reform:

An important aspect of administrative reform has been the area of Government procurement.  Responsibility for public procurement was decentralised in line ministries in financial year 2000/01, with the reformed Central Tender Board undertaking a supervisory and regulatory role. Following the formulation of procurement regulations in the financial year 2000/01, a Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Bill was prepared this year, and is now before Parliament. Major issues that are being addressed are the training of the procurement staff, and the staffing of the procurement units in line ministries.

Given the wider activities under this reform, including capacity building, I have provided a budget of Shs5.3 billion to fund procurement reform next financial year.  

PEAP PILLAR 3: MEASURES TO INCREASE THE INCOMES OF OUR PEOPLE

Increases in the incomes of our people in the long term will only come through the creation of jobs as a result of enhanced food productivity and economic growth. Agricultural and rural developments are vital and closely related, and in this regard, the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture is a multi-sectoral plan for increasing rural incomes. I will now outline Government interventions under the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture.

District, Urban and Community Access Roads and Waterways:

An efficient transport system is critical for rural and agricultural development.  Routine and periodic maintenance costing about shs50 billion has been carried out this year on the 30,000 kilometres of the districts, urban and community access roads in Uganda, and the same output is planned next year.

A strategy discussed at the recent Roads Conference is being prepared to address long term development needs. In the water transport sub-sector, work on the building of the Kalangala vessel will soon start.  Navigable routes and landing sites will be surveyed, and lighthouses will be installed on Lake Victoria.  

Agriculture:

Government interventions in support of agricultural development fall under the multi-sectoral plan for the modernisation of agriculture, and the strategic export programme.  

During the current financial year, shs4.4 billion was disbursed as non-sectoral conditional grants to sub-counties in 24 districts. 

National Agriculture Advisory Services (NAADS) implementation started this financial year in six districts. Support to the NAADS programme operations this year amounted to Shs5 billion, and will expand to shs12 billion as activities are initiated in further 8 districts.  

Uganda’s research system and a strategic plan for NARO have been revised with great emphasis to be placed on a demand-driven and decentralised approach to research.

Water for Agricultural Production:

During 2002/03, the budget will provide for the completion of 16 strategic dams/ valley tanks in Kotido, Moroto and Nakapiripirit; completion of 15 dams/valley tanks in Sembabule, Mbarara, Nakasongola, Kiboga, Mubende and Ntungamo; construction of 50 valley tanks countrywide; and the rehabilitation of two old dams in Kumi and Mbarara districts respectively. 

In addition, Government will complete the designs of at least 5 dam sites countrywide; report on test pumping of 20 high-yielding boreholes in Karamoja for windmill installation.  

Finally, a feasibility study on livestock water supply systems in the North and North Eastern Uganda will be carried out.

Rural Energy:

Expansion of energy in rural areas will provide income opportunities and improve the quality of life.  Accordingly, Government has initiated the Energy for Rural Transformation Programme. As part of this, Government is finalising the financing of the Rural Electrification Fund, which is expected to leverage US$375 million of investment in electrification schemes over the next ten years.

Government has signed contracts this year with development partners for rural electrification, which will induce investment in rural growth centres and in development of renewable energy.

Land, Natural Resources and the Environment:

 Increased security of land tenure is an integral component of the Plan for Modernising of Agriculture. The recently completed ten-year Land Sector Strategic Plan provides a framework for land resource management.  Implementation will continue next financial year through: the 18 land tribunals that have been operationalised since January; operations of the district land boards that started this year; finalisation of the National Land and Land use policies and guidelines for undertaking systematic demarcation; modernisation of the land registry; and finalisation of the design of the land information system. 

The Land Fund will be piloted in the Kibaale area, before finalising the rules and regulations. To fund these programmes and activities, I am providing a budget of Shs 9 billion next financial year. 

Under forestry, a total of Shs 1.4 billion has been budgeted for the National Forest Authority (NFA), once it is established. The role of the National Forest Authority will be to manage central government forest reserves on an ecologically sustainable basis. Establishment of NFA and the Forestry Fund will follow the completion of the National Forest Plan, and the enactment of the Forest Bill next financial year. Guidelines to prepare forest management plans will be developed and the district government forest extension staff trained. 

The key success of NEMA’ s programme has been the support to nine districts to develop their District Environment Action Plans. Fifteen districts will be supported next year. The work on the development of rules, regulations and guidelines to ensure that environmental laws are effectively implemented will continue, and the plans for twelve key government institutions will be reviewed for their environmental impact.

Implementation of the Wetland Sector Strategic Plan started this year at the local government level, and local governments developed several Wetland Action Plans. I am allocating Shs 700 million next year under the Poverty Action Fund. This represents a 32 percent increase over this year, and will support and enhance activities, including community awareness campaigns and the finalisation of the national wetlands inventory.  

PEAP PILLAR 4: MEASURES TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF LIFE OF OUR PEOPLE

Primary and Post-Primary Education:

The provision of primary education is a key element in the improvement in quality of life of the poor. Considerable success has been achieved in enhancing access to primary education, with the pupil/teacher ratio falling to 54:1 this year from 57:1 last year. The pupil/classroom ratio fell to 92:1 from 98:1 last year, not withstanding an increase in enrolment to 7.2 million pupils including enrolment to primary schools of 1.1 million pupils. During the year 2001/02, 114,835 teachers were on the payroll compared with 103,404 the previous year. 

Development partners expressed considerable satisfaction at the progress in implementing the UPE during the April 2002 Joint Sector Review. An important performance indicator in this sector is the pupil/teacher ratio, which is targeted to fall further to 50:1 in 2002/03. The Education Standard Agency was recently established to oversee the overall quality of primary and post primary education. 

The curriculum for primary education has been revised with a focus on agriculture and on life skills to enable students to better integrate into the work force. In addition, improved procurement has resulted in the reduction of the unit cost of school textbooks by half on average, down to Shs 5,000 per book. This saving should ensure that our long-term target of providing each people with a textbook would be achieved sooner than later. 

The development programme is currently being finalised for the post-primary education sector. The main programme this year will be construction of schools in 16 districts, costing Shs 2.3 billion. A budget of Shs 1.16 billion has been allocated for the construction of 8 seed schools next year. To cater for the projected increase in the number of secondary school teachers, mainly in grant-aided schools, the wage bill for secondary education has been raised by 29.4 percent to Shs 55 billion next year.

The Health Sector Strategic Plan (HSSP) has continued to guide interventions for reducing morbidity and mortality from the largest cause of ill health in the population and to increase access to health services nation wide. 

A few health indicators demonstrate considerable progress, most notably the HIV/AIDS prevalence rate, which has fallen to 6.1 per cent down from 6.9 per cent in the financial year 1999/2000. The immunisation rates continue to rise with DPT 3 coverage reaching 46 per cent, and plans are in place to introduce two additional vaccines. More than 2,300 nursing assistants have been trained this year, well above the target of 1,800 for the year. Ninety health centres out of the planned target of 100 have been constructed this year, bringing the total number constructed so far to 210.

However, there is an urgent need to address the status of the critical health indicators of infant and maternal mortality, which have remained stagnant for a number of years. While it is recognised that full responsibility for this status does not lie entirely with the mandate of the health sector, other factors, particularly education, water, sanitation and culture have a strong influence on health outcomes. It is very clear that expenditure in the health sector must be prioritised for primary health care, particularly for drugs for the poor. 

I have therefore allocated a 30 per cent increase to Primary Health Care next year, amounting to Shs 22 billion, the largest single increase in the entire budget in recognition of this priority. (Applause). 

Next year, funding for service delivery at Health sub-district level will rise by 35 per cent to Shs14.5 billion, of which 50 per cent will be allocated to essential drugs.  We need to increase efficiency and accountability in drug distribution and use, and reduce unauthorised diversion of drugs to the private clinics.

To strengthen access to adequate reproductive health services, emphasis will be placed on improving the referral system at the Health sub-district level, and increasing the proportion of deliveries attended to by skilled health professionals to a targeted level of 40 per cent.  To this end, provision has been made for upgrading Health Centre IIIs, transport to improve emergency maternal referral systems, and theatre equipment in Health Centre IVs.  In addition, more resources, specifically for reproductive health activities, have been included in the National Service Delivery Programmes.  

The completion of the Primary Health Care payroll cleaning exercise is expected to identify efficiency savings, which will enable further recruitment of essential cadres at the Primary Health Care level. Training of nursing assistants will continue with the provision of shillings two billion next year.  Sensitisation on the role of the proposed Village Health Teams will begin at the national level and in selected districts.  Mbarara University intake will significantly increase, thus expanding in the number of health workers more quickly for this initiative.  

Water  and Sanitation: 

Mr Speaker, as I indicated earlier, access to safe water and sanitation is critical for the health of our population.  The medium term objective of Government is to raise access to safe water in rural areas to 65 per cent, and rural household sanitation to 75 per cent by the year 2005.  

During this year, rural safe water coverage has risen to 55 per cent from 53.8 per cent last year, and over 10 million people can now access safe water.  In the area of rural sanitation, the budget this year provides for the construction of 4,139 school latrines, among the activities.  During 2002/2003, the budget will provide for the protection of 200 springs, the construction of 900 shallow wells and the drilling and the rehabilitating of 2,400 boreholes.  19 schemes for the supply of clean water in small towns were planned and completed this year.  The budget next year will provide for the construction of 50 piped water systems in selected rural growth centres, and for 92 boreholes and 33 gravity flow schemes, with 400 taps in other centres. In addition, 200 public latrines will be constructed.  Nine more water schemes are at a tender stage.  

The National Water and Sewerage Corporation has improved its service coverage in the urban centres from 56 per cent in June 2001 to about 59 per cent at present.  This year, National Water and Sewerage Corporation rehabilitated the water and sewerage system in Jinja and Kabale, and the activities next year include: completion of the plan for increasing water supply in Kampala and Entebbe; the extension of water supply to Malaba town; the refurbishment of Gaba I Water Works to increase water production by 10,000 cubic metres per day, and the improvement of service delivery to the peri-urban areas, through the Increased Stand Posts Program.

Social Development:

A Social Development Sector Strategic Investment Plan (SDSSIP) is being developed to build capacity at community level to promote social-economic development.  The Functional Adult Literacy programme has expanded into 11 new districts.  An extensive programme was conducted for teachers and supervisors, and 149,000 adult learners were enrolled.  During 2002/03, funds are provided for purchase of specialised equipment for the disabled at learning centres.  There will be activities for upgrading of sub-county Community Development Assistants, to enable them to more effectively mobilise the population for social-economic development.

REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE

Projected Revenue and Expenditure outturn for the Financial Year 2001/2002: 
The expected outturn for Uganda Revenue collection this year is Shs 1,207 billion, an increase of 12.3 per cent over last year, but Shs 52 billion short of the approved budget estimate for Shs 1,259 billion.  Collections rose in terms of GDP to 11.3 per cent from 10.7 per cent.  Some items of taxation performed much better than expected, income tax in particular, but other items, particularly taxes on international trade, performed below expectations.  

Total non-URA domestic revenue collection is estimated at shillings 39 billion this year compared to the approved budget estimate of Shs 41.6 billion.  Reforms to non-tax revenue collection by Ministries that I introduced this year are beginning to bear fruits.  However, much remains to be done to realise full potential for this source of revenue, as I shall elaborate later. Loan repayments due by public enterprises to Government have fallen below expectation by Shs 33 billion, partly due to the rollback of the electricity tariff increased last July.  

The outturn for government expenditure excluding donor-financed projects is projected at Shs 1,888 billion this financial year, equivalent to 98.4 per cent performance against the approved budget of Shs 1,918 billion. This under performance was due to domestic resource shortfalls.  

The wage component of the budget is expected to perform at 100 per cent of the approved budget, with over expenditure in the PAF wage Bill compensating for savings in the non-PAF wage expenditures.  Non-wage recurrent expenditures are projected to exceed the approved budget by about 2.5 per cent due to over expenditure in some votes, mainly in the public administration sector.  Over the past year, these over expenditures, coupled with the shortfall in domestic resources, have necessitated cuts in the releases to the non-wage recurrent and development budgets of several ministries.  Overall development spending is projected to be below the approved budget by more than 10 per cent with non-PAF projects performing at 83 per cent of their approved budget. PAF expenditures have performed at 98 per cent of the approved budget.  

Proposed Revenue and Expenditure for Financial Year 2002/2003

Mr Speaker, the Medium Term Expenditure Framework next year will grow at a much-reduced rate, relative to this year.  Our fiscal deficit has widened too fast over the last few years in relation to GDP, financed by large in-flows of Budget support.  The rapid rate of increase, far in excess of the natural growth of the economy, has put upward pressures on the exchange rate, as the donor funds have to a large extent been spent in the domestic economy. These upward pressures are likely to undermine the success of our export efforts. Moreover, the rapid rise in the fiscal deficit, financed by donor support, has increased our reliance on donor support, which has little predictability from year to year. It is only prudent that we reduce our reliance on them in the medium term and long term.

Starting with this budget, I will gradually reduce the fiscal deficit as a ratio of GDP, with a target of about 10.8 per cent of GDP next year from the expected outturn of 11.4 per cent of GDP for the current year. 

I wish to indicate that I am including donor-financed projects in the calculation of the fiscal deficit as they have a macro-economic impact, just as much as the spending by Government. Insufficient data has, until now, made it impossible for us to meaningfully include donor-financed projects within the Medium Term Expenditure Framework spending ceilings. Starting in financial year 2003/2004, all donor-financed projects will be integrated into these ceilings.  

Total revenue for the financial year 2002/2003 is estimated to increase by 14.9 per cent over this year’s expected outturn of Shs 1.433 billion, or 12.3 per cent of GDP. This includes revenue expected to be raised from new tax measures and efficiency gains. I shall describe these measures shortly.  Revenues collected by URA are projected to increase by 15.3 per cent to Shs 1.392 billion.  Non-URA non-tax revenues are projected at shs40.5 billion.

The transfer of responsibility in the financial year 2001/2002 for collection of passport fees to URA has dramatically illustrated the substantial gains to be made in non-tax revenue collections.  Passport fee collections are expected to be 300 per cent above the budget estimate for the year. I therefore intend to transfer the cash collection function to URA for more items currently collected by ministries.  

Another important measure will be the tightening up of the receipting, accounting and reporting arrangements, and the reduction of leakages through embezzlements. I expect these measures to yield an efficiency premium of about 20 per cent.

Our external resources consist of budget support loans and grants, including HIPC’s debt relief and project loans and grants that finance development projects outside the Consolidated Fund. Budget support loans and grants are projected to increase to Shs813 billion next year, from an estimated outturn of Shs783 billion this financial year.  Project loans and grants are projected at Shs632 billion next financial year.  

Total Government expenditure next year, excluding donor projects, will amount to Shs2,038 billion, that is 17 per cent of GDP, consisting of Shs628 billion for wage expenditures, Shs908 billion for other recurrent expenditures, and Shs502 billion for development expenditures. This represents an increase of Shs150 billion or 8 per cent over the expected outturn of this current year.

The expenditure on Poverty Action Fund (PAF) programmes next financial year is expected at Shs682 billion, equivalent to 35.5 per cent of the budget, compared to Shs611 billion projected this current year, or 35.1 percent of expenditure.  

With domestic revenue of Shs 1,433 billion and total expenditure including donor projects of Shs 2,696 billion, the fiscal deficit next year is projected at Shs 1,263 billion, which is 10.8 per cent of GDP. This will be financed by Shs861 billion in external grants and Shs 402 billion in net external and domestic financing. This comprises external financing of Shs 462 billion and negative Shs 60 billion of domestic financing, which includes arrears payments, savings in the banking system, and non-bank financing.

Having gone through that process of explaining the proposed revenue and expenditure, and also having gone through how we intend to cover the deficit, allow me to pause for a short break, and attend to the constitutional requirements.

The budgetary proposals of the accounting bodies have been submitted in compliance with Article 155(2) of the Constitution. In compliance with Article 155(3) of the Constitution, the Government has made recommendations on them. I will now lay these on the Table. (Applause). 

Again, following the requirements of the law, in order for me to submit a complete national budget for your consideration in accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the budget provisions of these self-accounting bodies incorporated into the Medium Term Expenditure Framework are in accordance with the resource envelope conveyed to the self-accounting bodies in the course of our discussions, and presented to Parliament as per the Budget Act.

Schedule of Indebtedness:  

In accordance with the provisions of section 13(1) and (2) of the Budget Act – I repeat – of the Budget Act, I hereby lay before the House the Statement on: 

(i) Government total indebtedness as at 31 March 2002; and 

(ii) The grants that the Government of the Republic of Uganda received during the financial year 2001/2002.  

With respect to Section 13(3) of the same Act, I am pleased to announce that during the financial year 2001/2002, Government did not guarantee any loans and provide grants to any individual or statutory body. Details of the utilisation and the performance of each loan and grant, including the extent of the achievements of the objective targets will be provided in the policy statements of the responsible ministers. (Applause).

Taxation and Tax Measures

Focus for tax policy in 2002/2003 will be on the objectives of:

(i) stimulating the economy;
(ii) strengthening tax administration;
(iii) raising tax revenue to meet our rising expenditure needs and reducing the fiscal deficit.

As I earlier indicated, strengthening tax administration is the main avenue open to us for mobilising extra resources. URA, as the body responsible for collecting tax, requires reorganisation and strengthening.  In an effort to strengthen the Authority, funds have been allocated for next financial year for the purchase and installation of an integrated modern computer system and for other such equipment, including scanners.  

Nevertheless, we face a resource gap of shs20 billion for next financial year.  As the efficiency measures for URA will have their main impact only in the medium term, I have no alternative but to make modest adjustments in tax rates in order to bridge the gap.

I shall now proceed to outline taxation and tax measures for next financial year.

Value Added Tax:

Mr Speaker, information and communication technology have become important world over for processing and accessing data.  It is important that Uganda should not be left out of development of information technology. I am therefore removing VAT on computers and accessories to promote development of information technology. (Applause).

Government Contracts:

Mr Speaker, some contracting companies have been undertaking Government contracts when they have not registered for VAT. As a result, they have been under-cutting tax-paying firms  In order to create an even playing field, future Government contracts with businesses, both at the centre and local governments, will only be awarded to VAT registered persons.  

Excise Duty On Local Goods:

Mr Speaker, in order to stimulate consumption of beer, the excise duty is being reduced from 70 percent to 60 percent. (Laughter).  

Motor Vehicles and License Fees:

Mr Speaker, I am raising excise duty by 5 percent points on all vehicles imported except commercial vehicles.  The details are contained in the Finance Bill.  This measure will generate additional revenue of Shs3 billion

Mr Speaker, to ameliorate the problems faced by dealers holding franchises in new cars because of limitation in the warehousing period, I am proposing that the warehousing period be extended to 24 months from the current maximum of 12 months.  The details are contained in the Customs Management (Amendment) Bill. 

Mr Speaker, many second-hand vehicles imported into Uganda are environmentally hazardous -(Laughter)- not road worthy, and it is difficult to determine their value. Accordingly, with effect from September 2002, all second-hand vehicles imported into the country will have first to be inspected and certified by competent authority in the country of origin.  This is to keep in line with the other East African countries.  Details are contained in the Finance Bill, and will also be published in the newspapers. 

I have adjusted various fees and licenses under the Traffic Act with regard to fees and charges applicable to motor vehicles. The details are contained in the Finance Bill.  This measure will generate revenue of Shs6 billion.

Fuel:

Mr Speaker, fuel excise duty rates have been constant for the last fours years at Shs580 per litre for petrol, Shs370 per litre for diesel, Shs200 per litre for paraffin, despite the fact that consumer prices have risen by 16 percent since then. The current specific rate on petrol of Shs580 per litre is being adjusted by Shs30 to 610 per litre. (Interjections). This modest adjustment will partly make up for the loss in the real value of the rates since 1998. This measure will take effect from 15 June this year, and is expected to raise Shs7 billion.

Polythene bags and plastic containers:

Mr Speaker, the difficulties in disposal of polyethylene and plastic containers have given rise to serious environmental concerns, including blockage of drainage and soil degradation. Material action is required in order to encourage producers and consumers to economize on the use of these bags and bottles, and to develop more environmentally friendly alternatives.  I am accordingly imposing an excise duty of 20 percent on polythene bags and plastic containers.  The details are contained in the Finance Bill. (Applause).  

Customs Duties:

Mr Speaker, no changes are proposed in the tariff structure, however, adjustments to HS Code duty rates are proposed to take into account development under the East African Community, and also to accommodate changes decided by the World Customs Cooperation Council. The details are contained in the Finance Bill.

Second-hand goods:

Mr Speaker, you may recall that Uganda was a leading producer of cotton, with a vibrant textile industry. Many Ugandans were employed in cotton production and textile industry, and expert tailors had also emerged.  This was a source of livelihood to many families.  Due to our past turmoil, all this fell in ruins.  Attempts have been made to revive the textile sector, but this is being undermined by the importation of used clothing. For the textile sector to develop, there must be sufficient demand locally.  It is in this regard, Mr Speaker, that I am increasing the current excise duty by a modest 5 percentage points. (Interruptions). The details are contained in the Finance Bill.

Sugar:

Mr Speaker, it has come to our attention that sugar-producing countries are providing heavy subsidies to their producers. As a result, importers are landing sugar into the country at a very low price, thereby unfairly undermining local industries. To counter this uncompetitive practice, I am increasing excise duty on imported sugar from 10 percent to 20 percent. (Applause).  

Bank of Uganda be exempt from income tax:

It is a worldwide practice, Mr Speaker, for central banks to be exempt from income tax provided it annually transfers its annual profits to Government after appropriate contribution to reserves.  Exempting central banks makes no difference in principle to the amount of Government receipts. While exemption reduces tax revenue, there is corresponding increase in the transfer of dividends to Government.  For the above reasons, an amendment is proposed to list Bank of Uganda as an exempt institution under the Income Tax Act. Details are contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill.

Livestock Development Levy:

Mr Speaker, a 15 percent levy is to be charged on FOB/FOR - FOB is freight on board, or Freight On Rail – on all raw hides and skins of bovine animals leaving Uganda.  Details are contained in the Finance Bill.

East African Community:

We have fully participated in the development of the East African Community and we remain committed to the integration process.  In the spirit of the East African Community, student visa fees for nationals from Kenya and Tanzania studying in Uganda are abolished. (Applause).

All these measures will take effect from 1 July except fuel, which takes immediate effect; that is as of 15 June.  

Conclusion:

Mr Speaker, financial year 2002/03 presents a major challenge in enhancing the implementation of the President’s manifesto.  Over the next year, and for the medium term, efforts to develop and reposition Uganda’s increasing export for higher quality production and greater competitiveness in the region, and International markets could be much more enhanced. This is critical to the achievements of Uganda’s long-term goal of eradicating absolute poverty by the year 2017. Our development partners are commended for their initiative in promoting these efforts, but these have to be sustained and deepened.  

I wish to reiterate Government’s commitment to reduce the cost of public administration, promote reform for great accountability and efficiency in all public sector operations, and aim for maximum efficiency of our programmes.  These are matters on which both the Executive and the Legislature are fully agreed. This is the only way to achieve our goals of reducing our dependence, achieving a higher growth, ensuring better standards of living of our people and coping with the ever increasing challenges in the globalised environment of the 21st century.

Mr Speaker, I want once again to express my satisfaction with the co-operation of Parliament in the process of preparing this budget as provided for in the Budget Act.  In order to achieve our mutual objective, I call upon honourable members to be in the forefront, working with the Executive and the local governments to ensure the successful implementation of this budget once they have approved it. In this connection, urgent consideration and approval of the Public Finance and Accountability Bill will be critical in ensuring the desired budget discipline.  

I highly commend this budget to you. I beg to move. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Hon. Members, as I indicated before, the function of presenting the budget estimates constitutionally belongs to His Excellency the President. Although he delegated this function to the Minister of Finance who has presented the speech, His Excellency the President wishes to make further remarks and recommendations on the Budget. Therefore, it is my pleasure to invite His Excellency the President to make his remarks on the Budget.

H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Museveni): The Speaker of Parliament, hon. Members, and all of you distinguished persons who are here, the NRM, from the bush days, had two broad aims - or rather three. 

The first one was to get rid of the dictatorship of UPC. (Laughter). That dictatorship of UPC had been started in 1966 when Obote and Idi Amin, acting together, overthrew the Constitution, which we had all agreed to in 1962. That one we did; it is finished; it is irreversible; it is accomplished! 

The second target was that after we had got rid of the criminals of UPC – (Interjections)- yes, they were criminals! Maybe a few who are here did not participate in the crimes –(Laughter)- but their leaders participated in verifiable crimes, and they qualify to go to where they are trying Milosevic in the Hague, instead of being in Lusaka. But because of my desire to repair the country, I ignored these people. I ignored Idi Amin, I ignored Obote, I did not follow it up but we can follow it up if they are interested – (Interjection). Reconciliation, I am glad to hear that –(Laughter). But this is not reconciliation; it is a pardon, because you pardon wrongs. You know what those people did to our country! Anyway that is not why I came here. I am just telling you the phases of the NRM’s targets. 

Phase one was to get rid of the dictatorship and to ensure that the dictatorship will never come back; and it will never come back! Whatever the games, whatever the stories, that dictatorship will never come back here and I can tell you this with some degree of knowledge. 

Secondly, our vision was that after we get rid of the dictatorship, we revive the economy. Because the country was torn up, the economy had shrunk by 40 percent. Since 1971, inflation was 240 percent. My friend Dr Adonia Tiberondwa was “Minister of Shortages” although he was being called the “Minister of Industries”. I have seen his articles in the papers recently. Now we know that he was the Minister of Shortages. At the time that was the situation. 

When we took over in 1986, our aim was to launch a minimum recovery program so that you could go by bus from one part of Uganda to another; you could go by taxi; you could walk in the streets without being killed by criminals, by the army, by the soldiers. We set out to make soldiers human beings, not animals, to tame the army, to ensure that people are peaceful. 

I am glad people who like beer applauded the Minister very loudly when he said that now you can drink freely without any more hindrances. There is a lot of beer now available in the factories, the sodas, the soap, the goods in the shops are plenty, both imported and local. This was the minimum recovery program we launched. These budgets that we have been reading here are all within the framework of the minimum recovery program. We just want life to be normal.

However, we had a third and more strategic vision, which was to transform Uganda from a backward society characteristic of Africa. African countries are mainly backward - pre-industrial. People stay in the rural areas, they do not have education, and they suffer from preventable diseases, diseases that are no longer known in other parts of the world. The other time when I went to Arua, people were suffering from bubonic plague! Bubonic plague was last heard of in Europe in the 14th Century. Here in Paidha, there was a problem of bubonic plague because of under-development! 

It was therefore our intention to eradicate these, and we said so in our program, especially point number five of our Ten-Point Program, which talked of building an economy which is integrated, independent and self sustaining. These days I do not hear our commentators talking much about that issue, but when we were in the retreat in Kyakwanzi, I reminded the ministers that this was our target.  

After the last elections, I composed a task force of technocrats, and later on when the Cabinet was formed, ministers joined them. This task force worked with me to evolve a priority list of activities that will usher us into this first phase of the transformation.  

As I addressed Parliament here the other day, I said there are two big problems with African economies. The first problem is lack of market access to Europe. You remember I talked to you about this problem of market access. The markets here are narrow. You know it, and it is because the people are still poor. The European markets are closed, or they have been closed until recently, so are the American markets. 

I just came this morning from the meeting of FAO, and I had to take the exception of expressing reservations on the declaration, which was being put out.  I said I have a reservation about that declaration because when we met in Rome, again in the FAO meeting in 1996, that time I was a bit busy. I did not pay close attention to the declaration.  And they said in the declaration that by 2015, we should have cut by a half the population of the hungry people in the whole world.  

Now this time, the Director General had called us to tell us that no, it seems we are not going to meet this target because in order to cut by half the number of people who are hungry by 2015, we need to reduce the hungry people by the figure of 22 million per annum. But now, according to him, we have been reducing the hungry people in the whole world by only 8 million. Therefore, according to him, we will not meet this target, and then in the declaration they said, you know, we should need more funding by the donors and all the usual story.  

Now, I took an exception. I said “no, I do not think this is –” Fortunately there was paragraph No.10 in that declaration which talked a little bit about market access. So, I put up my hand and said, “Mr Chairman, I think we should emphasize this paragraph 10 much more.”  Then they said, “If you are not so happy, you can express a reservation.” And I did!  I am on record that I did not agree wholly with that declaration. 

Now, first problem is market access.  I told them in Rome, I said - because they were talking about food security.  Now what does food security mean?  We produce food in two ways - this is what I told them. One way is to produce food for subsistence so that you feed yourself and your children.  Now, we have been doing that for the last 9,000 years.  We have been producing food so that we feed ourselves.

There is another third way of producing food, which I did not recommend to FAO because I did not think we could manage it.  This was the method that Jesus used when he turned water into wine.  I am sure FAO are not able to do that, and certainly I am not able to do that.  So I did not recommend this to FAO, and I do not recommend it to honourable members because none of you has got the ability to turn water into wine or to feed 5,000 people with two loaves as Jesus did – (Laughter).  For us, unfortunately, we must produce actually.

So, one way is to produce food for subsistence, which is what our people have been doing here.  The problem is that when you produce food for subsistence, you have got other needs, which cannot be produced on the farm.  You must have clothes, which you cannot produce on the farm; you must send your child to school for which you must pay; you must buy drugs, which, apart from omululuza and these other things, you cannot make on the farm.  So, that means that the method of producing food for subsistence is no longer viable in the modern world.  When we stick to producing food for subsistence, that is a recipe for poverty, that is shorthand for poverty.  

Therefore, I told those people that the only way we can produce food is to produce food commercially.  You produce food for sale and you sell, some of it you eat and you get enough money to solve all those other needs which I have talked about: education, health and so on - building yourself a house. 

Now, that brings the question of the market.  Where do you sell what you produce?  If you produce and you cannot sell, then you cannot sustain the production.  You know the problems we have been having: produce maize, there is no market, the price collapses; produce entangawuzi, there is no market, the price collapses; produce milk, there is no market. For instance milk, we pushed milk production from 200 million litres per annum in 1986, it is now 800 million litres per annum.  How much milk is consumed in the towns for the whole year?  Only 22 million litres!  So, how will this industry be sustained?

Now, you remember when I talked to you here the other time, I told you about the problems of the markets in Africa.  I do not want to repeat that.  So, in this term of my presidency, now that I have settled some of the other issues, and that we have achieved this minimum recovery - because this one was achieved, everything is plentiful.  But what are not plentiful are jobs.  

Employment is not plentiful. Why? Because the sort of activities which we have covered do not create sufficient employment to deal with our country’s problems  For instance, we have built a lot of houses as you can see.  The town now goes from here up to Kajansi. This is Kampala now. Kampala was at Najjanankumbi.  I know it because that is where we fought with Obote’s people in 1986.  But now you find Kampala at Kajansi on this side.  That is growth; that is tremendous growth!

If you look at the figures, construction is expanding by 10 percent per annum. Very fast! But how many jobs does construction create?  You have a few jobs when a house is being built, after it is built, the jobs are finished! Construction cannot create jobs in the same way as a textile factory can do.  

Jobs created by construction are erratic.  When there is a road being built from here to the other place – Tirinyi - from Iganga to Tirinyi, there is some work.  Some people come and work.  When the road is finished, they say, “All of you go home.” So, construction is not a type of activity that can create employment that is sustainable, that is durable.  

Boda bodas; how many boda bodas do we have now? The transport sector has grown tremendously but how many jobs can be created by the transport sector?  It is the boda boda person and in the bus, it is a driver and a conductor - the jobs are finished!  So, how can you employ people by just the transport sector growing only?  

The areas that can create employment are factories and services.  When you have got a big hotel like this Sheraton - a lot of children are working there. I always see them there: the waiters, the cooks, and the ones in the rooms That is something reasonable and durable. Once you attract a service company like a hotel, then you can know that “I have attracted permanent and durable jobs”. If you attract a textile factory, then you will know that, “I have got jobs for my people” - 1000 of them, 2000, whatever the number is. That is what we need to do. Apart from market access, selling outside, this is what we should demand. 

When you go to meet the Europeans, do not talk only about “mooltiparty, mooltiparty”! Okay, talk about mooltiparty and say, “we want mooltiparty, but we also want markets”. Please, I am not against people for multiparty, because we had multiparty here before and it failed. In addition to multiparty, ask for markets. I told you, hon. Members, Mr Speaker, please, when you go to the Parliamentary Speaker”s Association, when you are talking about whatever you are talking about, say, “by the way, markets, markets” (Applause). Because that is where the growth will come from. 

I am glad my message was picked up by some, because everybody was congratulating me, those people who were in that meeting, because they have all come to a dead end, some of them were saying, “you know the problem is that the Europeans and the Americans are not spending 0.7 of GDP.” But this was agreed, I do not know where, but even if you spend 0.7 of GDP, for how long? We have been on that recipe since 1960. Some of those countries have been independent since 1960, some of them since 1958! 

The other day in Rome, I was very proud. I stood up and said, “Uganda is among the only nine countries in Africa, which can feed themselves. (Applause). At least I had something to say. (Laughter). And what does feeding yourself mean? It means either you produce the food yourself or you have got the money to buy it. In Africa, only nine countries can feed themselves in that sense. Fortunately, Uganda is among them. 

So, please, press for markets. Those people should stop double language. They preach free trade to us; they practice protectionism. (Applause). This is against decency. You cannot preach a religion you do not believe in. 

I was a very active Christian myself in 1960. I was even president of the Scripture Union. In 1965, at a conference in Mwiri, I developed a difference with the Balokole. Since then, I pulled out and I do not pretend to be a mulokole to preach -(Laughter). I am a very good Christian but I do not preach the balokole ideology, because I have some difference with them. So, how can somebody preach a religion he does not believe in? 

You preach free trade – if I give a little subsidy here today, aid will be cut off. “You are not living up to the conditionality” and that kind of thing. You are the ones who are subsidising inefficient farmers. I am a farmer myself, Yoweri Museveni, son of Kaguta; I am a farmer - (Laughter). I have no subsidy from anybody or from Government but I am surviving. You come and see my farm. Why can”t those Europeans and the Americans be left alone to farm? If they do not want to do that, let them shut up and stop preaching to others. (Applause). We cannot go on like this; it is impossible! So, that is one point.

The second point is value addition. I must congratulate the Americans and the Europeans. They have at least opened for us 1,800 products. This AGOA - I heard that a professor from Makerere University was saying that AGOA was bogus. Well, I do not know who is bogus, AGOA or the professor? (Laughter) Because for the people of Africa to get a chance to export to the big market of the United States tax free, quota free and then somebody calls it bogus, especially a professor! If it was Mr Kaguta who does not know much about what is happening in the world, I would forgive, but the professor to say AGOA is bogus! I am told that he even had a seminar. 

Actually this was in a seminar of Members of Parliament. There was a seminar of Members of Parliament and there was a professor who came and told you that AGOA was bogus. I read it in the papers. Sometimes I glance, when I have time, in Mr Pike”s paper and the other one of Wafula Oguttu. I saw it. A professor is saying that AGOA is bogus! Anyway, those are the wonders of Africa. 

Now, this AGOA – the Europeans have said something about EBA (Everything But Arms). Let us take them at their word. Once I heard this - you remember I left for the US on the 4th of May and I did not come back until the 19th - I was meeting everybody that was willing to meet me and I made so many contacts. In fact, the Americans were joking that they should give me a right to vote because I had been there for too long. But I was there in order to make links for my country. These people are willing to come, quite a number of them are willing to come, but they do not want to be inconvenienced by our officials and our political class. These are very rich people. 

There is a group called Wal-Mart, which has a business size of US$220 billion; that is half the GDP of the whole of Africa - one company! Now, a person like that one comes and he is kept waiting by some little fellow in Uganda Investment Authority. (Laughter). “You come back tomorrow”; “I am still thinking about it”; “fill the forms”  Fill the forms for what? You should just stand up and welcome such a person and give him everything he needs there and then. But instead you say, “come back later, there is no work permit.” That really shows that you do not know who you are! 

The Banyankole have got a saying that goes, “Twingane etuura ahamarwa”. When people are drunk, they say, “how much better are you than me? We are all the same when we are drunk.” But when you are sober you will discover -(Laughter)- that if you are 5ft, you are still 5ft and the other man who was 6ft is still 6ft. So please, stop the equality of the drunkards. Those people have already accumulated money; we need their money here. I do not want any of you, even the Members of Parliament, delaying these people.  

The other project, which took seven years, the one of AES, it was a very big shame! I had to explain it when I was in America. Everybody was asking, “by the way, why did the other project take so long?” And I had to cover up and beat about the bush and say, “you know, our people are still learning how to do business and now they have learnt.” Otherwise there is no good reason why an infrastructure project should take seven years! That shows that the people of that country do not know what they are doing. 

I have so many contacts in Europe and in South Africa and these contacts can bear fruit very quickly. For instance, once I was in Maputo, not long ago, I think it was the year 2000, just before last year’s elections. I was in a SMART partnership meeting in Maputo. The other SMART partnership meeting I attended was held in Munyonyo. I spoke and somebody came and approached me after my speech. He said, “You seem to know something about business.” I said, “yes, I know –(Laughter)- and I am looking for businessmen.  You come and visit me.  Give me your card.” And he gave me his card. 

I take the cards of businessmen and I keep them myself. These are not my own businesses; my own business is cattle, as you know. These are businesses for your children. And because I cannot rely on some people – you give him a card he loses it - I keep these cards myself. I have got a big list of addresses. I pick up the telephone and ring these contacts. I ask them, “when are you coming over? You said you are coming, when is that?” And when they get here, they are delayed by my partners! That must stop. 

Teziteera nzigye zikanga,” the Banyankole say. This is not how you catch grasshoppers. When you want to catch grasshoppers, you move carefully. When you approach them walking anyhow, they will fly away. 

And we should strive for more success in adding value. I will tell you more stories about adding value. You do not know how much you have been cheated. Suppose we were adding value to our coffee, we would be getting much more. For instance, for the coffee we are selling to China now, I do not want to tell you how much money we are getting. I will tell you some other time. We are getting much more money now, per kilo. That coffee we are selling to China as roasted and soluble coffee, we are getting much more money for it, per kilo. But this is just a small beginning. Suppose we convert all this coffee into finished coffee, what will happen? We shall get more foreign exchange. 

Those factories that would come up would employ your sisters and brothers. Your Minister here would not be reading a Budget of Shs 1,000 billion, because you would have more units to tax. He would be reading a Budget of Shs 10,000 billion. That is what will transform your country and that is what the Movement wants to do. That is what I want to do. This was our target in the bush – (Applause) - it is our target today. So please, join me in this war. This is a war. 

That brings me to the question of quality. My American and Canadian friends advised me quietly.  I will not mention the country, but some people from a certain African country went to the United States and said “you come, buy from us; we are making very good food products”. I do not want to mention the food products in case you guess. They even had photographs of the production line of that factory. What was there? People working without gloves in the food factory; women with this hair from the salon, falling like this -(Laughter). The Americans said, “nga tufude banange! Eh!” 

Somebody working in the food industry in Europe is like a doctor. You have gloves! Supposing the hair falls in the food! Ebiviri byaffe ebyo ebilala! Ebiviri byaffe ebirungi nyo, funga! You must put things on your mouth so that you do not breathe on the food. You must check the health of everybody in the factory in case you have got T.B and so on!  We are now entering into serious business. This usual game here will not do.

I saw a law being brought about Uganda Bureau of Standards. That law must be very serious. Anybody working with food must be healthy; you must follow all the hygienic conditions. 

When we brought the Americans to look at one of our textile factories, they were even looking at the floor to see whether there was dust there. If it is dusty, they will not take the textiles because it may cause allergy to somebody in the United States.  Ebyamwe tebikyakola! We must take a complete new line of seriousness. The chances are there, the chances are plenty, but we must now be very serious.

We have the problem of transport on the sea. I am talking with President Moi and President Mkapa about that one; we shall find a solution. 

I was informed when I was in the US that a ship from Hong Kong gets to New York in 15 days and one from Mombasa takes 45 days. “Why?” I asked. They said, “first of all, there are very few things to pick and then they go on stopping.” The ship picks goods - it is like a matatu - it goes from Mombasa to Dar es Salaam and it picks something small, and it goes from there to Durban! But we shall find a solution to that. 

The ships in Hong Kong, because there is a big volume of trade, fill in one port and they go at once, they do not stop anywhere. But we shall find a solution to that. I will discuss with President Moi and President Mkapa and we shall get a solution. Let each one work very seriously on our side here.

The question of second hand clothes and second hand shoes must be tackled now. The Minister has put a small tax of 5 per cent from the previous year.  I would like everybody to politically understand this issue. Ugandans consume 220 square metres per annum and 162 million square meters of that are second-hand clothes. There is no domestic market for these factories that you want to come here.  

When you buy second-hand clothes, of course you buy them cheaply, although not so cheaply. Those people who import second-hand clothes first of all cheat you. They buy them at one dollar and sell them to you at 30 dollars - much more than what they bring them in for. That is a fact. They really rip you off, as they say.  

More seriously, by buying the second hand clothes, you are killing your own textile factory where your daughter, your sister and your brother should be working. You are killing that factory. We tried to calculate; even if you say one square metre is one dollar, this means that the internal market here is approximately 220 million dollars for textiles.  That is very big entandikwa. If these companies were able to get that money locally here, then they would put up capacity to compete even abroad.  

I saw somebody arguing in the papers that we should let second-hand clothes come here and then export the new clothes to those people who have got dollars. My friend, charity begins at home. You should start with what you have because that one is sure. You have your own market, your own market is sure; you will be able to get it.  

The same goes for shoes. I do not know how many shoes are coming in here, but in order to support our textile factories, support our shoe factories and leather factories, we must spend less on these second-hand items The benefits are incomparable.  

This is myopia. In the past I did not tackle second-hand clothes, the reason was that there was no local production. There was no point in interfering with the second-hand clothes when there was no local production of textiles. But now there is local production, and it can pick up, so we should encourage it.

On corruption, I am beginning to get information that there are some people who go and scare our investors. Somebody comes and wants to invest here, and an official working somewhere goes and says, “Unless you give me shares in your company, I will not give you this license”.  I am really looking for them – I am bloodthirsty for that type of person. 

The other time I told you this through Dr Kazibwe, who unfortunately is indisposed today, when she came to address you on my behalf, and I am now informing the investors. I think the investors have also lost confidence. Maybe they think that all Ugandans are corrupt; why don’t they explain to these people.  

I am telling you now, if any such person makes such a proposal to you, I have got my assistants whom I appointed recently, Mr Onegi Obel and Susan Muhwezi.  You ring them direct and tell them that so and so told me like this.  You will see, especially if you could have a tape recording of what he or she told you. Then I will be able to - but even we can look at the circumstances, to see whether he was meeting you in a bar.  What was he doing there?  

Please, that must stop and I am going to investigate backwards some stories which I am beginning to pick that so and so wanted this.  If you want to have a company, build up your own capacity. Work for money patiently until you are able to invest.  Do not be a parasite on other people! Certainly do not be obstacles to your own country’s development.

Two final points or three.  In this financial year, as the Minister indicated, we are going to emphasize industrial research also.  In agricultural research, we have done very well.  We have got very good products of research, but unfortunately they are not propagated to the villages.  We have got good seeds, good breeding materials but the peasants do not know about it.  

Once I went to Galamba - Galamba is very near here about 17 miles from here - and those people were still growing the old coffee, which I left with them when I was in Luwero Triangle, and yet at Kawanda here we have got new varieties of coffee that yield much more. So, this is a duty to the Members of Parliament and the chairmen of the districts, and all the political leaders to ensure that they propagate the results of agricultural research to the peasants.

Industrial research has not been so much.  So, I have talked to the Minister of Finance and the other responsible Ministers, we want to re-build the laboratory at Wandegeya, the natural chemotherapic centre where we can do research in medicinal herbs, and also maybe develop an ultra modern laboratory at Makerere Food Science faculty, so that we can know the food values of our foods and be able to promote them.  

For instance, when I was in America, I promoted Uganda Waragi.  Never mind that I do not drink myself.  But those Americans were surprised.  “This gin is from bananas?”  I said, “Yes, it is from bananas.”  “It is a miracle!”  They do not know that bananas can produce gin. Then the American Minister for Agriculture, Madam Vonman said, “but it is not indicated that it is from bananas!” 

You can see now the poor salesmanship of our people, because, if it is indicated, then it will become more attractive. Banana gin should be indicated!  But you see, “Uganda Waragi” they think everybody knows ‘Waragi’ or ‘Uganda’ even!  But if you said “Uganda Waragi from bananas”, then that captures somebody’s imagination. Then somebody may even come to Uganda because of the Waragi! So, you should promote these products. 

Now, I promoted the millet because I told the Americans - I said, “you know why African tribes are very tall?”  There are some very tall basket ballers especially from southern Sudan.  There is a man called Manut. He is I think 7ft or 8ft tall.  When I said, “do you know why African tribes are tall?”  They said “no”. I said, “It is because they eat millet.”  They said “what?”  I said, “They eat millet.” (Laughter).  

But when I came back here - there is somebody who packs millet flour at Maganjo. My wife is the one who normally drinks it.  I was not drinking it.  So, I tried to see whether I could promote it - full of stones! (Laughter)  So, since I do not want to be sued for breaking an American’s tooth - because when I studied law briefly, I studied law for only one year, there was a case they were calling vicarious liability.  There was this case where somebody was selling something in a bottle and then he put a snail in.  It was beer and then he put a snail. And when they opened, somebody fainted - something like that – so please, I cannot promote this millet of Maganjo. But I would like to meet these people. My staff - if they could organize for me to meet, them so we can help them. 

I think the best way – I can see it is not a problem of the Maganjo people because for them they are millers. The problem starts backwards with the production. The producers put the millet in the soil. So, the Americans asked me, they said, “Mr Museveni, some of us have been to Uganda, but the problem with Uganda is that - yes, you have got a lot of production and your country is very fertile, but your producers are small and scattered, and we have no time to go on chasing all these scattered people. For us we like to deal with plantations, big producers.” So I said, “Do not worry, we are forming producers associations like the one we have already formed for beef.” We have already formed beef farmers association. In fact we had formed it before. 

Now, what should happen is that nobody should belong to this association unless he is going to conform to the standards. Now you can work backwards and tell these millet people first to join the association.  Secondly, if you join the association, you must harvest in this way, you must dry in this way.  If you do not do any of this, we are not going to buy your product. So we can systematize and really get money out of all these wonderful products we have.

Finally on security, it is improving all around.  The ADF was finished in the west.  That area is now completely peaceful and the army is on the mountain permanently to ensure that it does not relapse. Now recently, we had an understanding with the Sudan Government, and we went to chase Kony inside southern Sudan.  The operation against Kony is going on very well.  

First of all, we chased him out of the areas where he was in Lubangatek. That is near Juba. Then he tried to go to the Imatong Mountains. We flushed him from there.  They are now scattered: Kony is going to go towards Tolit in Sudan.  One group with Otti entered Atyak area two days ago, but we are following it, and they are dropping the abductees.  You see as they run, they drop the abductees because they cannot cope with the running.

For instance, yesterday 47 children and 43 women reported at Atiak. They have been reporting in small groups. Some were being picked in their trails. One time we picked an infant of about 2 weeks. I think the mother had dropped him when they were running. 

We have also captured a lot of equipment from them and handed it to the Sudan Army – because they are the ones who originally gave the guns to them. So we gave them back to them. I have all the lists here but I do not want to tire you. Up to now, we have killed 141 of those bandits in the last two months of operation. Kony”s rebellion will be over because whatever he does, we have got a very big force and the Army is now much better trained and better briefed than in the past. We are going to solve this problem. 

I heard some people, including my friend, hon. Mao, talking of peace talks with Kony. Please, I do not want to hear of talks with Kony. You remember you even involved me in a very unprincipled thing of giving amnesty to murderers, which was not my view. For me, a murderer should be answerable. But as a compromise, I agreed because there was a lot of pressure that we give amnesty. Because Uganda is not my home, I am just a servant, in spite of my own opinions, if a significant number of people say, “amnesty”, “amnesty”, “Amin amnesty”, “amnesty Kony”, “amnesty Obote” –(Laughter)- then whom will you punish? If somebody can kill half a million people and you give him amnesty, how will you punish the one who has killed only one person? What logic is in it? But because I wanted peace, I said, “okay”. I even signed the Amnesty Bill; it was not my opinion. You know what my opinion is, but I compromised. 

But in spite of that Amnesty Bill, Kony went on killing people. ADF went on killing people. They have now been forced out by our effort. So, much work - you do not know the mountains, which our people have been climbing. The Imatong Mountains are almost as high as the Rwenzoris. Now that he is in a tight corner, hon. Mao comes and says, “peace talks”. 

There will be no peace talks with Kony. Kony should come if he wants to. (Applause). He has killed people long enough. Let him come. If he surrenders, according to the amnesty, which I signed, nothing will be done because that is what we said, that is if he comes voluntarily. But to say that we should sit down with Kony and talk peace! Talk what now? Say, “Kony cut less lips of people –(Laughter)- or cut fewer ears or infect less children with AIDS?” All these children who are coming have got AIDS. Those criminals infected them! These are the type of people who should be tried in the Hague!  

This morning I was watching television and some four thugs were being tried for raping and sex enslavement. Here, the hon. Member of Parliament is saying that – in Africa, while they are calling for mooltiparty, they are calling for forgiving the people who have committed crimes against humanity. What sort of people are these? 

So, hon. Mao, there will be no talks with Kony. He can come if he wants. He has been sending feelers that he wants to talk; he wants this and that. They drop letters. A fellow called Koyero and Besigye”s campaigner called Opoka are there, but we shall get them. 

Obote wrote a letter to Kony thinking that Sudan was heaven and that we shall never go there. We have got all the letters here now. Like we climbed the Rwenzori to find out those who were dealing with the ADF, now we know who was dealing with Kony. We may not say it for the sake of peace, but we shall expose them. Thank you very much and I hope you support the Budget of my Minister. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President, on behalf of Parliament, I thank you for having done your work in time. I also thank you for the ideas you have given us to improve the methods of our production so that we can attract a wider market. Now that His Excellency has presented the Budget, it is for us, as Parliament, to consider it and do the needful. I am sure with the Budget Act in force, it will now be possible to deal with this Budget earlier than before. As you know, by 31st August each Committee must have submitted its report to the House. So, instead of waiting for October, I think by August or September we shall have done our part. 

In order to expedite this, honourable Members, I now request you, after we have adjourned, or maybe tomorrow, to register for the Sessional Committees which you want to serve on during this Session so that next week we have the Committees and we can start our work. Otherwise, we cannot start on our work unless we have the Committees. With this we come to the end of today”s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow 14th at 10.00 a.m. to consider the Vote on Account. 

(The House rose at 4.46p.m and adjourned until Friday, 14 June 2002 at 10.00 a.m.)
 

