Tuesday, 15 June 2010 

Parliament met at 11.03 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this meeting and I hope you have been able to digest the State of the Nation Address as well as the budget that was read last week; and that you are ready to work.

Secondly, I would like to adjust the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement. So, we shall make that adjustment during the course of this morning. 

I also want to inform you that during the recess, I went to China and attended a meeting of the Global Summit of Women, which was the 20th anniversary. It was the first time Uganda was attending. It was a meeting for economically powerful people – of course, I did not fall in that category –(Laughter)- I had gone there to lobby for cheap vaccines for cervical cancer and screening facilities for the women of this country. One of the things that I saw there is that the corporations in China are very committed to corporate social responsibility. I even met a woman who donates $1 million a year for work without batting an eyelid. I hope the corporations in this country will also rise to the occasion and make commitments which will focus on the health of the people in the countries where they make money.

The second one was the issue of markets. The President of this country has been talking about the need for a big market in the East African region. I can assure you that China, despite all the nonsense you hear in the press - everybody who is important economically is in China; and we realised it was because of the market. So, a big market is very important. 

Hon. Members, I hope you will address your minds to that issue so that we see within the region how we could improve our attractiveness economically. I thank you very much. (Applause)
I think the Leader of the Opposition wants to say something about my communication.

11.07
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): I thank you. I would like to welcome you back from having participated in that very important meeting with members of the economically rich society. By osmosis, Uganda also got itself there.

I would like to bring something to the attention of this House which affects and relates to our security here as Members of Parliament, and as an institution of Parliament. 

On 9th June, hon. Sempala was attacked in her office in Baumann House, and she made an alarm to the Parliamentary Police, who unfortunately could not come to her aid. Instead, the officer in charge of Parliamentary Police told her to go and make a statement at the Central Police Station. 

If one looks at the Administration of Parliament Act, 1997, Article 7 among others, provides that it is the work of the Parliamentary Commission to provide security for staff, to maintain proper security for the Members of Parliament and facilities within the precincts of Parliament. If we Members of Parliament have problems within the precincts and yet the Commission has Police in place whose duty among others, is to provide security for us; and they cannot swing into action to the extent that even early last month, Madam Speaker - your senior brother - the Speaker’s vehicle was vandalised within the precincts of Parliament and yet we have our gates of Parliament guarded by Police officers 24 hours. 

If that could happen to the property of Parliament, which is assigned to enhance the performance of the Speaker, and here is a Member of Parliament who even makes an alarm – “Please come to my aid” – and she is told, “Please, report to CPS.” How will a person report to CPS when her life is in danger and she is crying for help? Can the institution of Parliament through the Parliamentary Commission try to find out why there is laxity among our Police in terms of the execution of their duties? This is something which has become tricky. 

In addition to that – even today, you will ask my colleagues here - it is very difficult to access Parliament. Yesterday, my chairman from Arua came to see me. It had to take me the trouble of getting out of my office, get the Sergeant-At-Arms and find out what it was. Are there people who are not supposed to access Parliament so that their names are displayed at the entrances and they know that this institution is out of bounds? Even the press who are accredited to this institution and cover us every other day, were also harassed yesterday and told not to come in. Is there a change in policy in this Parliament that even the press and visitors who come with proper identification and say, “I am a visitor of so and so; I have come from such a place and I want to see my MP”, that they are denied entrance. 

So, really, what is it? We will be very grateful if Parliament through its Commission could interest itself and find out what really went wrong on some of these incidents, so that when we enter here, we know we are safe and we know that when we are in trouble, we will be able to appeal –(Interruption) 

MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA: I thank you for giving way. What my colleague is talking about, more so at Bauman House, is very real. Sometime back – it could have been about a year ago - I happened to be a neighbour to hon. Minister Nyanzi, and most of the time he would have so many constituents who would line up in the corridors. But one man knocked on my door and when I opened, he told me he wanted to see me and he was from my constituency, but I did not know the man. In the course of time, he told me to lock the door. I told him I am not going to lock the door – I opened the door widely because there was this queue of hon. Nyanzi’s constituents. He eventually said, “I am mistaken. I actually thought you were a personal assistant of hon. Nyanzi. I want to see hon. Nyanzi. Fortunately, hon. Nyanzi was in and I knocked at his door; but he could not identify the fellow. We consulted the other constituents and none of them knew this fellow. I rang the desk where I expected Police help and none of them came to my rescue. Eventually, the man was left to walk away, just like that.

So, what he is talking about is real. I had instructed the reception that they should not send anybody to my office unless they consulted me. But to date, they do not even consult. You only hear a knock, only to open and see a stranger. Our lives are in danger, and most of the time, when I am in that office I am forced to lock the door. So, we really need protection in this Parliament. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I think our most important appeal to the administration of Parliament is to provide Members with security so that when you come here, you know you are in a secure environment, and at the end of the day, you are sure of getting out of Parliament and reaching home. But as of now, there is a lot of fear within the precincts of Parliament as far as our security is concerned. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what I can say is that we shall do all we can to ensure your security and I think we began by removing the boda bodas from around Bauman House so that there are no people hanging around you. I think you should appreciate it when we have stringent measures for entering this building because we must protect you. 

Hon. Sempala informed me about her problem and that is why we are now having more stringent measures about who comes into this Parliament and why. 

11.14
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Malinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I listened to hon. Wadri, I think in a way he contradicts himself. He wants security, and we all want security in Parliament; but on the other hand, he complains that people from outside who want to come and see him are not allowed in. This is tightening security by asking these people to identify themselves before they come into the premises of Parliament.

As this matter is strong and we are all concerned, I would suggest that the matter is referred to the appropriate committee for further investigation and recommendation. I would like to ask that that is done. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Parliamentary Commission will handle that. 

11.15
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Hon. Malinga is saying that it is a contradiction, but I do not see any contradiction. If our security can stop a person who wants to see me at the gate, what stops them from arresting a person who has entered somebody’s office and they are alerted and nothing is done? I think that is where the problem is. 

I had a personal experience with the newly deployed Police at Bauman House. I drove in and found this young officer chatting with some person. I stood at the gate; he had locked the gate; I called him, but he refused to come and open the gate. After about 10 minutes, he came and opened the gate. I asked him what the problem was; I said, “I thought you, as our security, are here because of us.” He said he is also a Ugandan. I said yes, you are Ugandans, but why do you keep me parked outside the gate? He said he had nothing to do with me.

I reported this matter to the Sergeant-at-Arms, the O/C and he was summoned. He later on came looking for me to apologise, but I told him to change the way he operates while here. That so far has changed, but it has not improved the security situation. We have had people breaking into people’s offices. 

I know that hon. Bako Christine had her office items taken. Hon. Betty Kamya had to ask the Sergeant-at-Arms to change her keys and ensure that she is the only one except for the Sergeant-at-Arms with the keys.

MR GODI: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, the issue of keys to our offices is of big concern. There are days I leave my office with the computers turned off, but in the morning, I find the computers switched on and the chairs arranged differently from how I left them. I really get concerned sometimes. 

I have thrice asked security about this, to no avail, and I am not really satisfied. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have a fridge in my office; I have powdered milk. I was surprised to come and find all these things not in the fridge. (Laughter) So, I kept wondering who had taken them. Now, I do not even keep anything in the fridge because something can be put in it. 

Hon. Katuntu was once leaving this Parliament and when he got to the exit, a man drove a car and blocked him and ordered him to get out of his car saying that the car was his. Hon. Katuntu got out of the car. As the man was struggling with hon. Katuntu, Police came in, but the man threatened the Police. 

Hon. Godi saw the ensuing scuffle and ran to the gate, and by this time the man was grabbing a gun from a Police officer. It is hon. Godi who kicked the man down and grabbed the gun. When we apprehended this man, we realised he was a robber. He had even stolen the very car he had used for blocking hon. Katuntu; he had stolen it from Christ the King.

I think our security should be very serious.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have taken note of all your concerns. We have a meeting of the Parliamentary Commission on Friday and I will bring those issues again to the Commission so as to improve your security. 

MR OKUPA: One other thing, Madam Speaker. When we ask Police here to take statements they say, “I think the problem we have here is that we do not have the CID department.” Since we have CID attached to PAC, I think we need it to be part of the Parliamentary Commission Police, because as of now, they are not part of the Parliamentary Commission Police. So, we need to incorporate this with the Parliamentary Commission Police. 

I remember on Budget day, hon. Okumu brought this matter to hon. Kale Kayihura, who said he only needed communication because he did not know that that was happening. I think we need to incorporate them so that they are able to help us take statements and even investigate. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like you to join me in welcoming some guests; Mr Simon Hart Derby, Mrs Glerys Hart, Mr Steve Brown Kiwoko, and Ms Judith Goddard of Lungujja. You are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Minister, I think you wanted to make a statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.21
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Ali Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for allowing me to brief Parliament on the demonstration that had been planned to be held in Kampala on 9th June 2010. 

Hon. Members, you are all aware that the duties of a citizen as spelt out in the Constitution include cooperation with authorities in the maintenance of law and order.  This is why, in the process of performing its functions as stipulated in Section 4 of the Police Act, the Police requires organisers of functions to inform them so that they can provide the necessary security. 

In line with this understanding, political parties have always formally written to the Police informing them of the party’s intention, and the Police has always cooperated and the functions have always got off very well without incidences. For example, the case of hon. Nambooze Bakireke, where she wanted to address a rally on her swearing in; we suggested another venue and she complied. In the case of the Democratic Party; where they also wanted to hold a rally at the Clock Tower and instead, Nakivubo Blue Primary School was suggested by the Police as the venue. To make my point, I would like to lay these correspondences on Table. 

In the week preceding the Heroes Day celebrations, the FDC leadership wrote three letters to the Police informing them of the party’s planned activities across the country, and seeking intervention of the Police to ensure peace, law and order. In the letters, FDC informed the Police about their leader’s intended visit to various places in the country. They attached a programme of these engagements in those areas, giving the place, venue and time. 

Following receipt of those correspondences, the Police put in place measures to ensure peace and security at venues and at the times the FDC had communicated. The Police expected the FDC leader to follow the programme FDC had drawn up. 

However, on Wednesday, 9th June 2010, at around 10.30 a.m. an unidentified group of people attempted to assemble at the Railway Gardens along Jinja Road in the central business district. These people’s presence at the place had not been notified to the Police. They insisted on holding an impromptu public assembly at the place and to hold a procession through the city thereafter. Based on experience, such impromptu assemblies could result into breakdown of law and order. The Police, therefore, never granted the group permission to go ahead with their intentions. 

Surprisingly, the group moved to Clock Tower grounds along Entebbe Road where they intended to hold their rally. For the same reasons as above, the Police declined to give them a go ahead. The Clock Tower grounds were contested grounds; there is a land dispute; and allowing the assembly to go ahead would add to the confusion. 

While the Police was attempting to disperse the group that had come from the Railway Station, another unidentified group armed with sticks appeared from nowhere. They began to disperse everybody and in the process many people were assaulted; I understand Dr Besigye is one of those who were assaulted.  

It must, however, be remembered that in the correspondence FDC sent to the Police, there was no mention of any public rally at the Railway Grounds in Kampala or any procession through the streets of Kampala or any public assembly at the Clock Tower grounds. The correspondence did not indicate any of these activities as being slated for 9 June 2010. In support of that, Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table copies of the correspondence.

It is, therefore, surprising that Dr Besigye deviated from the programme FDC had communicated to the Police. We, however, regret that he and others were hurt. Had he stuck to the programme sent to the Police, I am sure that he would not have been hurt.

Madam Speaker, regarding the group that was armed with sticks, this group is unknown to the Police. The Police launched investigations into the incident and it has in addition commissioned an investigation to establish the identity, membership, leadership, motive and mission of this group. The idea is to find out who they are. Criminal charges will definitely be brought against anyone who will be identified. Similarly, any Police officer who will be found to have acted improperly will be dealt with in line with the law.

I want to assure the House and the nation at large that the Police is able and ready at any time to deal with any situation that is likely to disrupt peace. In cases where Police capacity has been judged to be inadequate, we have always called on the formal security organs to assist the Police. We have done this during the elections and when hosting major international events. We have never resorted to using informal groups like the so called Kiboko Squad. 

The powers of maintaining law and order, peace and security throughout the Republic of Uganda, are well articulated under Article 212 of the Constitution, which vests it in the Uganda Police Force.

Hon. Members, let us all cooperate to ensure peace and security. While demanding for our individual rights, we should be mindful of the rights of others. In line with our constitutional obligation, let us all cooperate with the Police as they execute their function. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)  

11.29
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I wish to thank the honourable minister for bringing this statement. In the first place, I want it on record that it was through my own initiative that on the 10th June, I went across to the Rt hon. minister and expressed to him my concerns about what I had seen on the 9th and on the 10th. 

I want to limit my contribution to this infamous Kiboko Squad to the extent that even on the morning of Thursday the 10th, those of us who entered town from the Eastern side were accosted by a very ugly scene between the roundabout at the yard and Udyam House where Police officers adorned in official Police uniform and with inscriptions “VIPPU” were all armed with clubs - not batons; neither did they carry guns. But they were armed with clubs to the extent that even where taxis ordinarily stop to allow passengers to alight - near the Electoral Commission offices – taxis were not allowed stopping there. I had the opportunity of attempting to stop there to drop my wife who was going to work, but they told me: “Please, do not stop here.” 

Passers-by were beaten and -(Interjection)- yes, I brought this to your attention; I brought this to the attention of your junior minister and I brought it to the attention of the Inspector General of Police that it was not good for us as a country to have such an ugly scene along the highways where foreigners and even natives of this country watch such a scene. It is not nice at all.

One of the cardinal responsibilities of Police is to avert crime. Police is expected to be pro-active. You are here talking about a group of unknown people armed with clubs and yet that day they were operating side by side with Police, and Police could not even act and arrest them. Surely, if a Police officer came and found somebody moving around with a stone in his hands or moving with a club, and is about to commit a crime, can’t you in the course of exercising your duties arrest that person and ask why he or she is carrying such a club?  Then later, you are saying, “I do not know these people and yet they were.” We have got the footage in the TV stations where people were being beaten in the presence of the Police, and right now, the information we have is that some of these so called kiboko squad were energised with porridge from Central Police Station. I want to emphasise this.

Surely, how can you as Police - our security is in your hands and you cannot guarantee us that security? Even if I was a suspect or I was a demonstrator, the most humane and lawful thing you would have done would be to arrest me and take me for questioning. If you have enough evidence that I have a reason to be believed to have committed a crime, then charge me and arraign me in court; but this business of subjecting us and the public to such inhumane treatment - and yet you are saying that you do not know these people.

On 10th June, around 11 O’clock, the Inspector General of Police addressed a press conference. Immediately after his press conference, even the Police officers who were carrying clubs dropped them. (Interjections) Yes, they dropped their clubs after the IGP’s press conference on the 10th at 11 O’clock. Find out whether your IGP did not address a press conference and the fact that the people who were under his command were able to drop their clubs and resort to the usual insignia and tools of work; that is, the batons and the guns is a clear indication that Government or Police knew and they know who these club welding men and women are.

Such a thing, if left unchecked - there are a number of unemployed men and women in Kampala who can take advantage of such a thing and believe you me, it takes two to tangle. You can give a person a slap on the left cheek; not all of us are like Jesus to say, “turn the right to receive another slap.” People will be forced to resist when you push them against the wall and at the end of the day, we will not be happy to see this country in flames.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs - let the Police as an institution of Government charged with the responsibility of providing security for persons and their property, be seen to be at work; but not to have all these other fake and unknown people being brought in.

The other time, your Minister of State brought to this Parliament the various uniforms that our Police officers ordinarily wear so that when we see them in uniform, we know this is an insignia of authority; but if you are not going to do that, believe you me, uniforms will not have any respect to an ordinary person.

No.2 in your statement; you are talking about a contested ground at Clock Tower. As we talk now, there is a washing bay there. There is a car washing bay in that very particular place that the honourable minister is talking about. Which is more permanent? For a person to come and have a rally of 20-30 minutes and goes away or when a person has permanently established himself there with a car washing bay? I have failed to understand how a land dispute becomes an issue when there are people transacting business on that same piece of land. Right now, you can go there and you will find people washing cars. People are there.

Really, my issues of concern are, let Government become serious, and tell us why they failed to arrest all those numerous club welding men and instead of telling us, “We do not know them.” Can we take it that Police who were working side by side with these people failed in their duties to protect the ordinary person? We will be more interested if one or two were arrested and they have been questioned; then they will tell us the source of support and who has mobilised them to do that.

So, for the sake of peace in this country, let us leave the security of our people in the hands of the institutions that we know and we will greatly cooperate with Police; but where some of these people come - because in the papers I am now reading; even in today’s paper, the Democratic Party has come up to say they are also now going to organise their own youths to counteract the kiboko squad. Yesterday, I read that some IPC leaders are saying, “We are also ready to enlist young men into our own kiboko squad”. What will this country be like at the end of the day if every other organisation, and even Government institutions, are going to rely on kiboko squad as if we do not budget and give money to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to facilitate the operations of the Police.

My appeal once again to the honourable minister, is not to deny knowledge of these people. You know them. If you did not know them, you should have arrested them; then at least one or two of them would have acted as examples. Other than that, I will still hold it that you know these people and the onus is on you to prove your innocence. I thank you.

11.38
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for this statement. I must say that the minister’s statement could have been based on false findings. I will start with page 3 where he says, “I understand Dr Besigye is one of those who were assaulted”. I do not know whether my English is causing me problems, but the implication in this is that the minister does not have specific interest in people like Besigye and, therefore, he understands that Dr Besigye is one of the people who were assaulted.

The signal it sends to the general public is that if Dr Besigye is taken into such a capacity in the face of the minister, what about any other person? Besides, the minister’s statement talks about the change in programmes. The day he is talking about was Heroes day and there was no work on Heroes day because it was a public holiday. It is true that Police had information to this effect and the minister knows for a fact that Police was informed. I am one of the people who do not believe in doing anything without the information of the Police. We are grappling with the problem of information and the seeking of permission. Whenever we inform the Police of any activity, there is a tendency for some of the officers in Police - not all - to take it upon themselves as if we are asking for their permission, and this is the problem I want my senior colleague to recognise.
The change of programme is not characteristic to members of the Opposition. It has happened with everyone. The President can go and say he is going to meet people in Mukono at a certain spot but because of certain logistical problems, they can change that venue and it goes without saying that people comply and follow the new venue. The excuse that because a venue was changed, therefore, people who changed the venue must go and be beaten is not acceptable, and I think should not be presented before Parliament as an excuse because it is non-professional.

I was at Clock Tower and I saw what happened in detail. From there, the minister maybe was not informed that we proceeded to Katwe; but as you know, Katwe is not any other place in Uganda; it is Katwe and is Makindye West. The DPC Katwe came with two trucks of policemen in combat gear such as tear gas masks and so on. I told the Police officer that it was not in the interest of Police to attack the public. We agreed with them and there was no problem. We sized up ourselves and when we finished business, we left and there was no incident. But the officer was attempting to call for more reinforcement to attack the people. I told him, “It is not going to be possible for you to do that in Katwe. Let the Police also begin understanding.”

On a happy note, the statement from the Police is very gratifying.

11.43 
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is more than three years since this Kiboko Squad first emerged at the High Court. Is it really fair for the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us three years later that he still does not know these people that they are investigating – three years? 

I would like to prove to the Minister that Kiboko Squad is part of the Police force. Last week on the 10th June, I was on a tour of the North with my party president. We made an arrangement for him to go and lay a wreath on a mass grave at Lokung. This is a mass grave of more than 400 UPC youth who were ambushed during Amin’s regime when they were crossing to Owiny-Kibul. They were killed and buried in a mass grave. For some reasons unknown to us, the RDC of Lamwo decided that our party president should not lay the wreath and deployed the Army. I called the brigade commander who moved very fast and told me the RDC had no right to deploy the Army. He removed the Army, but because of that situation, the DPC who was moving with us had a Land Rover loaded with people who were holding guns in one hand and clapping with the other hand. They were putting on black trousers and black shirts. They were moving with us. This time round, they were protecting us. So, Mr Minister, these people are part of your Police force. Be honest with us and tell us the truth.

I would like to find out from the Minister about this question of Police permission to hold a rally. Under which law am I required to get Police permission?    (Member timed out.)

11.45
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of the Kiboko squad needs no mention. I am very disappointed that for three years, Parliament has requested for the people who are behind this Kiboko squad, but to no avail.

I want to give a very live example so that we can trace the genesis of this Kiboko squad. Recently, in Arua Municipality, the municipal authority had come with a decision to evict vendors around the hospital lane. As the municipal authorities were taking it on, the RDC came and said, “These are NRM supporters; if they are evicted, we will lose votes.” So, he attempted to bring a similar thing like the Kiboko Squad and deployed Police; but the wanainchi being no-nonsense, fighting ensued. The result was one man suffering a fractured arm. When he was admitted in the hospital, his family stormed the office of the RDC and said, “You employed our boy, now he is there and you are not helping.” 

What I know is that this Kiboko Squad is Police and I have friends who have this information. Very soon, we are going to lay it here.

I am disappointed – I want to know the real role of Police. Does it include ordering beatings? During the demonstration referred to that took place on the 9th around Udyam House; I was there when this young man, Sam Mugumya, was beaten. The orders came from Mr Kafeero, the Commander of Police at Katwe Police Station.  He gave orders and said, “Beat him quickly before the press men arrive.” He was talking like this in full view of the public. Is that really the role of Police? Is the Police supposed to do that? 

Take the case of the IPC women yesterday – we were in court. These women had reported for their usual hearing of the case, which was some time back. After the hearing, of course, the prosecution did not bring witnesses, so the women left. When these women were leaving peacefully to go to Christ the King Church – there is a hall at Christ the King where the IPC was having a function to admit some members of the Opposition. 

As the women were walking to that place, immediately, the Police swung into action. In the first instance, they deployed female Police constables to take on these IPC women. The women over-powered the female Police constables. In the process of the melee, their male counterparts joined and fighting ensued. There is a gas powder, which the Police used to give to women to guard against would-be rapists. The women are given that gas so that when you are attacked by a suspected rapist, you hold yourself and when you see the man advancing, you spray it on the man; it is supposed to be a protective gear. But yesterday, the Police were using this powder and spraying it on the face of Ingrid Turinawe, the other woman Asara, Damalie and Dembe; they sprayed it on their faces. The worst part was when these women were dragged and taken to the cells in CPS. The Police women continued beating them in the cells. (Member timed out.)

11.49
MR LULUME BAYIGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The provision that requires the people of Uganda to seek Police permission was successfully challenged by Mohammed Muwanga Kivumbi and others in the courts of law, and this Government has never appealed that ruling. It is on that basis – the Attorney-General is here, we need an explanation; where is this provision that the Deputy Prime Minister is talking about that requires citizens of Uganda to seek permission from Police to speak to the people? That was successfully challenged and it has never been appealed. We want the Attorney-General’s intervention on this.

Fundamental in this kind of statement is that the public needs to know who is responsible for the administration of wrath and violence to the public. The Minister needs to explain; the Inspector General of Police and others need to come to this Parliament and explain this. There needs to be a commission to enquire about the hierarchy of command, which is used to administer wrath on people who are keeping peace and assembling peacefully. These kind of flimsy reasons cannot be accepted in this Parliament from the Minister, particularly when they confess –[Mr Ruhindi: “Information”]– you will get time for your information because I have only three minutes. (Laughter) You will respond Mr Attorney-General.

When a minister comes and confesses ignorance of insecurity agents within the security system, it is a threat to the security situation in this country, and particularly to the politicians who want to influence events.

This statement should be withdrawn and a new one made based on information from proper records and research. We have heard about this Kiboko Squad before. They came out of CPS, ran to the streets and clobbered everybody there regardless of whether they were participating in any kind of demonstration or not. We demanded an explanation about that and they said they were going to cause an investigation, but no report has ever been furnished to this Parliament.

Surprisingly, there has not been any outrage or demand by this Parliament or the Speaker of Parliament to ensure that some of these reports, which concern clobbering the public by insecurity agencies within the security system are investigated. (Member timed out.)

11.53
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I am very worried about this country and my worries stem from the fact that the Minister of Internal Affairs who controls Police and other security institutions seems helpless. The Kiboko Squad, as has already been observed, is not something that is new. Three years ago, they matched out of CPS and harassed everybody they could find on their way. I went to Mukono on the 25th at the invitation of my sister Betty Nambooze, to observe on her behalf what was supposed to be taking place in Mukono elections. 

I found men in Police uniform carrying ordinary sticks. As a responsible citizen of this country, I confronted a number of them with a question, “Are you real policemen? Why then are you carrying ordinary sticks and not batons?” I want to know from the Minister whether his ministry has run out of money to buy batons for the policemen.

On 9th June, of course those of you who did not come for that demonstration could have watched clips on television, and you would evidently see some form of coordination between the Police and the Kiboko Squad. I want to challenge the Minister of Internal Affairs. If Government is serious, how many of those thugs were actually apprehended and are in custody?

We had many riot Police around as well as many regular Police, but still, the Kiboko Squad who the minister wants us to believe his ministry is not aware of, beat up people including Dr Kiiza Besigye who is no ordinary person in this country. He is a leader of a political organisation; one of the main Opposition political organisations in this country; but these people could accost and assault him and get away with it.

I do not know how Government views members of the media. I saw a young man at the Clock Tower grounds being attacked by Police. His camera was taken away from him and broken into pieces. That young man bears the brunt of the beating from the Police. Whom does Police want to work with if they cannot work with the media? I would like to observe that these kinds of happenings are not new in Africa. Uganda is merely towing the path of Zimbabwe. 

In Zimbabwe, the so-called war veterans were mobilised to terrorise the population of Zimbabwe. I see Kiboko Squad being mobilised by Government today to terrorise the Opposition -( Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have used more than 30 minutes. 

11.57
MS JANET OKORIMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for the opportunity and I want to thank the honourable minister for his statement. However, I would like to express how uncomfortable I am with the title of this statement. It reads, “Brief to Parliament on demonstrations that had been planned to be held in Kampala on 9th June 2010 by the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs”.

These are records we are going to keep for our great grandchildren to read, and as it stands, it looks as if it is the Deputy Prime Minister who planned these demonstrations. (Laughter) I kindly request that this title be amended to read, “Brief to Parliament by the Deputy Prime Minister on demonstrations that had been planned.” Otherwise, as of now, and as it stands, it looks as if he was the one who planned the demonstrations. (Laughter) It is not a laughing matter, but perhaps an error, which may implicate the minister for nothing. 

The other thing is the Kiboko Squad as they may call it. It has been in the vocabulary of many people for long. I think it is high time we gave a clear explanation. The Bible says, “You shall tell the truth and the truth shall set you free.” I do not want a situation where people who were going to lose in the forthcoming elections are going to use the Kiboko Squad as part of their manifesto. So, I think let us do something about this Kiboko Squad so that it becomes history in the vocabulary of some people.

About Police, now that we are entering the electioneering period, chaotic people and thugs are also planning seriously and our Police need to be more vigilant. On Friday night at about 1.00 a.m., I travelled through Mabira. There was a group of boda bodas starting from Seeta who were riding in a funny manner. The number plates of the motor bikes were half covered and could not be easily seen. We became suspicious, so we moved slowly. 

They were moving one after the other and making certain signals. By the time we arrived in Mabira, they were a group of seven so we were a bit scared. Good enough they did not do anything bad to us, but had they dared, they would have seen what a girl from that sub-region can do. (Laughter)

As we moved, the road was very lonely, but good enough we found a road block around Mabira Forest. We notified the Police who were there that there was a group of suspicious people around Najjembe, where Mabira starts. So, we need to be very vigilant. Much as we plan for good things, the devil is also planning for bad things through chaotic people. So, I think Police needs to be very vigilant. 

Even within Parliament, we are already sacred. In the Communication from the Chair followed by the submission from hon. Wadri, we are already scared. So, I think we need to do something because many people ­-(Member timed out.)

12.02
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to appreciate the statement made by the Minister of Internal Affairs, and I thank him because every time this Parliament requests a statement from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, we normally get it on time. So, we want to thank you for that.

However, the things that we saw on the cameras on 9th June, to me, undermined the effort of the Opposition in their fight for democracy, but also as Government, undermined our efforts in trying to build a professional Police force in this country. I do not think it is something that we would wish to be happening all the time. The statement of the minister, in my opinion, has fallen short of coming clear to condemn the Kiboko Squad as something that has no place in our modern society. 

The other day, I was watching a documentary about a group of people in the far Pacific Ocean – these people are still primitive; they do not put on clothing; eat raw food; but even in that state of their civilisation, they do not use sticks to solve their conflicts. What about a country that has been independent for 45 years? I want to invite Members of Parliament to clearly condemn Kiboko Squad as something that has no place in our modern society. 

I also want to appeal for mutual respect. The Bible says, “Love you neighbour as you love yourself.” What it essentially means is that do not do something to your neighbour that you would not want to be done to you. Would we want, for example, after 100 years when we are in the Opposition, to be treated the way we saw them there -(Interjections)– we would not certainly. But also you the Opposition Members of Parliament and the Opposition outside at large, if the law says you should seek permission from the Police -(Interjections)– but you have been seeking permission -(Interjections)– why have you been writing to the minister? -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: I rise on a point of order. We have our Constitution here under Article 29 which provides for freedom of assembly and association. We have the Police Act which gives power to Police to regulate public assemblies and that Police Act specifically enjoins Police to ensure that there is law and order; and in that Act, there is no specific provision which empowers the Police to grant a permit to anybody who intends to hold a public assembly. 

If you look at the opening statement of the minister –(Interjections) - in this statement before us –(Interjections)- look at the statement in the first paragraph. The minister clearly says section four talks of notice to the Police. Is hon. Bahati in order to mislead this House and the country that there is a requirement under the law for one to seek a Police permit before holding a public assembly? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member, unfortunately you arrived late, but also when the minister was talking about the venues, he did not mention them. I have looked at the letter and it says Dr Besigye was going to be at Pope Paul Memorial Centre on 9th June and in Sembabule on 10th June; that is what the letter says. So, he was not in the place where he said he was going to be. Those are the letters. Please proceed.

MR BAHATI: I thank you. All of us know that there are operational arrangements within the Police force to provide law and order where we want to hold our assemblies. Therefore, hon. Lukwago, I was saying that if really we need to be protected and you ask Government and Government says, “We are not ready for this time and at this place.” Why can’t you hold on and wait and go to a place rather than being embarrassed in the way we saw? I thank you.

12.07
THE MINSITER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): I thank you. As the honourable members know, I am a highly trained Army officer – (Interjections)– and in the course of my training, the roles of the Army officer, especially the roles of a Police officer, were clearly taught to us. A Police officer has a role to maintain law and order, peace and security in the country. That is his duty and we as citizens have a role to obey Police officers in the course of their duty. We have to help Police officers to carry out their duty. 

I have watched TV and many times whenever, a Police officer issues an order to a citizen, the first thing they do is confrontation. They confront Police officers and some of them hold the Police officer – that is obstruction of a Police officer in the course of his duty. 

We as leaders in this country have got to show an example. You have mentioned that one of the leaders of a political party was supposed to be at another place and then there were people who suddenly showed up for a demonstration and he was there with them.  There was chaos while that leader of a political party was there. He should not have been there. He was supposed to be somewhere else. When you do not like the fire – if you cannot bear the heat, do not go to the kitchen. The leader of this political party should not have been in a place where this demonstration – there was no information to the Police that a demonstration was going to be there. This was a chaotic demonstration which had not been planned. The Police had not been informed so that they could have planned and provided security at that demonstration. 

I have a scar on my face –(Interjections)– yes this one –(Interjections)– what happened? I used to demonstrate in the United States against abortion and one day, I just went for a demonstration with a few people and then there were pro-abortion people on the other side and so we collided. We had not informed Police and I really regret that we did not inform the Police. They would have provided protection for us and I would not have that scar today. So, it is our duty as citizens – if you want to have a demonstration, please inform the Police so that they can provide you with protection. (Applause) Do not just start with a demonstration. We are not going to be hooligans. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, hon. Captain Dr Mallinga [DR MALLINGA: “Lieutenant Colonel”] I remember the last time when he was seated this side, when he was called a major, he said he was a captain and now he is telling us that he was at the rank of a Lieutenant Colonel [DR MALINGA: “Amin promoted me.”] (Laughter) Is he in order to justify the presence of the Kiboko squad? Because from his presentation, he is justifying – he says, “If you are not ready to get heated up, do not go to the kitchen.” So he is justifying; he knew or he knows to whom this group belongs.

You do not know that the person who was beaten is one of the historical members of the NRM, which you have just joined. (Applause) On that day, his wife was made a heroine and that is the day you chose to humiliate him. Is he in order to justify the Kiboko Squad? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, the minister is explaining the circumstances under which he got the scar on his face. That was all.

DR MALLINGA: No, Madam Speaker, the Kiboko Squad - as I mentioned, this demonstration had not been planned. These demonstrators did not inform the Police so that they could have protection against the Kiboko Squad; possibly they just came on their own and there was a confrontation of the two. 

The honourable minister has just said that he does not know the Kiboko Squad. So I have no reason to doubt a man of his age –(Interjections)- I have no reason and none of you has proved to me clearly that the honourable minister knew about the Kiboko Squad. You have not explained to me. The Kiboko Squad was another disorderly demonstrators’ group, which met another group of demonstrators and they collided. (Laughter) 

We were all watching right at the gate here. There was a group of women who were demonstrating against the Electoral Commission; those women were holding the policemen. I have been to several countries, once a policeman gives you an order, you have got to obey; otherwise if you do not obey, he is justified to use force, and that force depends on how disorderly you are. 

So, at the court we once again saw these women. They came out and started confronting the policemen; pushing the policemen. That is not allowed. You have got to obey the policeman when he gives you an order and you have got to support a policeman in the course of his duty. Therefore, we as leaders should not encourage hooliganism in the country where people carry out demonstrations at an instant without informing the Police - so that they can maintain law and order. We have got to warn our people; we should not allow hooliganism.

As for the Kiboko Squad, we all know that it is illegal and the honourable minister has said so. Why do you insist that the minister knows about it when he has said that he does not know anything about it? The IGP said he did not know about the Kiboko Squad and investigations are being carried out? Some of us want to make political mileage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, I think we need to close this matter. Hon. Minister, conclude. The Attorney-General will speak and then hon. Katuntu.
  
DR MALLINGA: So, ladies and gentlemen, we make these laws and we should obey these laws and encourage others to obey the orders of the policemen otherwise if you do not, they have every right to handle you with appropriate force. (Laughter)

12.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I have always had the belief that we can achieve our objectives through non-confrontational means and through civilised means. And at one point I stood here and gave examples because we do not lack precedents in that respect. Nehru of India, Tito of Yugoslavia, Nkrumah and many others. There is even a Black lady whose name just ran out of my head as I was trying to stand up - the Black American lady who refused to stand up for a White person in the Montgomery Bus Service.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rosa Louise Parks. 

MR RUHINDI: Yes, Rosa Louise Parks. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. She refused and that was in 1955; and they normally say that, “She stood up by sitting down.” One day she was arrested, charged and appealed to the highest court, the Supreme Court, and that ordinance - the Montgomery Bus Service Ordinance was struck down as unconstitutional. Actually, she is the mother of the Civil Rights Movement in America. Therefore, we can achieve our means through non-confrontational means. 

Let me tell you; I agree, Shadow Attorney-General, you stood here and said there is a right of assembly. Granted, but the assembly must be peaceful. 

Hon. Lulume, you stood up and said - it is true Section 32, I think was struck down by the Constitutional Court. It is true but what was struck down was to prohibit or stop but the power to regulate still exists. The power to regulate is even a constitutional power of the Police under Article 212. How else would you maintain law and order if you do not regulate the manner in which assemblies and rallies are conducted?

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General. I want a clarification on the context in which this Act was imposed on the public, which had gathered at Clock Tower. We do not want to quote the Police Act out of context. Where was regulation at the Clock Tower rather than stopping and clobbering people? Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Well, I think when you are analysing security matters, you must regulate them contextually. The surrounding circumstances must be considered in totality and I believe that the Minister of Internal Affairs is in a better position to determine or to say or to give a comment on what transpired at Clock Tower. 

But I stood up on a point of law and I am very happy that you are satisfied. Dr Lulume that was the position of the Constitutional Court; they actually said, “Do not stop but regulate.” If the Police says that you are going to cause confusion here and you should actually be channelled and you use another route - please, also comply -(Interjection)- complied in terms of what? (Interjection) Yes, the law was unconstitutional but the power to regulate is constitutional. You have got to distinguish that; some of you are lawyers. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy that my colleagues have fully understood that the power of the police to regulate assemblies and rallies still exists. (Laughter)

12.22
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I was re-elected in December 2007, I was welcomed by the Rt Hon. Speaker and he did counsel me, telling me to forget about what had happened during my election. I had carried the jacket of bitterness to this Parliament but that evening when I left Parliament, I discarded that jacket at the gate of Parliament. 

I was the first victim of Kiboko Squad. The people of Bugweri; the people of my home town, Idudi, were the first victims of Kiboko Squad. I did not know this topic was on the Order Paper today but I have asked my clerk and he is bringing the photographs of Kiboko Squad in 2006. 

I have got a judgement of the High Court and a judgement of the Court of Appeal, which says the author, organiser, and perpetrator of that Kiboko Squad, which terrorised me, the people of Bugweri County and Idudi, is the present Minister of Internal Affairs.

I have got a report of Amnesty International, which tells us that actually when they saw that that very gentleman had been appointed Minister of Internal Affairs, they knew chaos was coming to this country. (Interjection) Wait just a minute. I do not want to be emotional. I had resisted talking about this issue for a long time but when this minister comes and says he knows nothing; after he was condemned by the courts of law, the highest court, the Supreme Court, as organiser and perpetrator of goons to beat up indiscriminately the people of Bugweri County, I shudder. (Applause) It is an insult to us. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you hon. Katuntu for giving way; just a little information about this. It is not a matter of sentiment or anything but these are matters of concern to all of us. There is a finding in the case hon. Katuntu is talking about; a finding of the High Court; a finding of the Court of Appeal, that the minister who has made the statement –(Interjection)- the minister, Hajj Kirunda Kivejinja, had a detention centre at his home. It is a finding of court that people who were abducted would be detained in his own home. The question is: what moral authority does he have to hold the position of Minister of Internal Affairs? I thank you. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, when you see some of us being emotional, this is not our usual behaviour. We have been victims of this uncivilised and uncouth behaviour by people who do not have any respect for the rule of law; for free and fair elections, for democracy, and here they are shouting. 

If I had not exposed this roguishness, I wouldn’t be in this House today. It took me two years to fight and come back to this House. It has not been easy, Madam Speaker. And when I see an Amin officer, trying to bring Aminism back to this century, I feel so bad. (Laughter) Hon. Mallinga, you were a victim of this very thing and you fled to America, and here you are trying to preach it! You learnt history but forgot it in the classroom. This country is not ready to go through the Aminism, which was here, before you fled to America. Stop insulting us, Ugandans, and hon. Kivejinja should know that – let me tell you, we may have forgiven you, and indeed I forgave you -(Interjection)- hon. Minister I am talking to  you. You many have –(Member timed ou­t_)     

12.28
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I regret that the minister does not know how to present a lie. On page 3, the last paragraph of his statement, he claims that this group is not known to the police. Hon. Kassiano Wadri put it very clearly and I also observed along Jinja Road, uniformed citizens of this country, with clubs, sticks and dark glasses and they were in police uniform. I do not know whether the minister is telling us that there are some private security forces in this country that have been given police uniform? 

Secondly, personally I know that a section of the police force is not happy with the presence of the Kiboko Squad within the security forces; a full section of the police force is not happy. Therefore, for the minister to claim that police has launched an investigation and the police has commissioned an investigation on what appears to be an action instigated by the police itself, is not very fair. 

This House, therefore, should demand an independent investigation over the conduct of the police and the existence of the Kiboko Squad within the police force. It will not be fair for the police to investigate itself. We saw the uniforms - right from the Electoral Commission to the railway line, there were no people dressed in civilian clothes. We clearly saw uniformed policemen.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Odit. The information I want to give is that if the minister is talking about police investigation but what has the minister done to the commanding officer of that day because that is where it should have started?

I came from Entebbe; I was following Maj. Gen. Kayihura; in fact even Kayihura was shocked to find that there was a roadblock, which was manned by stick wielding civilians in Katwe. That alone would have been enough for us to accost the commanding officer of the police at that side. What have you done with that commanding officer?

MR ODIT: Finally, Madam Speaker, we live in this country and we represent various constituencies. There is a lot of irregular training of civilians, young men and women, in all constituencies in this country and this in one way or another is a preparation for arming them with sticks in the forthcoming general elections and we must know that it is very easy for citizens to access sticks. Good enough, these are not going to be guns and the people will be ready to also arm themselves with sticks and we see who will be the loser. This is very dangerous.

12.32
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would want to thank the Members for the stimulation they have had from the statement. But I would only want to say one thing, as I said in my opening statement, that the duties of a citizen as spelt out in the Constitution include co-operation with the authorities in the maintenance of law and order. 

Whatever happened was exactly that because we were given notice that the leader of a party will be in a certain place. While we were waiting there, it was because of our preparedness that we also stumbled on this thing which had no notice. So, if that had been completely avoided, all these issues would not be around. Please, let us know the cause.

We may have gone against individuals but normally the best judges - and you know the side of the struggle in which I am - others were beneficiaries of the regime we overthrew; so automatically I do not expect any good word from them. The mere fact that actually he was able to stand up against me and I was also able to be taken to court and I accepted whatever was decided by court and he is here, is actually a vindication of the system that was brought and therefore nobody can say we did all that because we wanted to bring chaos in this country.

I have taken it that the greatest point on which the Members have dwelled has been this Kiboko Squad and I have already stated that we are investigating and if at all there is any policeman, you will definitely be informed. So, let us not pre-empt the situation, if we do not do it, we are in front of you, we will be able to come back and you implicate us. So, I think -(Interjections)- no, I think let me stop there so that I go back and try to wind up all these things so that we get a meaningful debate. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

12.35
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Kabakumba Matsiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Press and Journalists’ Act sets up the Media Council and Section 12 of the Press and Journalists’ Act is a requirement for council to submit to the minister responsible for information an annual report on its activities, and the minister to bring the report to Parliament within three months after receiving it.

Ten days ago I did receive the annual report of the Media Council and I would like to take this opportunity to lay it on the Table. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report of the Media Council is committed to the Committee on Presidential Affairs to peruse and report back to this House.

CONSTITUTTION OF SESSIONAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 160 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries:
1. 	Hon. Kabonesa Juliet, Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Kasaija Stephen, Vice-Chairperson
3. 	Hon. Wonekha Oliver
4. 	Hon. Dr Lastus Katende
5. 	Hon. Nsubuga William
6. 	Hon. Bintu Jalia
7. 	Hon. Kiboijana Margret
8. 	Hon. Magoola Zirabamuzale
9. 	Hon. Naiga Florence
10. 	Hon. Ssalabaya Haruuna
11. 	Hon. Nalugo Sekiyivu
12. 	Hon. Kabahweza Hashaka
13. 	Hon. Bucyanayandi Tress
14. 	Hon. Odit John
15. 	Hon. Kamya Betty
16. 	Hon. Kassiano Wadri
17. 	Hon. Ojok B’leo
18. 	Hon. Cecilia Ogwal

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I note that there are only 18 Members of this committee. There are still two vacancies to be filled on this committee. So can I urge the whips to do the needful? The members are not there? We do not have the required number. Okay, I put the question that this House approves the Sessional Committee on Agriculture as presently constituted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Foreign Affairs:
1. 	Hon. Byarugaba Alex, Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Sauda Mugwera, Vice-Chairperson
3. 	Hon. Onyango Kakoba
4. 	Hon. Kasule Lumumba
5. 	Hon. Katuramu Hood
6. 	Hon. Bartille Toskin
7. 	Hon. Lokii Peter
8. 	Hon. Mutuluuza Peter
9. 	Hon. Mugyenyi Mary
10. 	Hon. Katirima Phinehas
11. 	Hon. Lule Mawiya
12. 	Hon. Lubyayi Iddi Kisiki
13. 	Hon. Kaliba Steven
14. 	Hon. Oleru Huda
15. 	Hon. Okumu Reagan
16. 	Hon. Lulume Bayigga
17. 	Hon. Akiror Agnes
18. 	Hon. Kiiza Winifred
19. 	Hon. Nakawuki Suzan
20. 	Hon. Wamanga-Wamai

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House approves the Sessional Committee on Foreign Affairs as proposed and they are 20 Members. Yes, hon. Bayigga.

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I left that committee and joined Social Services but I continue to be counted there. I do not think -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are dealing with Foreign Affairs.

DR LULUME BAYIGA: Yes, I had since left it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think your whip must have allocated you to a new committee.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to belong to Foreign Affairs and I have been belonging to Foreign Affairs and my name is not there. I applied; I am an independent Member of Parliament who applied.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The independent Members belong to the Office of the Speaker but if Dr Lulume does not want to be here then we can incorporate hon. Amongi Betty and remove Dr Lulume from the Committee of Foreign Affairs. Can I substitute hon. Betty Amongi to be No. 16 on the Committee on Foreign Affairs? Okay, I put the question that the Committee of Foreign Affairs be constituted as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development:
1. 	Hon. Tumwebaze Frank, Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Kasule Robert Sebunya, Vice-Chairperson
3. 	Hon. Akol Rose
4. 	Hon. Balyejusa Julius
5. 	Hon. Banyenzaki Henry
6. 	Hon. Kaddunabi Lubega
7. 	Hon. Okorimoi Janet
8. 	Hon. Tuma Ruth
9. 	Hon. Odoch Pascal
10. 	Hon. Maj. Guma Gumisiriza
11. 	Hon. Tindamanyire Kabondo
12. 	Hon. Kyomugisha Grace
13. 	Hon. Ssejjoba Isaac
14. 	Hon. Oleny Charles
15. 	Hon. Oketcho William
16. 	Hon. Nandala-Mafabi
17. 	Hon. Oduman Charles
18. 	Hon. Oyet Simon
19. 	Hon. Nsubuga Birekeraawo
20. 	Hon. Ekanya Geoffrey

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Gender, Labour and social Development:
1. 	Hon. Pherry Kabanda, Chairperson
2. 	Hon. William Nokrach, Vice-Chairperson
3. 	Hon. Byamukama Noor	
4. 	Hon. Mwebaza Sarah
5. 	Hon. Lagada Beatrice
6. 	Hon. Omwony Adong
7. 	Hon. Mwebaza Sarah
8. 	Hon. Lagada Beatrice
9. 	Hon. Omwony Adong
10. 	Hon. Tubbo Christine 
11. 	Hon. Nyakairima Aronda
12. 	Hon. Okello Francis 
13. 	Hon. Obua Denis 
14. 	Hon. Nalwanga Lukwago Rebecca
15. 	Hon. Nampijja Susan 
16. 	Hon. Acen Rhoda
17. 	Hon. Aciro Concy 
18. 	Hon. Ogwang John

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have noted that there are only 15 members on this committee, so there are five slots remaining. I invite Members who have not been allocated to inform my office so that we can distribute them. For Gender, they are only 15. (Interjections) What are you suggesting? 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, every Member of Parliament is a member of a sessional committee; but not all the slots on the sessional committees are always filled. That has been the practice. No Member is left out, but we do not raise all the required numbers as per the number of MPs from both sides. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, I have committees where they are in excess of 20. Yes! 

MR WADRI: If there are those who exceed 20; those are the ones who need to be reallocated to where vacancies exist. But at the end of the day, not all committees should be full. That has been our experience with my colleague the Government Chief Whip. 

The slots of 20 multiplied by the number of sessional committees is not equal to the number of MPs who are around 333 [MS KABAKUMBA: “Of back benchers.”] especially of back benchers. Of course I am cognisant of those of you who are in the front seats. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway Members, I encourage those who are not allocated to come and fill in the slots; the Whips and my office will handle that. I now put the question that the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development be constituted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Information, Communication and Technology:
1. 	Hon. Igeme Nabeta, Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Paula Turyaikayo, Vice-Chairperson 
3. 	Hon. Bahati David
4. 	Hon. Katende Sematiko
5. 	Hon. Kyeyago Jowali
6. 	Hon. Baliddawa Edward
7. 	Hon. Elly Tumwine
8. 	Hon. Wangwa Rutangye
9. 	Hon. Ndawula Kaweesi
10. 	Hon. Kwebiha Joyce
11. 	Hon. Tumwesigye Elioda
12. 	Hon. Tubwita Grace
13. 	Hon. Mugulumaali Mugumya
14. 	Hon. Nalubega Mariam
15. 	Hon. Godi Akbar
16. 	Hon. Oceng Penytoo
17. 	Hon. Otto Ishaa
18. 	Hon. Apiliga Moses 
19. 	Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have noted that there are 19 Members on this committee with one empty slot. But I put the question that the Committee on Information, Communication and Technology be comprised as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Physical Infrastructure:
1. 	Hon. Byandala Abraham, Chairperson 
2. 	Hon. Baba Diri, Vice-Chairperson 
3. 	Hon. Byarugaba Grace
4. 	Hon. Busima Cosmas 
5. 	Hon. Matte Joseph
6. 	Hon. Byanyima Nathan
7. 	Hon. Kisira Margaret
8. 	Hon. Kwizera Eudia
9. 	Hon. Nansubuga Nyombi
10. 	Hon. Jim Muhwezi
11. 	Hon. Otada Owor
12. 	Hon. Dombo Emmanuel
13. 	Hon. Adison Kakuru
14. 	Hon. Balyejjusa Sulaiman
15. 	Hon. Piro Santos 
16. 	Hon. Amuriat Oboi
17. 	Hon. Okupa Elijah
18. 	Hon. Omollo Peter
19. 	Hon. Mabikke Michael
20. 	Hon. Kabuusu Moses 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, these are 20 Members. I put the question that the Committee on Physical Infrastructure be comprised as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs: 
1. 	Hon. Tashobya Stephen, Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Sabila Herbert, Vice-Chairperson 
3. 	Hon. Mulumba Meddie 
4. 	Hon. Ndeezi Alex
5. 	Hon. Nuwagaba Wilfred
6. 	Hon. Mpabwa Sarah
7. 	Hon. Tinyefuza David
8. 	Hon. Netalisire Sarah
9. 	Hon. Kyamulesire Ramadhan
10. 	Hon. Bakka Mugabi
11. 	Hon. Karooro Okurut
12. 	Hon. Achia Remigio
13. 	Hon. Nyombi Peter
14. 	Hon. Ben Wacha
15. 	Hon. Lukwago Erias
16. 	Hon. Njuba Sam
17. 	Hon. Odonga Otto
18. 	Hon. Euku Simon
19. 	Hon. Balikuddembe Joseph
20. 	Hon. Abdu Katuntu

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs be comprised as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Presidential Affairs:
1. 	Hon. Tinkasiimire Barnabas, Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Muwulize Norman, Vice-Chairperson 
3. 	Hon. Kasaijja Robert
4. 	Hon. Kasozi Joseph
5. 	Hon. Kiryapawo Loi
6. 	Hon. Butime Tom 
7. 	Hon. Kaahwa Erisa
8. 	Hon. Olega Ashraf
9. 	Hon. Menhya Gerald
10. 	Hon. Kitatta Aboud 
11. 	Hon. Nyomera Namoe
12. 	Hon. Oburu Grace 
13. 	Hon. Angufiru Margaret
14. 	Hon. Rusaniya Barumba 
15. 	Hon. Kibanzanga Christopher 
16. 	Hon. Okello-Okello
17. 	Hon. Opange Louis 
18. 	Hon. Kikungwe Issa
19. 	Hon. Nabilah Ssempala 
20. 	Hon. Betty Nambooze

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are 20 Members. I put the question that the Sessional Committee on Presidential Affairs be comprised as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Public Service and Local Government:
1. 	Hon. Otekat Emilly, Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Badda Fred, Vice-Chairperson 
3. 	Hon. Akumu Mavenjina
4. 	Hon. Bakeine Mabel
5. 	Hon. Booma Emma
6. 	Hon. Byenkya Nyakaisiki
7. 	Hon. Nyago Lydia
8. 	Hon. Achia Terence 
9. 	Hon. Mpairwe Beatrice
10. 	Hon. Lwanga Kasole
11. 	Hon. Sam Lyomoki
12. 	Hon. Yiga Anthony
13. 	Hon. Namara Grace
14. 	Hon. John Arumadri
15. 	Hon. Amuge Rebecca
16. 	Hon. Ssozi Kaddumukasa
17. 	Hon. Emigu Julius 
18. 	Hon. Ocula Michael

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have noted that there are only 18 Members, so there is a balance of two slots, but for now I put the question that the Committee on Public Service and Local Government be comprised as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry:
1. 	Hon. Sseguya Lubyayi, Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Mary Tunde, Vice-Chairperson  
3. 	Hon. Rwebembera Kiiza
4. 	Hon. Okot Felix 
5. 	Hon. Oketta Julius
6. 	Hon. Tete Chelangat
7. 	Hon. Pajobo Joram
8. 	Hon. Makumbi James
9. 	Hon. Mugambe Joseph
10.	Hon. Sanjay Tanna
11. 	Hon. Auru Anne
12. 	Hon. Iriama Rose 
13. 	Hon. Ekemu Charles
14. 	Hon. Kawanga John
15. 	Hon. Okao Caroline
16. 	Hon. Angiro Gutmoi
17. 	Hon. Toolit Simon
18. 	Hon. Obua Ogwal Benson

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are 18 Members on this committee, but in the meantime, let me propose that the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry be comprised as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Social Services:
1. 	Hon. Asiimwe Brian, Chairperson
2. 	Hon. Alepar Margaret, Vice-Chairperson 
3. 	Hon. Seninde Rosemary
4. 	Hon. Alisemera Babiha 
5. 	Hon. Rwakimari Beatrice 
6. 	Hon. Gudoi Yahaya
7. 	Hon. Kubeketerya James 
8. 	Hon. Nalule Safia 
9. 	Hon. Wopuwa George
10. 	Hon. Ssinabulya Sylvia
11. 	Hon. Arimpa Kigyagi
12. 	Hon. Nvumetta Ruth Kavuma
13. 	Hon. Ssentongo Theopista
14. 	Hon. Kyatuheire Jacqueline 
15. 	Hon. Chris Baryomunsi
16. 	Hon. Anokbonggo Willy 
17. 	Hon. Bako Christine Abia
18. 	Hon. Epetait Francis
19. 	Hon. Alice Alaso
20. 	Hon. Aol Betty Ochan

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have noted that on this committee, Members of the Democratic Party are not represented so I ask the Whip of the FDC to make adjustments to allow hon. Bayigga to serve on this committee.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, without wasting much time, I would like to propose that I withdraw hon. Betty Aol and replace her with hon. Dr Bayiga Lulume of the Democratic Party.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the social services committee be comprised as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs:
1.	Hon. Kamba Saleh, Chairperson
2.	Hon. Milton Muwuma, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Hon. Silver Bahane
4.	Hon. Badru Katongole
5.	Hon. Kazibwe Musisi Tom
6.	Hon. Kibedi Zaake
7.	Hon. Mukose Mutabali
8.	Hon. Ssekikubo Theodore
9.	Hon. Mujuzi Pius
10.	Hon. Kasamba Mathias
11.	Hon. Ndawula Ali Sekyanzi
12.	Hon. Abura Pirir
13.	Hon. Mbagadhi Fred
14.	Hon. Namayanja Rose
15.	Hon. Sebaggala Latif
16.	Hon. Kyanjo Hussein
17.	Hon. Kiyonga Francis
18.	Hon. Akello Judith Franca
19.	Hon. Yokasi Bihande
20.	Hon. Fungaroo Kaps
21.	Hon. Malinga Johnson

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is one of the committees where we are over subscribed. There are 21 members, so can the NRM Whip and Opposition Whip withdraw one of the Members? They are 21.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, in every committee there are only 14 slots for NRM and the list that was submitted to you consists of only 14 NRM members. So it can’t be the Government side that is over subscribed.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, unlike the other sessions where the Government Chief Whip and I had an opportunity to interface with the Director for Committees, this has been a very exceptional case where my list and that of the Government Chief Whip were taken and the Director for Committees did not bother to reconcile them. I think it is only fair that, as you rightly indicated earlier on, the Government Chief Whip and I go back to the drawing board and redeploy some of those people because we all submitted lists but the issue of rationalisations was not competently done by the Director for Committees.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, NRM submitted only 14 honourable Members. Actually we did offer two slots that we were supposed to nominate Independents allied to our side but we have not added those two. So it is my colleague to re-organise his side and remove one person and redeploy them otherwise for the 14, I have difficulties withdrawing any of them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So can we stand over this while you sort yourselves out?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, the reason why we agreed that these committees be as expeditiously constituted as possible was bearing in mind the fact that this last lap of the Eighth Parliament is going to be a unique one in the sense that by August, the Professor will not see you here as you will be canvassing for votes for your primaries; so there will be the problem of quorum. 

In that spirit, therefore, I wish to say the following. One, I will withdraw one of the members from my side and at the same time I will also pray to you that I be allowed to redeploy hon. Aol Betty to the Gender Committee. She is the one who we are going to remove from there, just in the interest of the service because within the next three months or so, we need to work very hard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So that we can have 17 members on the Gender Committee?

MR WADRI: That is right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So which one are you withdrawing?

MR WADRI: Can I be reminded of those who are there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have hon. Latif Sebaggala, hon. Hussein Kyanjo, hon. Kiyonga Francis, hon. Judith Franca, hon. Yowasi Bihande, hon. Fungaroo and hon. Johnson Malinga.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, can I propose that hon. Judith Akello Franca goes to Gender?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, so hon. Betty Aol and hon. Judith Akello go to the Committee on Gender to raise the number to 17. I now put the question that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs be comprised as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Natural Resources:
1.	Hon. Bukenya Gyabi, Chairperson
2.	Hon. Najjuma Faridah, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Hon. Munyira Rose
4.	Hon. Wamakuyu Mudini
5.	Hon. Kyahurwenda Tom
6.	Hon. Kawooya Bangirana
7.	Hon. Kyetunda Elijah
8.	Hon. Ngabirano Charles
9.	Hon. Muhanga Margaret
10.	Hon. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit
11.	Hon. Najjemba Rose
12.	Hon. Mukitale Steven
13.	Hon. Ochieng Peter
14.	Hon. Winifred Masiko
15.	Hon. Yekko Arapkissa
16.	Hon. Anywar Beatrice
17.	Hon. Ibi Florence
18.	Hon. Kasigwa Harry
19.	Hon. Akena Jimmy
20.	Hon. Ebong David
21.	Hon. Kawuma Muhammed

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is another committee where we are over subscribed; we have 21 members. I think it is your side. The 14 NRM Members are there and then your seven including two Independents. There is hon. Yekko, hon. Anywar, hon. Ibi, hon. Kasigwa, hon. Akena, hon. Ebong, hon. Kawuma.

MR WADRI: Hon. Yekko is not my Member unless he wants to cross over here. He has never been my member. My former colleague, hon. Princess Kabakumba, knows that hon. Yekko seats on the other side and is not my member.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, as I did indicate, the practice has been that NRM has 14 slots, Independent, two slots and the Opposition, four slots. We did agree among ourselves that one Independent would be allied and deployed by the Opposition Chief Whip and one Independent would be deployed by the government side. That was the understanding with you because the Independents are your responsibility. So even on this committee, the 14 NRM slots are fully occupied and the 15th Member that is hon. Yekko Arapkissa also takes on the slot of Independent allied to the Government side. So still the Opposition will have to reorganise their Members and withdraw one member. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR WADRI: I wish to withdraw hon. Florence Ibi –(Interjections)- yes, because FDC has three people there and two are shadow ministers who are responsible for issues of natural resources and it is only fair that they remain there. So, I withdraw hon. Ibi Florence and have her redeployed –(Interjections)- I am told there is a vacancy on the Committee on Trade.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am told there is a vacancy on the Committee on Trade.

MR WADRI: How many vacancies?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One.

MR WADRI: Then we can deploy hon. Ibi there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Ibi is deployed to the Committee on Trade. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there was another item on the agenda but I wanted to remind the Minister of Finance that you are required to lay on Table the names of the Accounting Officers before we can consider the Vote-on-Account. That has been the practice. So, proceedings are suspended until 2.30 p.m. 

(The House was suspended at 1.03 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.05 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE ON ACCOUNT FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2010/2011 IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 129 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we issued an order paper this morning, which the Members have. However, I would like to make a slight amendment to permit the Minister of Finance move one additional motion, which he will explain later. 

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, “WHEREAS clause 4 of Article 154 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund account for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriations Act, whichever is earlier; 

AND WHEREAS the government financial year will end on 30th June 2010, and it is the belief of the President that by that date this House will not have approved the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the financial year 2010/2011;

AND WHEREAS it is necessary that the President authorises the issuance of monies from the Consolidated Fund account for the purposes of meeting expenditures necessary to carry on the services of Government; 

AND WHEREAS clause 5(a) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that authorisation of the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund account for purposes of clause 4 has to be approved by a resolution of Parliament;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament approves Vote-on-Account allocated to the various votes attached to this resolution.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. I wish to thank the honourable minister for the motion he has brought seeking approval of Parliament to grant authority to have Vote-on-Account voted. 

However, what I would like to find out from him is whether we have got accounting officers duly appointed to manage these funds in the fiscal year 2010/2011 because it is my belief that immediately Parliament pronounces itself on this motion, money will readily be available in all the ministries and Government sectors for utilisation. Do we have the duly authorised and appointed accounting officers in place in the various ministries, before we can proceed to authorise this expenditure. I just need that procedural matter to be cleared. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when I suspended the House this afternoon, I reminded the Minister of Finance that we required the accounting officers’ names to be laid before the House and if he has them, let him please lay them.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your guidance and in accordance with your guidance, I hereby lay on the Table the list of officers appointed as accounting officers for the fiscal year 2010/2011. (Applause)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has the motion been seconded?  Okay, the motion has been seconded.

Hon. Members, this is Vote-on-Account; it is one third of the allocation. I do not know whether anybody has any objection to us handling it?

Central Government 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do approve the allocation for the central government.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Regional referral hospitals

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do approve the allocation for the regional referral hospitals.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Missions abroad

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do approve the allocation for the missions abroad.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Local government

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do approve the allocation for the local government.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Wadri, can you raise your objection?

MR WADRI: The principle on which we agreed to proceed was that we would proceed to avail the money for the various ministries and government institutions to spend, on the condition that there are duly appointed accounting officers. What the honourable minister has laid on Table are the accounting officers under the Ministry of Local Government. Those of the Central Government are not there. So, our trust and confidence that we had in the minister is being abused -(Interjections)- yes. What he has laid on Table is a letter from the Permanent Secretary of Local Government and not from the Secretary to the Treasury/ Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  Please, can we have that? Otherwise, our trust in you is being taken for a ride -(Interjections)- no, please hon. Professor, I respect you. These are procedural matters and that confidence we have should not be abused.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I have always wondered why hon. Wadri works himself into anger when a matter can be explained. What we have laid on Table is a list of appointed accounting officers in accordance with the heads on the Vote-on-Account for the financial year 2010/2011. We have the Central Government and regional governments. Now, the accounting officers for the Central Government votes – and hon. Wadri, you have contributed to this; that any officer who was implicated in the CHOGM report in whatever way should first be investigated before being reappointed as accounting officer for votes in the Central Government. That list of accounting officers is now being verified. So, what I have given you is a list of those who have been cleared and they can be accounting officers.

Now, Madam Speaker, I can see hon. Wadri is ‘itching’. What I can explain to the House is that in order to respect your earlier decision, the screening exercise of the accounting officers is being compiled and it will be provided to the House before the Budget is fully passed; this is a commitment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But hon. Minister, you know this Vote-on-Account is not just for the local governments, it is also for the Central Government. How can you partially agree on the local governments accounting officers and we have no Central Government accounting officers for this Vote-on-Account? So, hon. Members, I think what we do is to stay this for 24 hours so that you can come back with all your accounting officers for both the local governments and the Central Government.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I think truthfully, we can comply with your guidance subject to the House understanding that the list we shall submit to this House tomorrow might change in the course of time if any of the names found on the list submitted to you is implicated in the CHOGM report. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, let the minister for finance not take us for a ride. We also worked in the Civil Service and we know the procedure. What normally happens is that not necessarily is the permanent secretary the accounting officer of a ministry. The Secretary to the Treasury can appoint any officer in a ministry to be an accounting officer. So, if a permanent secretary of a ministry has been suspect to have soiled his or her hands with CHOGM funds, the Secretary to the Treasury can appoint any other person. And he has also got the powers to withdraw even in the course of the financial year; before the 12 months elapse, he or she can change. So, it does not matter whether – if anything, how many permanent secretaries have been implicated in the CHOGM report? They are not even one third of the line of permanent secretaries.  Madam Speaker, I think you made a wise ruling and the honourable minister whom I really have high regard for – Professor, just 24 hours – go back and let the Secretary to the Treasury give us the names of the people into whose hands we are going to commit this money. 

These are public funds and anything can happen. At the end of the day if we do not have the right people, who are we going to hold responsible? So, we need to have the right people who from the word go, we will know are having custody of the public funds and should anything go wrong, we shall not go around looking for a person we do not know. I sincerely wish we could sleep over this matter. 

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, after necessary consultations, I wish to submit that an accounting officer who is implicated is not yet adjudged guilty. And if a person is implicated, the normal way of handling matters is that that person is maybe interdicted and goes aside and investigations are carried on and other procedural arrangements take place. But where the accounting officer is still in the office, certainly he is the accounting officer until otherwise stated or undertaken. So, I believe that the accounting officers who are still in their offices should actually be brought as the accounting officers. That is the position from the legal point of view. If they are appointed annually - yes that is what I mean. What I am trying to clarify is that you cannot say that a person has been implicated and, therefore, cannot be appointed. That is what I am trying to advance. And we have consulted. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this House will not lift the veil to check what is happening in the ministry of finance. What we want as of now are the accounting officers. So, Minister, we are giving you 24 hours to bring the accounting officers of the Central Government before we pass the Vote-on-Account. (Applause)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I will oblige. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

3.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to request that since we are looking at item 5, where this House was meant to resolve itself into a committee of supply, and while looking at the Budget, we know that we are meant to supply figures. I request that as the minister brings the list of accounting officers, he should also come with a summary of the totals for local governments and hospitals separately, and also for the various votes, and we supply in accordance with what this House has already set as a precedent. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, Minister, you know what to do. Please bring the figures and bring the accounting officers.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, the totals are actually given on the Vote-on-Account for the financial year 2010/2011, both for the Central Government, which is totalled on the back page -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but Minister, you are just saying the back page and you are not telling us the figures. Please comply with our directive. Let us do it neatly tomorrow.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much.

3.25
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I would request the minister to come with a better print out. Really, when you look at this, you cannot read anything; the figures are too small. I do not know whether this is being done deliberately to strain us such that we cannot scrutinise the figures. Madam Speaker, you need to look at it and see. So, tomorrow we expect a better print out of these figures, which we can read and make our own contributions or cross-check.

Secondly, I am also having a problem. The appointing authority of the accounting officers in local government is actually the Secretary to the Treasury. I heard from hon. Wadri who had access to the document that has been laid on the Table that actually the list is being forwarded by another permanent secretary who is not the appointing authority. As I talk now, I am the Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee and almost every other time, appointment letters are copied to me. In fact, as I talk now, there is another one from Amolatar which has just come in this afternoon, which even the Local Government PS may not have received.

So, I would rather we have a letter forwarding these names from the appointing authority who is the Secretary to the Treasury and not Ministry of Local Government, since we are all interested, rather than it being laid on the Table. Let the Clerk’s Office distribute it to us such that we can really cross check what has been laid on the Table before we take some of these decisions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.27
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Kabakumba Matsiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the morning, we did constitute sessional committees; there is one member on my side, hon. Netalisire Kayagi who had been designated on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. She would like to change to the Committee on Agriculture and there is still a vacancy and I have no problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that hon. Netalisire be transferred from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to the Committee on Agriculture.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much indeed. As you are aware, Uganda will be hosting the African Union Summit in July. This will be during the period when government expenditure is Vote-on-Account and the amount of expenditure to be incurred for the Union is clearly more than the Vote-on-Account amount for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In light of this, I want to move for a resolution of Parliament for authorising Government to incur expenditure of Shs 5.6 billion -  

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of procedure and actually guidance from the Chair whether we can really handle this resolution before passing the Vote-on-Account. What comes after? I think we pass Vote-on-Account then we can provide for this money. We cannot definitely go into authorising the expenditure of money which has not been passed. I cannot understand how we can do it. There is no money.

He is talking about a Vote-on-Account which we have not passed and he is talking about extra money - extra money for what and from where?

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am only getting concerned about the rate at which we incur expenses in the name of hosting meetings. I think we need to be a little conscious because -(Interjections)- I am very reluctant even if we had passed the Vote-on-Account and I am even concerned that we are going too far cutting too many coats when we do not have the material.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, minister, I think you will come back with that motion after we have dealt with your Vote-on-Account.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, most obliged. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, as you will appreciate, we constituted the sessional committees this morning. I do not know whether they have had an opportunity to meet. The business which follows the Vote-on-Account requires the committees to sit and either go through the reports again or acclimatise. So, I want to propose that tomorrow, all the committees sit and look at their reports so that we can resume on Thursday morning when they are more familiar with what we have to do; because, I do not even know if they have had a first meeting as committees. Is that okay Members?

HON.MEMBERS: Yes!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, so we adjourn the House to -

3.32
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I remember you did communicate the day the budget was read, through the Chair, that its time that the ministries do comply and act very fast by supplying the policy statements to the House. Up to this level, we have not received any single copy from any ministry. I know the Prime Minister’s Office has always been the first to deliver its policy statements. Now that the Prime Minister is here, I want to again appeal to him to whip the ministers to deliver the policy statements to enable us handle this matter given the fact that these two months are going to be very hectic months for us. So, I just appeal that the Prime Minister does whip the ministries to supply the policy statements such that we are able to go through them very fast and handle this matter with urgency before they go for the primaries. Thank you.

3.33
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We discussed this matter with the Speaker and it was agreed that all ministries submit their 360 copies of their statements by 21st June because they have to go through the issues and agree. That is a reasonable date; I don’t want to have a situation whereby a minister comes here and disagrees with his ministry. There was such a case and that minister was going to be sacked by His Excellency, the President, until he came here and apologised. I do not want such a situation to arise; so it will be 21st. I have already made the directive and copied it to you, the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and all ministers and ministers of state. I thank you.

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is just a reminder. Last financial year, Parliament left some gap for ministers because it was their first time to submit policy statements. But it is also a requirement that each policy statement should come with a procurement plan, recruitment plan and workplans. So, by 21st when they are submitting, all these three documents should be accompanying the policy statements. Last year, we relaxed because it was the first time; but this time we must insist that those three other documents must accompany the policy statements. That is when it will be considered complete. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, I want to alert the following committees: The Committee on Presidential Affairs, which has two businesses; the Committee on Public Service and Local Government; the Committee on Social Services; and the Committee on ICT. These four committees are the next in line, so we shall start with your business on Thursday at 9.30 in the morning. Please, I do not want to hear chairpersons saying they have not read their reports. I have read the committees: Presidential, Local Government, Social Services and ICT; that is the business which will follow.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, we are likely to have problems. Most of the chairpersons are new, while others are moving from one committee to another; the membership has remained but I do not even see any of the new chairpersons here. So, we are likely to have a problem because you are saying Thursday; Thursday is the day after tomorrow. Isn’t it? We will not have some of these people. I appeal to the Government Chief Whip to tell the chairpersons to do the needful. Otherwise, we cannot have this work done when the chairpersons have been changed. That is why most of us were advocating continuity in this difficult time whereby we are also trying to find our levels. (Laughter) I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Parliamentary Commission had anticipated this problem; we tried to appeal but we were over-ruled; so, this is the problem we have. That is why I am saying the new chairpersons should take up the responsibility immediately. I am giving you only one day to read the reports and be ready on Thursday. (Applause)

3.38
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, in the interest of developing and availing Members of Parliament an opportunity to serve, we have new committee leaders for some of the committees. Even by today, some of these committees were ready and the leaders have already handed over. I can assure you that by Thursday, they will be available to transact business that has been earmarked. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the House is adjourned to 9.30 on Thursday morning. Thank you. 

(The House rose at 3.39 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 17 June 2010 at 9.30 a.m.)
