Thursday, 18 June 2009

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.

(The House was called to order.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you. I would like to adjust the Order Paper to introduce three items. I will permit the Minister for Information to lay a report. I will also permit Hon. Okupa to make a personal statement and I will bring forward a petition from the people of Tororo.

Secondly, we have a number of questions and in the Business Committee this week, we realised that one of the reasons the questions take too much of our time is because the ministers have very long answers, leading to very many supplementaries. So all those ministers who are scheduled to answer today, you will use only 5 minutes for your answer. 

Supplementary questions will be rigorously limited by the speaker so that we are able to finish this other work and improve on our records for question time. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.38
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, under section 12 of the Press and Journalist Act 1995, the Media Council is required to submit an annual report to the Minister responsible for Information, a report of all its activities and the minister is required to lay the report in Parliament within three months of receiving it.

Madam Speaker, I received this report last week and in line with the requirements, I am laying it on Table. We have produced more than 350 copies. It is the Media Council Annual Report for 2008. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The clerk will distribute the copies to the members. The report is committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I am making a personal statement according to our Rule 22 (3) of our Rules of Procedure. This statement relates to the statements that have been made against me in my constituency by Government leaders regarding the security in Kasilo County. 

From 6 April 2009, I started getting calls from my constituents that some people were seen in the swamps between Pingire and Bugondo sub counties and this was causing fear to the locals. I directed the LC III Bugondo who also happens to be the chairperson for all the LCIII of Teso region to follow up this matter and inform the police and the army if need be.

On 8 April 2009, I too travelled to Kasilo because this rumour had continued to the extent that some people were sleeping in the bushes. I got in touch with the police, Capt. Teff Emojong of UPDF in charge of Teso region and on 10th and 11th April 2009, a joint operation of the army and police with the GISOs of the two sub counties named above. I and the LC III of Bugondo Odeng Julius ocana were part of the operation. I provided the necessary logistics, like food and fuel from my personal recourses to the two forces. 

On the second day of the operation, the LC I of Apapai Centre and the locals apprehended a stranger whom they found in the centre loitering. On interrogation, he claimed to have come from Tororo and that his name was Oketcho. (Laughter) I do not mean hon. Okecho. (Laughter)

He was making uncoordinated statements and he did not have any identity. This man was handed over to the police and transferred to Soroti CPS after I had briefed Maj. Gen. Odongo Jeje the Minister of State for Defence and Brig. Charles Angina. I later received information that this man was released because it was found that he had mental problems.

On 11 April 2009, I left Kasilo for Kampala because I had to travel to Bermuda on Parliamentary work. But while in Bermunda I kept in touch with my constituency. It was while I was out of the country that the RDC Soroti Ben Etonu held a rally in Kamod in Kasilo together with the RDC Amuria Mzee Omax Omeda. 

In this meeting the RDC of Soroti told people that there are rebels in Kasilo and it is their leaders who are behind all this. Mr Omax Omeda rose up and objected to these remarks by the RDC, Ben Etonu.

The GISO of Bugondo and Pingire sub counties have also continued telling the people that it is their MP and LC III of Bugondo who are behind this rebel thing, working hand in hand with one Lt Opoi Opoy who is based in Pingire. I wonder what this Lt. Opoy is doing in this place because he has been here for over one year. I wonder what UPDF is doing about this. He even seems to be a deserter to us. 

This officer is also busy threatening people through sms, including threatening one councillor called Esther Adipo. In these messages, he says, if this lady does not cross to NRM, she will find politics very rough to her in the next elections.

Madam Speaker, I want government and in particular the Ministers of Defence and Security to tell the country and the people of Kasilo and Teso in general whether the statements by the RDC are a Government informed position.

I also want to ask the Minister for the Presidency to restrain the RDC of Soroti from making such statements that cause panic to the people. I want to advise the RDC that he should devise other means of getting allowances if he is getting problems with facilitation.

The Minister of Defence should also establish what Lt Opio Oboi is doing in Pingire if he is not a deserter. I want to assure the people of Teso that there are no rebels in Kasilo and whoever is involved in this rumour mongering will be dealt with when caught.

I must also inform the country that I am not involved in any subversive activity and whoever is day dreaming is wasting his/her time because even at the height of the rebellion in Teso, I did not join but the people who are making statements today caused suffering to the people of Teso. But I chose at that time to suffer and I ran to exile within my country in Fort Portal. I do not have any traits of being a rebel.

When a leopard wants to eat its young ones, it starts by accusing them of smelling like goats. I hope this is not the case in this matter. I will oppose any oppression with my mouth and a vote. 

Today in the papers we have also read statements where they are quoting MPs going to be arrested. I think it is necessary for the government to come up and make a statement on this matter and tell us if there is any rebel group being prepared such that we all join hands and fight insurgency in this country. We are tired of suffering. For God and my country! Thank you very much.

PETITION CONTESTING THE MANNER IN WHICH TORORO DISTRICT WAS SUB-DIVIDED INTO TWO DISTRICTS

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I thank you. I rise on a procedural point. The matter being brought to the House this afternoon is already before Parliament. In fact it is a matter that has been referred to the committee of Parliament. I am surprised that this matter has found its way to the Order Paper. 

I do not know whether it is procedurally right for hon. Okecho to bring the grievance of the people of West Budama to the House instead of going to the committee where this matter will be exhaustively discussed before being brought back to the House. I beg for your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know this Parliament is for all the people of Uganda. (Applause) If the people have a grievance, I think we should allow them to bring it here and it will go to the committee. We are not going to debate it. All we are doing is to commit it to the committee. You trust me, please. 

2.48
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): I thank you very much for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker. I am going to be extremely brief to ensure that I do not waste too much of Parliament’s time. But as this is the Parliament of Uganda for Ugandans, we are bringing up this petition under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.

“The humble petition of the Japadhola of West Budama and Tororo Municipality against proposed creation of two new districts out of Tororo District presented by Okecho William, MP for West Budama County North in Tororo District showeth and states that:

 On 26 May 2009, the Minister of Local Government in a motion to Parliament sought to create two new districts, Kisoko and Mukuju out of Tororo District; 

The motion suggested that by the creation of the two districts, Tororo District as presently known should cease to exist effective 1 July 2010. 

The proposed creation of these two new districts out of Tororo has taken the people of West Budama by surprise because the Japadhola have never asked Government for a new district.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okecho, what did we agree? Read the prayers.

MR OKECHO: I know very well that all of you have got a copy of this document and, “Therefore your petitioners pray as follows:

1. 	That Tororo District should never be erased from the map of Uganda as is intended in the motion. (Applause)

2. 	A decision to create any new district should leave Tororo District to be composed of West Budama County and Tororo municipality.

3. 	We pray that the creation of Mukuju District from Tororo County as represented in Parliament be endorsed by Parliament so that Tororo County can now become Mukuju District. We do not worry about that.

4. 	The last prayer is that the proposal to create Kisoko District out of West Budama County be rejected by this Parliament.

	Your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray that those prayers are honoured.”

And here, I humbly lay on the Table the signatures 11,000 petitioners from Tororo municipality and West Budama County. I beg to lay this on Table. Thank you very much and your gesture, Madam Speaker, is going to quell the crisis that is looming in Tororo. And I am sure our people are listening. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that petition and the signatures will be sent to the relevant committee. I am just informing the petitioners that the committee chair and secretary will invite you for a public hearing and you will explain your matters in detail in that committee.

And also for the record, when you come here you do not clap. But you have done your work.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

    QUESTION 47/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT)
        
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today the first one-hour is for private members’ business.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker I agree with you on that and the first business was related to Malaba and you adjusted the Order Paper but I think the clerk did not pick it properly. So may the minister of Finance make the statement? (Laughter) I beg for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, are you not usurping the powers of the Speaker?

MR EKANYA: I am not and I apologise, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us proceed as we have indicated. This schedule was set by the Business Committee; let us start with the questions, and then we shall come to your matter. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 47/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT)

2.55
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): “When will the proposed investment on Shimoni land commence? 

What is the time frame within which the land should revert back to Government if no investment is commenced on the land? 

What lessons has Government learnt from the Shimoni investment case?” 

Madam Speaker, although it is procedure for the minister to provide me with a copy, I haven’t got a copy but I am ready to take the response. He can proceed to read as he sends me the copy. Thank you.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, a question for oral answer is “When will the proposed investment on Shimoni land commence?” 

Work on the proposed investment has already commenced. The site has been cleared and fenced, and work will be done in three phases. Phase one will be a hotel, rental and office tower. Phase two will be a convention centre, rental and office towers and phase three will be retail and office towers. All these phases are estimated to cost $80 million. Equipment has been mobilised by the investor on the site and more will be reinforced after the necessary approvals of Kampala City Council and other authorities.

Madam Speaker, the investor has completed Geotechnical studies of the site including the study of the soils. 

The investor has signed a contract with the Intercontinental Group Hotels, who will manage the hotel. 

The technical team of the investor and the Intercontinental Group Hotels are working out a detailed and final design to suit a five star hotel. 

The Final architectural drawings are being finalised for submission to KCC.

The second question is, “What is the timeframe within which land should be reverted back to Government if no investment is commenced on the land?” 

The standard given time on public land before it is withdrawn is five years. Although the initial lease agreement and support agreement did not provide a timeframe within which land can revert to Government, Government has given the investor a maximum of five years after which land will revert to Government.

The third question is, “What lesson has Government learnt from the Shimoni investment case?” 

The Government of Uganda is committed to promoting investment and creating a good investment climate for investors in Uganda. 

A majority of licensed investors in Uganda are the highest taxpayers and are contributing to the country’s budget and development programmes. Investment incentives are part and parcel of the investment climate to attract investors. While there may be isolated bad examples among the investors, overall investments in Uganda have gone up creating employment and raising the tax levels. 

Government will, in addition to attracting investors to come to Uganda, impose performance indicators such as development timelines in cases where land is part of the investment package extended to the investors. 

Government needs and will in future conduct due diligence on investors intending to invest in Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.58
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, on 27 March 2007, hon. Kajara wrote to the Kingdom Holdings, who were meant to purchase the land, asking them to give an account such that money is refunded to this investor. What was the reason for writing that letter at that time?

Two, who is the investor that has started work? Is it the original investor or is it this new company called Azure which we heard has bought this land from Kingdom Holdings, or is it KCC?

The US $2 million was paid by Kingdom Hotels, owned by the prince from Saudi Arabia. This money was meant to be a contribution even though the minister in his letter said that they wanted to refund the money. If it were a contribution, why did the minister write asking for an account to refund the money and what have you done with that money? We do not see the school that was supposed to be built with that US $2 million. 

3.00
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for the response given. I also thank hon. Elijah Okupa for raising this pertinent issue. I have got three questions to ask.

One, we were here debating this issue on the 14 December 2006 and there was assurance from the minister that they were going to construct a CHOGM hotel on that land. CHOGM was held here in November 2007 and we were not offered any reasons as to why this hotel was not constructed on time. Why did you not construct a CHOGM hotel on that land, well knowing that you hastily demolished a school for that particular purpose and the reason you could not give that school any grace period was that you needed to construct a hotel for CHOGM purposes? 

Secondly, there was also assurance given to this House on that same day that alternative premises for the school were going to be constructed along the Lugogo bypass and there was a state of the art design that was displayed in the House. We are wondering where is Shimoni Demonstration School as we speak? What happened to that land that they said had already been acquired for that particular purpose? 

I am aware that, Madam Speaker, you are an OG of that school. That school was the best UPE school in Kampala Central and the whole of this country. There is a reason it was established and we are wondering what happened to the PTC and the Demonstration school.

We were told by the former Minister of State for Finance, Prof. Ssemakula Kiwanuka, that this company called Azure was a quack company which was masquerading as the current investor. What is the position now?

I know hon. Elijah Okupa has asked a supplementary question as to who the current investor is but what I want to know is, is this company, Azure, a quack company? Is it the one carrying out construction? How did it come into the picture? The information we had here was that this land had been given to Kingdom Hotels which is owned by Prince Al Waleed -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Member who has been on the Floor wrote to that investor saying that when he came to invest in that land, he would do so at his own peril. It appeared in the newspapers and he did not deny it. Is the hon. Member now in order to ask who the investor is?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you ask the question again, please?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, through that letter written by the hon. Member which appeared in the newspapers, and which he has never denounced, the investor was scared. And now the same Member is asking who the investor is. In that letter which he has never denounced, he said that an investor who came to invest in Shimon land would do so at his own peril. Now, is the hon. Member in order to ask who the investor is? Who is fooling who?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I did not get an opportunity to see that letter. It did not come to this House and so, I do not know. Complete your question.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was asking the last question. There are reports all over that this land has been given to Kensington, this new real estate company, and that they are trying to construct those structures. That is why there was intervention by the Minister of Finance to stop this process. There are people who are behind this and who are highly placed in Government. 

The question I am asking - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I have tried to explain to you that supplementary questions are not submissions. Ask, “Is Kensington involved in this matter?” But now you are justifying and answering and asking yourself. Please.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I was just laying a background for my question -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MR LUKWAGO: The question is, is it true that Kensington is involved in the development of this land? If so, how did Kensington come to own this land and how much was paid? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please answer.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the Ministry of Finance did write to the original investor asking that if they were not able to develop the land, Government was prepared to refund the money they had paid for it. 

While they had not responded, the investor managed to get a co-investor in the name of Azure Holdings Ltd with whom they took over the land of Kampala Kingdom Hotels. Azure Holdings is a shareholder in Kampala Kingdom Hotels which owns the Shimoni land.

As to where the money is, it is common knowledge that Government money is in the custody of the treasury. The $ 2 million that was paid by Kampala Kingdom Hotels was paid to the treasury and forwarded to the Bank of Uganda.

The second question was that this hotel was supposed to be the CHOGM hotel -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification on this business of land being given to investors. Investors are meant to have the capacity but now, to my total surprise and dismay, the minister is telling this House that the original owner who was given this piece of land went ahead to source a co-investor. 

This country has paid dearly to these investors. What is the rationale behind giving prime land to the so-called investors who then turn out to be quack investors? Where is the transparency in land being given to investors? 

We can all become investors in one way or the other if given free land as it is. Someone can start walking around looking for a co-investor. All of us can do that.

I am therefore disgusted. I do not know for how long the minister can come here and tell us that the investor secured a co-investor. 

And to be sure, Azure is not registered anywhere, or at least it was not registered by the time they became co-investors. Why are we being taken for a ride? Can the minister come out clean on this matter and explain to this country? Enough should be enough.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I recall that the former Minister for Investment, who is now our Ambassador in the Emirates, denounced this company, Azure Holdings, and he is now resident Ambassador in the Emirates. 

So, what I believe is that the minister, hon. Kajara, and the Ambassador, are not speaking the same language. It seems something is not very clear. The former minister categorically denied the existence of Azure Holdings in the United Arab Emirates and now the minister is telling us, “Yes, this company is there.” Now, who is telling the truth?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think the minister should be honest with us if we are to move this country forward and save it from all these losses. He should tell us that Azure paid US $1.5 million only to get that land. But he is not telling us and instead he is saying he is a co-investor. He is even getting it at a very cheap price. 

How can a serious government keep US $2 million in Bank of Uganda, if it is true, when our children are languishing and failing to get where to study from? Is the Minister honesty and telling us the truth when he says the money is in Bank of Uganda?

MR KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, I just want to ask the hon. Minister for the details of the certificate of title in respect of this land. I would want to know whether it was a lease or not, and if so, then for what period and what are the terms of the lease; that should be laid on Table in this Parliament.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To answer hon. Kawanga, I would like to inform the House that the lease that was given to Kingdom Hotels is 99 years. In that lease, the investor is supposed to construct a five-star hotel among other property like I said the rent and office towers, a conventional centre and retail and office towers. Those are the terms.

Regarding the question relating to it being a CHOGM hotel, I would like to say that is correct. However, let me add that what transpired was that the investor was not able to, within the time he was granted, mobilise enough funds to construct that five-star hotel. That is why construction of the hotel did not take off at that time. 

For the same reason, I would like to report, the investor went and mobilised other partners to join him. It is normal in business - if you cannot do a venture alone – to enter a joint venture or partnership with others provided the terms of the lease are honoured.

The second question was whether Azure Holdings as a company exists – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a motion. Yes, hon. Amuriat.

3.15
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I rise to move a motion, without notice, under our Rules of Procedure. The motion is: judging from what the questions that have been asked and the manner in which he is proceeding, and which to me borders gambling, I have a feeling that this particular issue needs to be investigated further, including the production of relevant documents and a visitation of the site by the committee. I know this will not possible given the manner in which it is being presented today. 

I therefore, beg to move, Madam Speaker, that a select committee be set up to examine the affairs of the Shimon land –(Interjections)– I beg that you help the Member to also exhaustively examine the matters pertaining to Shimon Land and report to this House within three weeks. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are going into a very busy period. We are going to start the debate on the State of the Nation Address and the budget. So, I do not know whether we can take off time for a select committee. What I would like to propose is that we ask the Minister to make a more substantive statement on this matter taking into account the issues raised. And after we have discussed that statement, we can really determine whether we need a select committee or not.

MR KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, that is very good, but we pray that when that occurs, the certificate of title and the lease should also be laid on the Table here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Minister, please take note of all the issues that have been raised by the Members, make a statement and lay all these documents here – no, he is alive. Can you do that in a fortnight? Are you able to come with a substantive statement on all those matters in two weeks?

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 80/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe before we handle the question, please join me in welcoming children from Global Junior School, Mukono and students of Busia Secondary School, represented by hon. Sekiziyivu and Hon. Munyira respectively. You are all welcome. Okay, hon. Ekanya.

3.19
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): “Would the Minister explain and provide to the House a list of all the treaties and protocols that the executive has signed since 1996; those ratified and those not yet ratified, explaining reasons for the delay?” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Foreign Affairs.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. The hon. Ekanya would like the Minister to explain and provide to the House, a list of all the treaties and protocols that the Executive has signed since 1996, those ratified, those not yet ratified and explaining the reasons for the delay.

I think there are five elements in this question. The first is to provide a list. I have a list here, which has a close print of about 48 pages and I would like to lay it on the Table.

The second element of this question, which is about explaining this list, sets out the third element about those that have been ratified, the fourth on those that have not been ratified and the fifth on why they have not been ratified.

I want to inform the House that ratification of treaties is governed by The Ratification of Treaties Act – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: As the shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs, I would like to thank hon. Isaac Musumba for responding to this question. However, just like my colleagues, I am in a difficult situation – I managed to only obtain a copy of the list of the protocols and bi-lateral agreements signed. We do not have copies of the other response; it is only him who has a copy yet he is reading from it. I do not know how – we do not have copies of the response to the other part of the question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Ekanya, I think he has provided what has been ratified. And you have asked what has not been ratified, which he is going to respond to and why. Isn’t it?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, he is responding as if this question only needed an oral answer; it a question that I put to the Ministry about a year ago. I do appreciate he has provided a list, but copies of the response relating to the treaties that have not been ratified and why the delay, have not been provided to Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If he has an extra copy, he will give it to you; you are the one who is entitled to it.

MR EKANYA: Yes, I need a copy so that I can ask supplementary questions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have an extra copy?

MR MUSUMBA: I have a page of explanation which will fit within the time allocated to me in this House, which I want to give to the hon. member and the honourable House. 

Madam Speaker, if it pleases you, I will read the summary and give him a copy. All I am saying is that ratification is governed by Cap. 203 of our laws, which is the Ratification of Treaties Act. Therein, under Section 2, ratification is done by Cabinet and Parliament. 

In the case of Cabinet, it ratifies all treaties except: 
1.	Those that relate to armistice, neutrality or peace.
2.	Those that require a constitutional amendment for their implementation. 

These two categories are ratified by Cabinet and these includes all the agreements that are made between Uganda and countries abroad, or multinational organisations abroad, bilateral and protocols. 

In the list that I have laid before this House, there are several treaties, protocols and agreements that Uganda has entered into with organisations abroad and those have been complied with in accordance with the law for ratification. I would like to lay this on Table for the hon. Member to see the explanation. 

However, it is important that in the question that has been raised, unless the Member has specific questions that rise from this list, it would take more time than this Parliament can give me to explain all those which have been ratified and those which are outstanding. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the list. The question was very clear. “Explain those which are ratified and those not yet ratified and the reasons for the delay”; it is very fundamental. 

If you look at this list, the government has committed itself to several protocols and treaties. In the Constitution, Article 123, and the ratification of Treaties Act, Cap. 204 – I would like to correct the minister, it is not Cap. 203 - I have a copy here. I need to know whether the minister is well acquainted with his sector or not, because I am a shadow minister. 

Madam Speaker, Cap. 204 demands that all treaties must be laid before Parliament. For the time I have been here – let the minister tell us how many of these protocols and treaties you have laid on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is the debate we have been having in the Business Committee. You have asked a very general question. If you had said, “I want to know about the convention on the rights of the children”, he would be able to answer. But how much time shall we take on this? 

If there are specific ones that you are interested in, name them, but that one is too general, it would take a whole week for us to deal with it. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I agree with you and I do not want to take time. But I want to know why Government has never laid a single treaty on this Table, that is the work of Parliament, so that the laws can be domesticated. 

We have a problem in the agriculture sector because the ministry signed treaties and protocols, but when it came to domestication, there was a problem. When we travel abroad, this government is forced to pay money because as soon as the government signs a protocol, there is a fee that the Minister of Finance pays annually. That is part of the debt that we have, and some times it is an embarrassment. An official calls for a meeting and they are told that your Government has not paid the membership and other necessary fees. It has embarrassed several officials and some have even returned. 

This matter is very serious and that is why the minister should explain why the ministry has failed to lay copies of the treaties that are signed so that we ask the relevant sectors why the domestication delays. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, first of all, it is not true that Government has never laid here a single protocol or treaty. This House should remember that it received the East African Treaty that was about 1996, and I can assure you that this House received it. It also received the COMESA treaty. So, it is not true for hon. Ekanya to say that this House has never received a treaty. 

Secondly, we can narrow this debate. I have submitted before this House a comprehensive list of all agreements, protocols and treaties that we have entered into as Government. Let the Member familiarise himself with that list, and if he has any specific questions, we shall be pleased to respond. The list is on the Table for everybody to inspect. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance from your Chair. There are certain questions for oral answer that are really significant for Members of Parliament and particularly this one. Is it really good guidance from your Chair to tell the Members of Parliament – when a minister is responding to a question, he should avail the Members at least with a summary of their answer, so that we can follow. 

Secondly, what entails “oral”; is it just verbatim, and then we just listen? I thought it is for Parliament and the general public? I seek your guidance in that matter because this is becoming too abstract for us to comprehend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, the response of the minister relates directly to the questions asked. The hon. member said he wanted a full list of all the treaties signed since 1996. Then he said, “Why have some not been ratified?” So, I propose that the Clerk distributes the list to the Members, and if there are members interested in particular treaties, they can raise questions at a later stage. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister for providing a list. I know that if we added the time required for all of us to know how many treaties and protocols have been signed, it would be a total waste of time. But could the hon. minister give us the numbers of the treaties and protocols that have been entered into, how many have been ratified and how many are pending ratification –(Interjections)– well, fortunately, you are not on the floor, so I will not respond to that.

3.32
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much. The supplementary question I would want to give to the minister is in relation to Article 123 of the Constitution. The Ratification of Treaties Act makes reference to Article 123 of the Constitution and if you look at the interpretation of what that treaty means, this is defined under section 1 of the Interpretation of Treaties Act. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, treaties –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, subsequent to the enactment of that Constitution, this House enacted the Ratification of Treaties Act.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I have all the laws of Uganda on my phone so I am just making reference to the Ratification of Treaties Act, with all due respect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you not in breach of the rules?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Alright, let me follow the rules. Section one on the- Madam Speaker, can you protect me from the Minister of National Guidance and former MP of Bugweri County? 

Minister of Internal Affairs, I was asking about section 1 of the Ratification of the Treaties Act. The definition of a treaty includes all agreements that have been entered into by the Government of Uganda with any international organisation or any body that the Government of Uganda is doing business with. 

So would it be of interest to you to tell this House whether the oil agreements have also been tabled among the documents that you have talked of, because my interpretation falls in the wider interpretation of the treaties according to section 1 of the Ratification of Treaties Act. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you are really taking this a bit far. One of things we agreed on with the Business Committee is that supplementaries should be relevant to the subject. Hon. Lukwago, you are the last one and we end with this.

3.35
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is specifically on two protocols and conventions. One, the Optional Protocol against Torture (OPAT). 

Hon. Minister, you are aware that Uganda Human Rights Commission has raised this matter several times. In many of these reports that we have, the Human Rights Commission also reports. They are wondering why OPAT has not been ratified up to now. So would you offer the reason as to why you have delayed yet we assented, as a country, to the Convention against Torture but up to now we have not assented to the protocol and this has hampered the work of the Human Rights Commission?

Secondly, the Enforced Disappearance Convention or treaty. The UN Convention against enforced disappearance is a very fundamental treaty that we should have signed way back in 2006. Why haven’t we signed that treaty up to now yet, again, we assented to the convention? Why haven’t you signed it? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, the honourable Leader of the Opposition wanted statistics but statistics without substance in themselves have no effect. I want to propose that everyone follows the guidance that you have made. I have submitted to this House the comprehensive list. It is there for everybody to see, read and acquaint themselves with.

Hon. Otto is asking about certain agreements. Again, when I was a lecturer at the Law Development Centre –(Laughter)- I used to tell my students to deal with the facts. Any student who doesn’t deal with the facts is likely to fail. I want to advise that the information is here for the hon. member to see and satisfy himself as to whether the agreements he is looking for are there or not and then we can take it from there. The same goes to hon. Erias Lukwago. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I should thank hon. Ekanya for raising this question so that members are up to date on all these treaties. I will ask the Clerk to distribute lists to members then during the course of this session, if you have an interest in an area, please follow it up. Thank you.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 87/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

3.32
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am acting on behalf of hon. Ross Euku who is not doing well. He asked me to ask the question on his behalf. 
“Would the Minister explain to the House -
•	Whether Uganda’s external debt is sustainable?
•	The effect of Uganda’s continued external borrowing on Uganda’s exports
•	The impact of the debt repayment on social services budget.” 

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, a quick answer is that Uganda’s total external debt stock is US $4 billion and comprises of US $1.9 billion as loans, which have been disbursed and US $1.6 billion as loans, which have been contracted but not yet disbursed and approximately US $0.5 billion in loan guarantees.

The issue of sustainability is statistically measured by three fundamental variables: export performance, GDP performance and domestic revenue collection performance. On the basis of this, there are thresholds or caps beyond which debt become unsustainable. 

In Uganda’s case, these figures indicate that on external debt using net present value of all the debts collected to the present as a percentage of GDP, the cap would be 50 percent but Uganda’s ratio in 2008 was 16 percent which is below 50; in 2009 it was 26 which is below 50 and I can continue the line; it is still below the cap.

Similarly, when you have net present value as a percentage of our exports, the cap should be 150. Uganda’s position was 53 percent in 2008, 92 percent in 2009, 107 percent in projected 2010; again clearly below 150 cap. 

As regards the net present value on domestic budgeted revenue that is collections, the cap is 300 percent. For Uganda’s case, in 2008 it was 88 percent, 2009 was 32 percent, 2010 is projected to be 150 percent. Again it is below the 300 percent cap.

On the liquidity ratio, which also measures the sustainability of external debt of countries, we again have the ratios. The cap is 25 to 35 as percentages of collections on everyone of them. Uganda is still below the cap -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You know regarding percentages and figures, if you get one in the second and another in the third minute, you have difficulty understanding. 

The guidance I am seeking is whether it is a matter of coming to read percentages when we cannot refer and see so that we can understand. This is because these questions that are being asked are for purposes of understanding and if Nandala-Mafabi cannot understand, what about those in the gallery?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, maybe we shall need to amend our Rules of Procedure because our rules say that the minister gives a copy to the member who asked. You are not the member; you are not Euku. I know the member who asked the question.

MR KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I really have a feeling that some members are using what in Parliament is called bantering. I am explaining and answering the question on sustainability. How can I show the House external debt sustainability if I don’t show you the standard calculations used for measuring whether countries - yes, I am just mentioning to you. There are caps or thresholds and I have used these to measure Uganda’s external debt sustainability and I am showing you, quantitatively that indeed Uganda’s debt as of now is sustainable and this is proved. I will add – there is a lot of bantering in this House, of wanting to spend time - this is statistical proof to reduce debate.

Uganda’s external debt strategy is focused on three fundamental areas: One is to seek grants where you don’t need to pay back. Second, to target concessional conditions when you are borrowing and three, to focus budget targets to the areas, which unlock the greatest potential of the economy and developing infrastructure. 

On the basis of that, I can assure members of this House that the borrowing at this moment is within sustainable limits and government will endeavour, through its external debt strategy, to avoid a level of committing this country beyond sustainability.

The second question concerns the effect of Uganda’s continued borrowing on exports. This is already in the strategy paper, which was distributed to this House and our external borrowing is only focused on strategic areas, which address the supply constraints to growth and reduce the cost of doing business in the country.

The concluding point here is that as long as you are focusing your borrowing on areas, which improve your productivity, expand it and unlock growth potential and you are able to pay back, that is prudent borrowing.

Thirdly, the impact of external debt repayment on social service budget. Again quickly, the strategy of government particularly when the country negotiated HIPC that is Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, is that the funds saved have been put on an account, which is the Poverty Action Fund. This is a ring-fenced account and money is directed towards financing the social service sector and principally health, education and other social services.

I hope this answer is satisfactory. If further questions are needed, I am prepared and ready to provide them. Thank you very much.

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you. The other question, which I think needs better clarification is, what arrangement has government put in place or made to repay these debts?

3.48
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mr Minister, these are percentages. Are they in real terms or nominal terms?

Secondly, can you give us the exact numbers instead of the percentages? Where is the base period of which you are applying the percentages?

3.49
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would seek your indulgence. This week in our pigeonholes, the Ministry of Finance gave us the same subject in a booklet. 

As a Committee of Economy, we had requested much earlier that this is fully presented to the plenary so that the House can appreciate how we are performing in terms of the debt portfolio, the performance of loans and generally the sustainability. 

Would it be proper for the minister to seek another time to present that booklet, which we got at a committee level? Members now have copies but we think it is very important for the plenary and members to understand and appreciate how we are performing in terms of the debt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I appreciate the fact that the minister has distributed that document but we had a backlog of questions and we undertook that the outstanding questions should be answered. So let him answer this but you will still come back to explain that document, which you issued to the House.

3.50
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the hon. minister to be very clear whether our foreign debt policy is based on the World Bank model, OECD model or UN model. 

I am saying this specifically because the UN model does not agree with the NPVC standards. So, can the minister be very clear whether our debt sustainability framework is based on the World Bank model, OECD model, UN model or it follows the Paris Declaration model? 

3.51
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): I have two supplementary questions to the minister. He stated that our external debt is currently US$4 billion. How can we prove that what you are saying here is the exact debt of Uganda? 

Secondly, as a Minister of Finance and a professor, which generation of Ugandans is most likely going to pay these debts? Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please answer.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, let me begin with the last question of hon. Otto. I have stated in this House and I will stand by what I have stated that the total external debt of this country is US$4 billion. And it is true. I would want you to state what is in the contrary if you know. What is the contrary figure? Hon. Otto, my figure is US$4 billion and it is true, if you doubting it, show the alternative. Do you have an alternative answer to this? 

I am confirming to this House, this figure I have given is true and I can prove it by looking at the documentation. If hon. Otto has his list of external debt, let him put it on the Table and you reveal the source of that information. 
  
MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, with all due respect Bank of Uganda states that the external debt of Uganda is US$8 billion. So, if you are asking for an alternative opinion I can say US $20 billion. So, what this House needs is evidence that the external debt is US $4 billion. We need some tangible evidence whether from the Bank of Uganda or from those whom we owe money. Not just figures because you are contradicting URA, you are contradicting Bank of Uganda and now you are about to contradict yourself. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, if hon. Otto is doubting the figure I have given to this House, the burden of contrary evidence is on him to prove that this figure is not right. 

Madam Speaker, let me continue. Which generation is likely to pay? This country is going to be in existence in perpetuity. So, all the generations from now henceforth will continue to pay the commitments we are making and that is why we are careful not to overburden the future generation.

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you hon. minister for giving way. We are not the first to be on this world and therefore the things we are enjoying, you did not subscribe to. Others did suffer for them. So, it is also your duty to contribute similarly and add on to what you found for the generations to come. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Hon. Ekanya’s supplementary question was asking which model Uganda is following in its commitment of external debt. I thought I had stated here that the focus of Uganda’s external debt, you can call it a model; the model we are following is a domestic model. It is a Ugandan model. It is not a World Bank model or UN model. It is a domestic model; It is ours, indigenous, homemade. 

Now, the Chairman of the National Economy, yes, with your permission I can come back to the House and explain the position of the external debt strategy. 

I should answer hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s points as to whether the figures I have given are nominal or real. These figures I am quoting are really real. They are not nominal. I know what he is trying to get at but I am saying to you that the figures I am putting are external stock contracted and the monies disbursed and the percentage that I am using are actual revenue collections of the country, which I am using as figures in calculation of the ratios to measure the sustainability of external debt. 

And finally, what arrangements have we made to pay? We do this thing annually in the Budget. Incidentally, there is absolutely no external loan committed which is not approved by this House and consequently, the obligation to pay is also approved by this House and we pay in accordance with the terms approved on the Floor of this House. Thank you very much. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 96/01/08 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

3.59
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Northern): “Would the Minister inform the House about the plans Government has put in place to rehabilitate, staff and equip the orthopaedic workshop at Mulago National Referral hospital; a workshop that is currently understaffed, poorly equipped, dilapidated and using obsolete technology incapable of meeting the rising demands of the users.”

3.59
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Nokrach wanted to know whether I could inform the House about what plan the government has to rehabilitate, staff and equip the orthopaedic workshop at Mulago National Referral hospital; a workshop that is currently understaffed, poorly equipped, dilapidated and using obsolete technology incapable of meeting rising demands of the users. 

I will give a little background about that workshop and then I will explain the plans that the government has to rehabilitate the unit. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members for more than 12 years now, there has been a remarkable decline in the operation of Mulago Hospital Orthopedic Workshop. This has been mainly due to poor funding and lack of experienced administrative staff to manage it. 

Previously donors especially AVIS from the Italian Cooperation and also the late Professor Belcher supported this workshop with funds and technical assistance. However, this support stopped in 1996. At the moment, the workshop provides its services under the Mulago Hospital budget, which budget as you know is rather small. 

Hon. Members, it is important to appreciate that when reviewing the operations of Mulago Hospital, we should realize that we are under funded. 

The workshop has started and equipment to produce appliances or assertive devices for persons with disabilities in the whole of this country and also for the whole of the Great Lakes Region is in place. This workshop is owned by the Government of Uganda and is run by Mulago National Referral Hospital as I earlier on mentioned. 

The allocation to the workshop has been only Shs 15 million per month and this is supposed to be used to purchase raw materials to fabricate the required appliances. In addition it pays the staff salaries and wages plus utilities. This budget allocation is obviously small. However, budgeting for Mulago hospital has been modified now. 

The Heart Institute is going to receive its own vote. The Cancer Institute has its own Vote. Consequently, there will be more hospitals going directly to Mulago Hospital and consequently, the plan for the said workshop is likely to improve. And Government plans to give strong support to the workshop. 

The Ministry of Health and that of Finance are going to include the workshop in the general budget of Mulago Hospital rather than depending on outside grants. The workshop requires major renovation. The Government is determined to provide capital as a development fund for this renovation.

Equipment

A capital development fund to procure, prepare and service the machinery will be provided. Prospective donors will be encouraged to contribute directly to the workshop and not through Mulago Hospital. We are also going to provide close supervision of the workshop by getting locally and technically knowledgeable people to run it.

The orthopedic workshop is going to be taken as a project initially and subsequently be institutionalised and budgeted for through Mulago Hospital. 

To ease the purchase of raw materials, a central purchasing system has now been established from NMS and JMS. It is not going to be as it was before where the money for the purchase of equipment was going through the ministry. 

About 80 percent of Mulago budget for equipment is going to go to NMS and JMS where relevant, directly, so that there will be a credit line for the purchase of equipment and am sure this will affect the improvement of the orthopedic workshop at Mulago Hospital. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nokrach, do you have a supplementary?

MR NOKRACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for his responses and from what I know, he has been very honest in his responses. I want to thank him sincerely. 

However, Madam Speaker, although the proposal given by the Minister is very good, is it possible for him to assert time frames as to when things are going to happen so that my people know that he is serious?

The second issue is the prices of the appliances are extremely high. A wheel chair costs Shs 150,000; an artificial limb is Shs 500,000. My people cannot afford them. Long time ago, these appliances were given freely but now our economy is growing; not only growing but booming – (Laughter)- is it possible for the ministry to subsidize on these appliances so that our people can get them easily? This is one way of interpreting a growing economy in the country. Can the minister really think about this one seriously? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, just supplementaries and not preambles.

4.08
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving positive responses to the questions raised and I would also like to thank hon. Nokrach for raising these questions.

I am a member of the Committee on Social Services and I have always been raising these questions about the facilities needed by persons with disabilities. None of these facilities have ever been a priority, neither to the ministries nor to any other person concerned. It is good that at least this one is coming to the Floor of this House.

When I read the responses of the minister, it looks like he is looking at the manufacturing of appliances only. Yes, it is true we need the appliances and as hon. Nokrach has said, the appliances are not even available. They are inadequate, very expensive and people with disabilities cannot afford them.

But the other service, which we are getting from the orthopedic workshop, was physiotherapy exercises. We cannot get these exercises from anywhere and if at all we access them, they are very expensive. This is actually one of the causes of secondary disabilities in people especially those ones who are affected by polio. 

I know that when we talk about disability issues everybody says that it is very expensive and so forth and that is why they will say that the budget ceiling is already decided and nothing can be done. 

But I just want to request the minister and the ministry concerned that since we have not yet discussed the policy statements, can they make readjustments within their budgets to start on this kind of work? And more so, as they create budget votes for other issues, can they create a specific budget vote to cater for this workshop? Thank you.

4.10
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the response. The minister informed us that he plans to have a separate vote for the various institutes. 

I would like to know the plan that is in place to accelerate the acquisition of a radiotherapy machine in Mulago. We have talked about this before and you know we need it because people start lining to use this machine as early as 3.00 a.m. Thank you.

4.11
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not want to say anything but I have stood up to thank the minister for saying the truth unlike other ministers -(Interjections)- yes, I have to say this because this is very true. The situation at Mulago Orthopedic Ward is what the minister has reported.

The question I want to put -(Interruption)

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much, Madam speaker. Is the hon. Member in order to say that people are not speaking the truth without stating who those people are? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we sit here, we listen and we have different perspectives of things. So that is his perspective. Please ask your question.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am worried that the former Minister of National Guidance cannot take this as an example. (Laughter)

But I just want to find out whether this Shs 115 million was requested for and if it was requested for, did Parliament pass it? And if Parliament passed it, did the Ministry of Finance refuse to give it to the Orthopedic Clinic? If they refused, then we should consider them criminals. I thank you.

4.13
MR TOSKIN BARTILE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Madam Speaker, we are aware that the demand for orthopedic services is very high especially with the current problem of accidents. Does the minister have any plans to decentralise workshops or even to improve the workshops at the regional hospitals? We have been to Mbale and it is almost non functional now.

Then the other question is what plans has the ministry got to increase the manpower on the orthopedic services that we are short of?

4.14
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister for his response. I just have one serious national concern about the increasing accidents and the recent war in Northern Uganda which have left many people with disability.

The supply of limbs and orthopedic facilities to cater for persons with disability is becoming inadequate day in and day out as the minister has elaborated. It is very appalling that right now in the park yard of Uganda Revenue Authority there is a container for limbs and orthopedic equipment destined for Mbale but it is going to be auctioned because of failure to pay tax.

Can I inquire what the government is doing considering the shortages in our facilities to provide the equipment? There is an options to take care of the equipment brought in as donation to cater for the shortages we are having in the country.

May I get an elaborate answer as far as that situation is concerned?

4.16
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to draw your attention to page 2 of the response of the minister. The first paragraph says when donors stopped funding the workshop; Government was to give Shs 115 million as an initial fund to energise the workshop. This money has never been given.

This worries me. It shows the high level of discrimination against persons with disabilities. It shows a high level of negative attitude towards persons with disabilities. It shows what we are being looked at and portrayed as- by other people who are supposed to be the implementers of government programmes. It tells what people think about us.

My question is that given this scenario and given the way forward as recommended by the minister, how sure are we that these good proposals are going to be taken into consideration when it comes to issues like this?

I may even ask wanting to know whether the Minister of Health has taken an initiative to have a dialogue meeting with the Minister of Finance so as to have this incorporated into their budget framework. 

And if I may request, since there is a supplementary budget coming in the excess of 3 percent, which is legally allowed, can this also be taken care of since to us as persons with disabilities, crutches are like aspirin and Panadol? Without them, I cannot go anywhere. Can this also be treated among those priorities, which are of an emergency nature? 

As I wind up, I want to say that we believe that there is nothing for us without us. I thank you.

4.19
MS FLORENCE SSEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to find out from the minister whether he is aware that poor orthopedic appliances cause us secondary disabilities. We are using primitive orthopedic appliances. Some of them are too heavy for our lives, for example, the calipers like those I use are too heavy for my life. Yet in India, they make lighter ones, which are not being made here and the minister is not even proposing modern ways of training orthopedic assistants and those who work in the workshops to adopt the modern orthopedic appliances. This then means even the machines that he is praising are no longer as good as he says. We need better machines.

I want to also ask the minister whether he is aware that some people are not mobile right now because they cannot make use of those appliances being given. 

I have an example of a lady called Frances Mutamba; she has been working in Lugazi Sugar Factory and in Mulago they cannot make that artificial limb for her. They do not have the materials. 

I would like to find out from the minister whether his ministry can now provide the materials. If they cannot provide them, then the ministry should now provide an air ticket and facilitation for this lady to enable her to be mobile. She cannot be a beggar; she is educated and has been working but the leg she had acquired from overseas is broken. In Uganda – even in Mulago, they cannot make a leg for her and they sent her to Buluba where they too cannot make one for her. What plans does the minister have for such people? 

4.22
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the State of the Nation Address and also in the Budget Speech, public-private partnership was emphasised as the way forward for Mulago Hospital. I would like to ask the minister whether he is aware that 60 percent has been given to an investor and the government has only 40 percent stake in Mulago Hospital. 

4.23
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me thank the Minister of Health for the information he has given. My short questions are: One, why has it taken so long for the Ministry of Health to realise or appreciate the importance of Mulago Orthopedic workshop?

The second concern is that when it comes to life, the Government of Uganda should not depend entirely on donor funding. Even if there are constraints of funds in this country, I think a nominal budgetary provision should be given to important issues concerning health. 

What provision is being made by the Ministry of Health to ensure the training of orthopaedics staff - leave alone the orthopedic surgeons – I know that their training takes a long time. But orthopedic assistants should be available in all regional hospitals.

4.24
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you. I was in the orthopedic workshop late last year and according to the minister, there are so many challenges and I agree with him. But I want to ask, what have you done as a government? Because I can see in the following proposed way forward, you are saying that the workshop needs strong support from government, and then you are saying that government should provide capital development funds for these renovations. Which government are you asking to support when yourself are in the government?

Second question, what plans do you have, Mr Minister to extend these orthopaedic services to regional referral hospitals because you notice that there is really need to have affirmative action to help the people with disabilities in this country. I really feel strongly that this section of our community is being neglected by this government and I want to request that you extend these services all over the country. Thank you. 

4.26
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern was also raised by hon. Mathias Kasamba about the Northern region. We have been at war and hon. Minister, I am sure that you know we have an orthopaedics workshop in Gulu and right now, they get support from AFC but it is not enough. Since you have already got a very big challenge in Mulago Orthopaedics Workshop, is there a plan for the already existing orthopaedics workshop in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital since we have very many people there who suffer and who cannot even afford to come to Mulago National Referral Hospital?

4.27
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three questions and the first one is related to Prof. Belcher. When Prof. Belcher was in Mulago Orthopaedic Clinic, it used to be funded and a lot of operations were done free of charge. When he died, that funding stopped. Since you are looking out for funders, to what extent have you followed up this funding that Prof. Belcher used?

Secondly, I would like to know what the budget of the Orthopaedic Workshop would be against which you claim to be under-funded. What is the budget of the orthopaedic clinic so that it can work optimally to satisfy everybody? 

Thirdly, what excuse can this government have for not funding healthcare to the optimum when other neighbouring countries including those which have lower economic statuses than us are about to fund some of these programmes optimally? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please answer thematically. Many of the questions were similar. 

4.29
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nokrach raised a very pertinent question that the prices of these appliances have become very expensive; and whether there is a plan by Government to subsidise them. 

Actually, what we are trying to do at the moment is to re-establish the workshop. Let it function properly and as we go along, the prices of most of these appliances will come down when we start producing massively and also when we start funding the workshop properly.

Hon. Nalule, I think physiotherapy is a different question. The question I was trying to answer here today is with regard to the Orthopaedic Workshop. If the hon. Member wants to find out about physiotherapy, I will need to make consultations and then return with an answer. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, on her behalf, let me say that you should come back and answer that question because she said that apart from the orthopaedic appliances, they are supposed to have physiotherapy but it is not there. So, their treatment is not complete. 

DR MALLINGA: Physiotherapy is a separate unit. The Orthopaedic workshop is a different unit. I worked in Mulago for seven years and I should be able to tell you. Hon. Munyira, about Radiotherapy, a new cobalt unit is already budgeted for the Cancer Unit. So, that answers your question. 

Hon. Mutuluuza, actually as I pointed out, we are now funding the orthopaedic workshop through a budget of Mulago Hospital. I agree with you that 15 million a month is very little money but as you know when we distribute money, there are two factors. It depends on how much money is available in the country and secondly, on how much money you allocate to the Ministry of Health. I have constantly appealed to the hon. Members of Parliament that I need more money in the Ministry of Health but they have never supported me. (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think you are really accusing this House of disabling your ministry. Is there any occasion when this House has denied you the money you presented here? 

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I then look forward to this time that the hon. Members of Parliament will influence the budget to increase the share through the Budget Committee and through the discussions. I hope they will increase the money to the Ministry of Health.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should correct the record.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, I think the blame belongs to Government because under Article 93 of the Constitution, any motion or resolution which makes a burden or a charge on the Consolidated Fund or any other fund can only be made by Government. So, the blame belongs to us. We should not blame Parliament. (Applause)

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much. Hon. Toskin asked if there was a possibility of decentralisation of the orthopaedic units.  

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I am really angry with the minister for the sarcastic answer he has given us. 

What I would like to find out from him is that in the Sixth Parliament, what was the budget of the Ministry of Health? And today what is the budget of the Ministry of Health? Are we not increasing money every year? Why don’t you include orthopaedic appliances? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we really need to finish with this. Point of procedure, hon. Epetait.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, my colleague, hon. Mallinga, the Minister of Health has made a very scathing attack on the Members of this House. I thank the hon. Prime Minister for giving him guidance that the burden goes to Government because of the limitation this House has under Article 93 of the Constitution. 

Now, we are all aware that all Members of this House have been agitating for improved healthcare delivery in this country. I have not heard any Member advocate for decreased funding to health. The House has been very supportive but you have started turning round. I demand that he apologises before he continues.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, the next question is from hon. Toskin. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. hon. minister. Please withdraw the statement that this House has denied you money because it is on the Hansard.

DR MALLINGA: Okay. What I should have said is that the House should have influenced the budgetary system to prioritise budgeting for health -(Interjection) 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, you have guided this House and you have rightly advised the minister to first of all, acknowledge that this House has all the good will and that we need improved services in this country and hence an improved budget for them. He made a statement which was portraying us as not having good will.

Madam Speaker, you rightly guided the minister. Is it in order for him, instead of withdrawing the statement, apologising and creating good will between the ministry and this House, to continue with other statements and disregard your guidance? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know the public sometimes does not distinguish between the work of Parliament and the work of Government and I can assure you that Parliament is a favourite catchword. So, when they hear statements like the one you have made that we have failed to give you money, it sends bad signals. Please withdraw what you said. This House has been supportive. (Applause)

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, through your guidance it has been emphasised to me that allocation of money through the budget is the responsibility of Government and not Parliament. 

I would also like to appreciate the support I have always received from the Members of Parliament. (Applause) I withdraw my previous statement. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I was responding to the question-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is it hon. Odit?

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, we appreciate the apology from the minister as well as the subsequent withdrawal of the statement. Now, what about the statement made by the Prime Minister when trying to take responsibility and pass the blame to Government for that very tight legal provision? What message can we learn from that one?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What? You want the Minister of Health to answer that?

MR ODIT: What I read from the Prime Minister’s statement is that he has apologised on behalf of Government. Government has failed in its responsibility to relax the provision for making it possible for us to offer more resources for the various sectors that Government manages. Can he be clear over the statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think if you want to amend the Constitution, let us move the motion in this House. That is now our responsibility. He has acknowledged that it is difficult so we make the move. Hon. Minister, proceed.


PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, I have not – what I said was that it is our task; it is the task of Government, but Government has got many priorities –(Interjections)- yes, government had got many priorities and you must understand that. And we sit in cabinet to allocate these resources. I would like you to understand that my Government is very efficient.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the debate on the amendment of the Constitution will come separately. Let us finish with the issues raised by our members.

MR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you can protect me, I will be able to answer the question that was asked by hon. Toskin. He asked if it is possible to decentralise the orthopaedic services in country. 

I would like to say that orthopaedic services are available at all the regional referral hospitals. They are also available at all the district hospitals. Even up to health centre IV; we have orthopaedic assistants who apply plasters. Anybody trained in medicine – if you were trained the way I was - you should be able to reduce fractures; that is an orthopaedic service. You should be able to operate on some fracture, which is called internal fixation. We are seeing orthopaedic services as highly specialised and only to be performed by those people who are specialised, but general practitioners can also provide those services.

There was a question on whether we are increasing the services. I would like to say, yes, we are training orthopaedic assistants; we are increasing the services.

The hon. Member from Kakuto wanted to find out if we are increasing the services given the increasing number of accidents. Again, I would like to say, yes. But I want to add that we are planning to generally improve all the services provided in the health sector. 

There is a lorry, he says, that is full of equipment – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I have information –(Interjections)- on the lorry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us give him time because he is part of the Ministry of Health.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you my senior colleague. There is an allegation that a lorry full of medical equipment – (Interjections)– no, he has allowed me – that this lorry is going to be auctioned, which is not true.

I would like to state it clearly that there are no medical equipment in this country for which taxes are paid. I have looked at the packing list – the goods that are declared in Nakawa - (Interruption)

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, I am very well aware of what I talked about. I am in the process of clearing a container meant for my community in Kakuto, but while at URA I got information that there is a container destined for Mbale – but he is talking about a container that is meant for my people. 

Anyway, in the process of clearing that container, I got information about a container destined for Mbale with limbs for orthopaedic and disability community in the Eastern region, but which URA is going to auction due to failure to pay taxes for it. What he is talking about is very different; he should not combine the two. I am aware of what I am talking about. Is he in order to use the documents that I have given him and which are for my container in giving such information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister of Health, I think the information that came was given in good faith. The Members have complained that there is a shortage of orthopaedic equipment in this country and that there is a container about to be auctioned. Why don’t you say you will find out what is happening and pass it on to Mbale? 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I am giving information and I want to standby it. Under the Harmonised Code of the East African Customs Union, no medical equipment pay taxes, it is as simple as that. The problem must be from the clearing agent who mixed the goods to clear them as tax exempted. That is where the problem is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, hon. Minister, as far as we are concerned if this equipment is available and destined for people who need it, why don’t you help get it out? You should not come here and speak for the agents. Assist the disabled to get the equipment and take it to Mbale.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, this is the first time I am hearing about this lorry. I would like to say that I am going to work with hon. Kasamba to establish the existence of this lorry; I will go forward from there. If the Hon. Members want, I will come back and report to them about that lorry.

Hon. Balyejusa, it is really not true that we discriminate against disabled people. I think it is the amount of money available in this country that limits the kind of services we can provide to everybody. We are not 100 percent providing services in all the areas that we should be providing. It is not a deliberate discrimination against disabled people. I am extremely sensitive to the needs of disabled people. 

When I was practicing obstetrics, whenever there was nobody to deliver disabled patients, I was always available. I would like to inform the House that I have worked with disabled people throughout the time I practiced medicine. So, the question of I, deliberately discriminating against disabled people is impossible. I would like to say that we are trying hard to improve the services provided to the disabled people.

I would like to agree with hon. Nayiga on the comment that poor orthopaedic appliances create or increase disability. However, as I explained, I would like to say that we are trying to improve the appliances that we make available to disabled people in this country. It is true there is a shortage of appliances in this country, but we are trying hard to make sure every disabled person who uses appliances actually gets one.

Hon. Anokbonggo wanted to know why it has taken so long for us to improve. I cannot really explain what happened in the past; you know that, but now that I am in charge, things are improving. We hope to influence – you know Mulago Hospital manages its own budget. We give them a lamp sum, but how they use that money is up to them. 

Anyway, we are trying to work with them to improve the money that goes to take care of the disabled. Our emphasis at Mulago is obstetrics - maternal-child health and the disabled. I have already mentioned that we are increasing on the number of orthopaedic assistants.

Hon. Akello wanted to know the plans we have for orthopaedic services, but as soon as she finished, someone else said that there is an orthopaedic unit at Gulu – she had also complained that there are no orthopaedic services in regional referral hospitals. 

I am happy she now knows that there is an orthopaedic unit at Gulu Hospital. But like any other health service that are just being started- maybe we are not yet providing the services to the satisfaction of everybody. Well, what I can tell you is that we are going to improve on it.

Finally, there was a question on what would be the budget for the orthopaedic unit at Mulago Hospital. I would like to say, I do not know. Mulago Hospital decides on how to use its money. What I can say is that we shall try to influence them so that they can spend more on maternal-child health and the disabled.

Madam Speaker, thank you very much for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I really would like to thank the Executive for answering all these many questions today. We have made progress and I hope that next week we shall utilise the time much better. Otherwise, I think we have done well for today. We have answered four questions and I think that is an achievement.

4.55
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I also would like to pay tribute to the Speaker for putting the outstanding questions on the Order Paper. I also want to thank Government for doing an excellent job. We are ready to serve. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have got my items on the Order Paper – I do not know what he wants to say. Let us move on to statements very quickly because we have to handle the supplementary schedule.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE MALABA CUSTOMS BORDER POST

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, on Tuesday, 16 June 2009, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, Member of Parliament for Tororo County raised in Parliament, a concern about Uganda Revenue Authority introducing a policy change in cargo handling, which according to him, frustrated clearing agents because it caused delays in cargo handling, resulted into lose of business and that it had caused a strike.

Madam Speaker, you directed me to investigate and report to Parliament on the efforts that were being put in place to contain the strike. I would like to report that I have done so and wish to confirm to you and the House at large that there was no strike at all. 

I want to report on the matter briefly as follows: What URA did was in response to increasing demand world wide for custom procedures to be reduced to minimum so that the cost of doing business is reduced to ensure all non-tariff barriers are reduced and impediments in transit transport and routes is minimized. 

As a result of that Uganda Revenue Authority allowed for goods destined to big towns such as Jinja, Kampala and Mbale to have final Clarence involving verification of goods and payment of taxes to be done at the point of destination. 

Malaba is a very big gateway and handles nearly 80 percent of the dry cargo and 20 percent of the fuel imported in the country. 

As a result of this change, there have been benefits; the clearing time has been reduced substantially, it used to take three days, now it takes three hours. 

Costs, which would otherwise be incurred by the business community from retention of tracks and over-time charges have been eliminated by this change in cargo handling procedures. 

Loss that would have been incurred on goods because of long stay at the border has also been reduced. And manipulation of documents, which was very common has also reduced.

But in economics, whenever you do one thing, something else comes up. By reducing the congestion at Malaba, the casual labourers at Malaba have now less work to do because business has been transferred. That means less business for the local both during the day and at night. Congestion has been reduced and a 24 hour operation has also made work quite more efficient. 

So the challenging which hon. Ekanya has raised are being addressed by the URA holding meetings with the local people, including political leaders, business community and commissioner generals of Kenya and Uganda and other actors in the region to ensure that this is understood. And it is understood because locally, Malaba as an area may loss some jobs but holistically, the country benefits because of efficient clearing on the borders.

So in conclusion, this policy change is meant for improving efficiency in clearing the borders; and it is also responding to international demand. It will also improve the cost of doing business in the country. We support it and I have talked with hon. Ekanya. This matter can be handled locally so that the efficiency of clearing and improving the climate of doing business in the country is not hindered by temporary lose of jobs by the people in the area. Madam Speaker, I beg to report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, hon. Members, this was in response to our request that the minister briefs the country on the containment of the strike. He has said that actually there was no strike. 

Yesterday, hon. Ekanya said that there was no strike. So what we need to do is to wait for the main report for which you gave him one month, because this was to address the strike, which is not there. 

5.02
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I was very clear here yesterday. I said the strike was suspended. I am finding a bit of difficulty with the hon. Minister, with whom I had a dialogue. 

His report was prepared by URA, because those are his technical people. But instead of reading what is in the report, he is saying that there was no strike. But if you read his report on page 6, it says, “The strike was not supported by the majority of the clearing agents”. This means there was a strike –(Interjections)– yes, it is here in his report. So, if he says there was no strike, it means that I lied to this House, which is a very serious matter. 

Yesterday, I presented a letter here signed by the Chairperson of Malaba Clearing Agents Association. The minister should have read the report as prepared for him by URA technical staff; but it is wrong for him to come and say there was no strike, yet in the statement there is reference to the same strike. 

Let us put the record straight, the companies that do not want to cooperate in the association are the shipping lines. The shipping lines are Intraship, Panalpina, Transami, Mask etcetera. For them they have internal container depots in Kampala and therefore they would not what to be stopped. They want to get goods from Europe straight to Kampala. But the clearing agents within East Africa do not agree with this. Madam Speaker, I have the latest information –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we had two instructions for the minister. One to report on the strike, which he has said is not there now. And we also gave him a directive to come back within one month and give a full report so that we can debate it. So we have received information about the strike; there is no strike. Now, let us give him time to proceed with the main report so that we can debate fully. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your guidance. I only want to inform the minister that as the Committee of Government Assurances, we are very interested in this report. So it is not just saying that we are going to come back after one month. Some of the contents of what we are expecting in that one month, you seem to have brought it here. 

So, I want to take this opportunity to tell the minister that we are very interested and to make him aware that there are senior people who are doing business with Government and they do not want this port in Malaba because they have already acquired chunks of land in Kampala. So, please take this report with all the seriousness it deserves. 

Hon. Minister, our instructions still stands. You made a government assurance that within one month you will come back with a full report and we have a debate on this matter. You have dealt with the strike. Please come back in one month with a full report –(Interjections)– no, today was for the strike. Hon. Members, let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
ON THE ALLEGED FORCEFUL BREASTFEEDING OF PUPPIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Internal Affairs.

5.07
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, this is a statement to Parliament on the alleged forceful breast-feeding of puppies. The matter of the forceful breast feeding of puppies has been reported. Facts of the matter are as follows. 

A one Jennifer Alupo reported to the Woman Assistant Inspector of Police, a one Florence Amijiong of the Family Protection Unit at Pallisa Police Station, a case of failing, by her husband, a one Nathan Awoloyi, to provide necessities for the family and in addition, forcing her to breast-feed puppies.

The Family Protection Officer did not handle the matter expeditiously. This forced the complainant to seek support from the NGO called Women Won’t Wait. The NGO, based in Pallisa, is affiliated to another NGO, Action Aid.

The NGO decided to address a press conference on the matter. The District Police Commander learnt of the matter during this press conference.

Following the investigations, Nathan Awoloyi was produced in court to answer charges of failing to provide for his family. He is on remand in Kamuge Prison, Pallisa district. Meanwhile, Jennifer Alupo is at Women Won’t Wait facilities at Pallisa.

The General Inquiries File (GEF) on allegations of forceful breast-feeding of puppies was submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions Office in Mbale for consideration and advice.

Florence Amijiong was charged for negligence and failure to act promptly. The file was sent to the Mbale Regional Office. Six witnesses have so far testified and two more witnesses are due to appear.

I will keep the House informed about all developments regarding this case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, don’t go into the merits of the matter because it is subjudice.

5.10
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This allegation took place in Okorotok division, Kapala parish in Apapong sub-county where I represent as a Member of Parliament. 

It is unfortunate that this case is in court but I could have told the country what transpired. I seek your indulgence if I could clear the status of this matter concerning the forceful breastfeeding of puppies. If you could allow me –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. Don’t go into the matter. I think it is the court to decide whether the allegations are true or not. We cannot handle it here.

MR OPANGE: Madam Speaker, the only problem we have in this case is that Mr Awoloyi has been charged for failure to provide the basic necessities for the family and not for the allegation of forceful breast-feeding of the puppies. Therefore, I think it would be prudent for us to restrict ourselves from the other case of failure to provide basic necessities and we talk about the forceful breast-feeding because these two are not related in court.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we don’t have the charge sheet here. No. Hon. Members, I think the minister has undertaken to update us on this matter. I can ask members of Parliament to take an interest in what is going on but for us to say, he did or he did not- We can’t say that here.

MR OPANGE: Madam Speaker, I realise that one can easily access bail for failure to provide basic necessities to the family but I wonder why Awoloyi has been denied bail whereas it is his right to ask for it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the matter is subjudice. The minister has undertaken to update us on this matter. So together with the minister, we shall keep monitoring what is happening. Please. Thank you very much.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2008/2009 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET, ON SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2

5.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Arising from what transpired yesterday in the House, you requested us to go and reconsider the report and present today in order to clear the issues that arose yesterday.

We met as a committee and decided that we divide this supplementary into two. One, the amount up to 3 percent, which totalled Shs 74.624 billion for which separate approval will be requested for from Parliament. Then the second amount of Shs 62.501 billion, which is the amount over and above 3 percent and it is not yet issued for the Ministry of Finance to give us the way forward.

I will proceed on the amount, which is up to 3 percent which is the Shs 74.624 billion. 

On 14 May 2009 Supplementary Schedule No.2 was laid on the Table by the Minister of Finance, and it was subsequently referred to the Budget Committee. The Budget Committee duly considered this report as reported yesterday and I would now like to just read a summary of the items which add up to the Shs 74.624 billion, which is the amount that adds up the total supplementary of schedule No.1 and now partly of this schedule No.2 to make up the 3 percent for which parliamentary approval will still be required. 

Madam Speaker, I will proceed to read the summary because I know that each and every Member of Parliament has a copy of the document that was laid on Table on 14 May2009, which has the details. 

Summary

Vote 001: Office of the President, Shs 0.580 billion, and that was contribution to the Commonwealth Partnership Technology Management Endowment Fund. These details are in the report which I believe all of you have. 

Still on Vote 001: Office of the President, facilitation of the manifesto implementation unit, Shs 0.592 billion. 

State House: facilitation of the model villages under the Poverty Alleviation Programme, Shs1 billion. 

State House: promotion of agriculture in Buganda, Bunyoro and Busoga, Shs1 billion.

Vote 004: Madam Speaker, I have explained that the document was laid on Table and I am only giving a summary of the document which every Member of Parliament is in possession of. 

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, to my understanding, Government came to this House with Schedule No.2 seeking the approval of this House for the expenditure they had incurred as indicated in that schedule. And the findings of the Committee and indeed this House were that the expenditure was beyond the statutory limit. What I am hearing now is that there is an attempt to circumvent that, to breakdown the expenditure that has been presented by Government in two portions in order to break the statutory limit. 

I have a problem. I am wondering whether government has withdrawn Supplementary Schedule No.2 and then presented that expenditure in different bits. Because as far as we are concerned, or I am concerned, what I have here is Schedule No.2. How then does it become two schedules? This is the presentation of government.

I have a concern that in trying to defeat the law, we will be defeating ourselves. Government has said that they spent this money and we have found that it is beyond. 

In my view, our job is very simple: to hold government responsible for carrying out illegal expenditure, and proceed accordingly. But to go back and try to help Government to circumvent the law, in my view, is wrong for this House to do. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the chairperson explained yesterday under the Budget Act that this House is required to approve these expenditures, and that is what she is doing. 

MR ODUMAN: I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker. Yes, I agree that it is for this House to approve. How much then, we need to ask, can this House approve? My problem is: the expenditure as presented by government is more. What then does the law say –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oduman, I do not know whether you were here yesterday. You were not here yesterday. Allow the chairperson to explain. Please, let her make the presentation and then you will understand what she is doing. 

MR OKUPA: I think the problem here is procedure. According to Article 154, I think it should have been the Minister to present first because what she presented last time was not this. We would have expected the minister to present this and then the chairperson would come in later; and that is where we are finding a problem. It should have been the other way round. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is us who asked the chairperson and her committee to go back and reformulate the presentation. 

MR OKUPA: I agree with you. They should have then communicated to the minister to come and present his work so that they present their report after he has presented his resolution. That is what should have happened. They should have informed the minister to come present and then for us we submit our report based on it since we had already looked at this.  

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I thank colleagues for the concerns they have put forward. In the preamble I gave, I said that what I am reading is the difference, which is the Shs 74.624 billion, which would exhaust the 3 percent supplementary expenditure, which is authorised by the law for government to spend and then come and report to Parliament within three months. 

Now, Madam Speaker, maybe you could guide the House. What I was doing was to present up to 3 percent, we get approval because it is already spent; then the over and above, Government presents the resolution seeking parliamentary authority to spend over and above the 3 percent. That is what I was requesting. So, maybe you could guide us. Do we start up to 3 percent or with the resolution?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, we do not need to make this process very complicated because all we desired was that we do things according to the law. Supplementary schedule No.2 has already been presented. Our problem was that the expenditure over and above the 3 percent had not been approved and what we required of Government is to ask Parliament to approve. Since it will be part of the supplementary expenditure schedule No.2, if we obtained this approval, then we would go and deal with schedule No.2 and pass it. Because the approval would have been there and everything in schedule No.2 would include what is required for us to approve and the one that they are free to expend on account of the provisions of the Budget Act. 

If government came and said this is the figure over and above, and I see a resolution but the title is not asking us to approve, the title is “Resolution of Parliament to resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval …” Ok, I do not know whether that is the right title but the title should be asking Parliament to authorise government to spend over and above the 3 percent. That would be more appropriate. We would sit and look at it, pass it and then we come to the Schedule No.2 and pass it. 

5.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Leader of the Opposition for making that clarification. 

Madam Speaker, when we adjourned yesterday, we had agreed that the Ministry of Finance presents a resolution to Parliament to authorize the spending of monies as supplementary expenditure which is required to finance Government activities in excess of what is authorized under the law of 3 percent. It is that spirit that this resolution is presented to the House. 

RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR FY 2008/09

MR KAJARA: “WHEREAS clause 2(a) and (b) of Article 156 of the Constitution allows that in respect of any financial year it is found -
(a)	that the amount appropriated for any purpose  under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for  a purpose of which no amount has been appropriated; or
(b)	that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Act, a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.

AND WHEREAS Section 12(1) of the Budget Act provides that the total Supplementary Expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed 3 percent of the total for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS the limit of 3 percent of Supplementary Expenditure has been reached;

AND WHEREAS Government has received additional expenditure demands that require additional supplementary funding of Shs 62, 501, 546, 606 above the 3 percent limit;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament approves Supplementary Expenditure amounting to Shs 62,501,546,606 above the 3 percent provision under Section 12(1) of the Budget Act, 2001.”

Madam speaker, the House required that this additional expenditure over and above the 3 percent limit be explained. And if you see the attachment to this resolution, this is the money that is required to be spent above and over the 3 per cent limit. 

Vote 001 - Office of the President: Urgent Classified operations under ISO is 0.385 billion. 

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister. The office of the Prime Minister needs the provision of emergency relief food for the Karamoja sub region. Shs 10 374 billion; this money is required for the purchase of food for the hunger stricken area of Karamoja and government cannot sit down and wait when our people are dying. And if this money is not approve, Madam Speaker, it means that the hunger situation in Karamoja and some parts of the country will continue to kill people. Yesterday Members did express concern in the country especially in Karamoja, Teso and parts of Northern Uganda and this money is meant to address that.

Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development:  Shs 2.187 billion is money for completion of pending activities of the Government pool houses sale scheme. 

Madam Speaker, under the government pool housing sale scheme handled by the Ministry of Lands, houses which formerly belonged to Government were put under the Condominium law and there is money which is required to handle legal fees; to handle transfers and other taxes. If this money is not expended, it will result that the owners of this property, because it is not transferred into their names, may resort to taking court action, which will attract more fines or penalties to Government. And therefore we may incur more money than if we allow this expenditure to be spent.

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports

This Shs 13 billion is intended to support capitation for USE and it is supposed to be for second term. Second term opened without this money being provided but under the promise the Ministry will provide this money. If this money is not provided, it will result into closing or recalling secondary schools especially those that are private but are being supported under the USE Programme.

Shs O.350 billion is redundancy package for the staff in Kyambogo who were laid off. You recall that this Parliament authorized restructuring of Kyambogo University and the staff who were laid redundant have to be paid their entitlements. 

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority: Shs 8.975 billion is the money required to cater for the shortfalls in operations of the Budget for May and June. This money, Madam Speaker and Members is meant to enhance the capacity of the operations of the Uganda Revenue Authority to enable it collect more money, which will be used to enhance or support the Budget. It is very important that this money is given because if it is not, the operations of URA will be hampered and therefore will not be able to collect revenue as we have forecast. 

144 billion Uganda Police shortfall in the budget, the Shs 3.300 billion is meant to support the operations of the members of the Police Force that was deployed in Northern Uganda and Karamoja as a result of the seceding of the violence and the defeat of Kony, there was a gap in police personnel to man the law and order in that region and this money had not been provided for and therefore we need to provide this money in order for police to enhance its operations in that region.

Vote 021 - Ministry of East Africa and Community Affairs: This Shs 3.677 billion arose as a result of the depreciation of the Uganda Shilling, loss of poundage. This money was required for East African Affairs activities; you will know that the other activities of other missions were covered under Supplementary Schedule I, except for this ministry. So, this is needed also to make sure that the activities of that ministry are not hampered.

Vote 540 - Mpigi District: shortfall in urban and Conditional Grant and Urban Graduated Tax due to wrong computation which attracts Shs 0.094 billion.

560 Isingiro District, this was a Presidential pledge towards construction of the district headquarters, Shs 0.100 billion. 

566 Manafwa District is also a Presidential pledge, Shs 0.1 billion. This total comes to Shs 42.542 billion as additional expenditure of what is being sought and Members will know that this money has not been spent, but what Government has done is we have authorised activities like purchase of food and so forth to take place pending the approval of this expenditure.

In b) supplementary expenditure funded through the reallocation with in the budget; it is true this money had been appropriated in the budget, but the implication of the reallocation of this money is that you vary the authority of Parliament because Parliament authorised it to be spent under certain votes, but now we are varying this expenditure and the very fact that you remove it from one vote to another means you are creating a supplementary expenditure on that vote where you are transferring it.

And this was the argument of this honourable House last financial year and it was agreed that this money be reflected as supplementary expenditure. Ordinarily this should not have been supplementary expenditure but by order and direction of Parliament in last year’s discussion this was ordered so that we are working within the Budget Act, section 12(1).

Madam Speaker, I want to make it clear that most of this money has not been spent, but procurement activities and processes are going on, so that we are not time barred. Because if we do not spend this money and some Members advance the idea that Vote-on-Account is coming as the next item on the budget, all we are saying is that Vote-on-Account is money budgeted for the next financial year and not this year and this money is supposed to be spent this year.

If it is not approved, the suppliers of food and the schools as we have talked about, and the police, this will have an effect on Government operations. This is the spirit in which we are moving this resolution. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to request the House to support this provision, which is well over and above the 3 per cent as authorised by the Constitution and section 12 (1) of the Budget Act. I beg to move.

5.41
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oduman): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I would like to also thank the Budget Committee for making very good findings in their work. They made good findings. The concern that I will raise will be in the conclusion. Matters of principle were raised which needed to have come out in the response of the minister.

There was a question regarding the source of financing. In the past, there has been a question of where the money is going to come from for financing supplementaries but this time there was a good attempt to indicate where the money is coming from.

But a fundamental question was raised, some of the money is coming from Bank of Uganda and the committee raised the issue, why are we talking about a certain account in Bank of Uganda which we cannot see? What sort of account is that? And they asked for a bank statement for this account.

The concern of the committee in this report, on page 7 is that no bank statement was provided of this account in Bank of Uganda. So, why is the government hiding this account what ever the account is? It is here in the report. The committee has previously requested the minister -(Interruption)  

MR KAJARA: Thank you Shadow Minister for Finance for giving way. The concern that these draw downs are from Bank of Uganda; it is correct these draw downs are from the Bank of Uganda and the Bank of Uganda is the custodian of the consolidated fund of government. So these draw downs are not from any secret account; it is from the consolidated account which is housed in Bank of Uganda. That is the clarification I want to make.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, this was the concern of the committee –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is right in saying the custodian of the Consolidate Fund is Bank of Uganda and you are saying they are down draws from Bank of Uganda; you never said from Consolidated Fund. If you are saying down draw, that means –(Interjections)- okay, draw up if that is what you want – it means you have another method of utilising the Consolidated Fund in another name not a Consolidated Fund. We know the Consolidated Fund is the one where we have the Accountant-General who gives you the authority to draw money. Now for you, you are on a draw down.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us deal with this resolution first and then we embark on the other one later. 

MR ODUMAN: I am now dealing with an aspect of the resolution on the second page where we are talking about additional expenditure. Again, I will refer to the report of the committee because when we say we are getting monies from certain accounts and votes reallocating them to finance areas that have become priority, we need to assess the impact of those reallocations. 

Why Parliament approves these allocations in the first place is something that cannot be contested. The reallocations need to be justified and from what the committee says, they were not satisfied and I am still not sure that the minister has satisfied us now about the impact of the reallocations from the votes where the monies where allocated.

There were a lot of complaints raised by the committee about some sectors being prioritised yet there were others that were of greater priority. They are talking about provision for the helicopter as being a greater priority over provision of facilitation for the Police in Northern Uganda. These are the issues that the minister should have come up with to make a case for and how it affects these votes that he has advised us to move funds from.

It is an undoing on my part that I was not here yesterday, but I would have been more interested in debating in detail the principles in the report because the issues raised are very critical and we needed more details about loss of poundage, about the kingdoms and about arbitrary increments in salary in some departments like ISO. These are matters of concern to us. How can one department wake up and say we are increasing salaries for our staff by Shs 626 million and you bring that in a supplementary? Is that something that cannot be planned for? These are matters of principle which I think we should be addressing ourselves to on page 6 of the schedule. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I reminded you yesterday that we are going to have debate on the State of the Nation Address and on the Budget. Let us deal with the resolution and move.

5.49
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a contention with this request and I would like to call the attention of the House to the information given on the last page of this resolution. 

The minister has told this House under (b) that the supplementary expenditure is funded through reallocation within the budget. He has insisted that this money should actually be passed under this supplementary provision. 

In my understanding, this money is available somewhere in the budget. It is merely being reallocated. What I would have expected the minister to tell us is that he needs help for him to have money reallocated from department A to department B but not to ask for more money. If it is being reallocated, it must be somewhere and therefore it is my contention that what the minister should be asking for in terms of money is Shs 42.54 billion and not Shs 62.502 billion. 

I am not satisfied with the explanation and I think this is a way of hiding money. Where has the other money that was initially allocated to the other departments from where we are getting money to finance these activities gone? 

I am concerned about the shortfall in secondary capitation grant. Capitation grant is calculated on the basis –(Interruption)

COL GUMA GUMISIRIZA: I think the minister’s explanation is satisfying but you have not understood it. Technically you shift funds from one vote to another. The proposal can come from the Minister of Finance but the authority is by this Parliament. 

So what hon. Kajara was saying is that funds are being shifted from one vote and sector to another. Unless you are saying they should bring all those details here which I do not think is necessary. [Mr Odonga Otto: “It is not true.”] Hon. Otto, this is not law; it is financial and budgetary. Shifting money from one vote to another requires the approval of this Parliament and that is what the minister said.

MR AMURIAT: I am not an economist but at least I learnt a little bit of mathematics while at school. A supplementary budget is one over and above the budget that we pass and you are asking for extra funds beyond the budget. So, if you already have shs.19.9 billion in your budget, is there a need for us to ask for money over and above the budget? This is the gist of my question. 

The shortfall in the secondary capitation grant in my view, Madam Speaker, should not be arising here. Capitation grant is computed on the basis of population of pupils and students and so this figure should have been concretely placed in the budget and therefore no need for extra funding. 

I would like to ask for an explanation as to why we are asking for more money on capitation grant. It could be understood when you talk about depreciation of the shilling because this is not predicated like in the case of the minister of the East African Affairs, but not in the case of the Ministry of Education and specifically the capitation grant. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.54
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In his submission, the minister said that this money has not been spent but authorised. Later, he said that most of this money has not been spent. That means that some of it has been spent and he really emphasised the need for us to pass this budget within this financial year. 

We have to be extremely careful not to have budgets over and above the 3 percent limit that the Budget Act allows. We may be setting a very bad precedent. I have looked at a number of these votes and honestly, would some of these expenses not be budgeted for in this new financial year?

Madam Speaker let me react to vote 003 to the Prime Minister’s Office for the purchase of relief food. It is stated for the Karamoja sub-region. Yes, there is a lot of stress in the Karamoja sub-region caused by famine and this is not only limited to Karamoja but parts of Teso and the West Nile region. 

In my opinion, it should be such unforeseen disasters that we would probably cater for as a supplementary, but how do we talk about the Ministry of Lands –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I sit on this committee and if members were following well, on Tuesday when Parliament sat and there was this debate on famine, I raised this issue of Shs.190 billion with my chairperson. When the minister brought this before the committee, we actually pointed out the fact that it is not only the Karamoja region that needs food. So, we requested that this money be spread over the other affected areas and because the minister realised that the money is too little, he insisted that the money is to procure food for Karamoja and some few sub-counties in Teso. But I still think this is not the subject for this. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I want to emphasise the fact that we should only be looking at emergencies to have the 3 percent over and above the 3 percent. I do not see why we could not have budgeted for this vote 0112 for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Couldn’t it go for the next financial year? 

I appreciate the need for us to construct district headquarters, after all this money is not even sufficient to do the job. But my question still goes, couldn’t we be smart enough and handle it in the next financial year rather than opening up a certain gate which can be subject to abuse of supplementaries above 3 percent?

Madam Speaker, hon. Guma was labouring to explain provision b. In the paragraph, he says “Supplementary expenditure funded through re-allocation within the budget.” It is a very ambiguous heading. I think what hon. Guma is labouring to say is that Government is seeking for approval, for reallocation within the budget but they are talking of supplementary expenditure. 

Really, how can we start putting up a supplementary expenditure for something that has already been approved? So, I think the whole of paragraph b in my opinion is very uncalled for in this supplementary. I thank you. 

5.59
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to re-emphasise, and this should be in good faith to government and the minister, that the notion of supplementaries should really be in exceptional circumstances and I hope and urge Parliament to accept this kind of shady treatment of the Consolidated Fund and parliamentary approvals. We should reserve supplementaries for exactly the unforeseen. 

The notion of unfunded priorities is equally a phenomenon associated with poor planning and poor budgeting. These sectors have to budget. They ensure that they don’t prioritise well and wait for a certain period of time to emerge and say, “This item was a priority and we never funded it,” yet you find them pushing forward non essential and non core areas. 

I would like to urge the Minister of Finance not to stretch us a bit too far. Let us be systematic and let us allow the budgeting process to be a budgeting process. Short of that, there is no need for budgeting if we continue in this manner. 

I would also like to reiterate a recommendation that the Auditor-General institutes a special audit into the Garamba operation. This is on page 6. We want it because at the end of the day if the Budget Committee found out that the Garamba operation was exaggerated and indeed we are here trying to cut here and there to get this money. We really need a special audit as the committee recommended so that we know how it is.

Lastly, we demand a statement of balance of accounts on the Consolidated Fund. It is one of the recommendations of the committee. As we vote to adopt the report, we need assurance from the minister that this statement about the Consolidated Fund should be put on the Floor of Parliament so that we know how healthy our Consolidated Fund is. Short of that, we shall always experience occasional raiding of the Consolidated Fund in such a shabby manner and I hope this will be the end of it, and I hope Parliament will not entertain this in the next financial year. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

6.02
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support that we accept the supplementary but with a bit of caution. In the report, they say that some activities were emergencies and others were not. I think these that were not emergencies should have been included in the budget. Why should they come as supplementaries?

Secondly, they present that ministries and departments leave out priorities and present non-priorities. These technical people are paid to do the right work, but what do we do in the event that they have not done their work? 

The other issue is about the Consolidated Fund in the Bank of Uganda. People have laboured to explain it but if you will allow me read: “The committee is concerned about using draw down on the Bank of Uganda Consolidated Fund…” This should be done with the knowledge of Parliament but it was not done with the approval of parliament. This means that whatever we are doing as Parliament is done haphazardly. 

We really have a problem if we just accept things as they are. We cannot wait for that time of the debate because these things are important and the minister and the committee should take note of the problem. 

Actually people were wondering as to who will pay these loans. In relation to this, in this country people will pay for money that is just being spent anyhow. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

6.04
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have failed to understand what we mean by 3 percent over and above the budget because when I read the Auditor-General’s report, there is what they call domestic arrears in that same financial year. 

Overall in the previous years of 2006/2007 and 2007/2008, domestic arrears were Shs.209.9 billion and shs.378 billion respectively that was over and above what was budgeted for. When we go through these reports, we get confused because we have what we call a commitment control system; a law which was passed by this Parliament but which is not followed. 

I want to know from the minister whether we shall not have domestic arrears at the end of this financial year, after we pass this supplementary. I want to get that clarification because we are spending a lot of money. (Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Mutuluuza for giving way. The information I want to give is that there are votes for the supplementary requested for by the ministry. So, the money is not for paying domestic arrears but it is going to cater for specific items as per the schedule. But even if the supplementary is over and above 3 percent, domestic arrears will still arise unless it has been budgeted for by the supplementary. So, your query will always be there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please –

MR MUTUULUZA: Madam Speaker, I heard some people say that some are accumulated domestic arrears but there are some that are specific for that financial year that has ended. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want the minister to answer that?

MR MUTULUUZA: I want to get clarification from the minister whether after we pass this supplementary we shall not have domestic arrears for this financial year. 

6.07 
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We started discussing this supplementary at 2.00 p.m. yesterday until now and it perturbs me. If this heading of “supplementary expenditure funded through reallocation” is the problem, maybe the minister should change it so that we pass this supplementary budget.

Right now, schools have opened but are in the process of closing especially in Yumbe district. My primary school teachers have not been paid for three months now and I have seen here that there is a shortfall. Therefore, we should pass this money so that we pay those teachers. 

I suspect that this money for Universal Primary Education has already been used because last week, we had a massive immunisation exercise in the country. Where did the money come from? This money has already been utilised since our children participated in the programme. (Interruption}- I do not have that time for taking your information.

Madam Speaker, within this week in this House, there was a report by members of Parliament that there have been raids in Karamoja. But this is because we have inadequate Police in the region and that is why there is an easy way for the people to come and raid cattle. Therefore, let us pass this budget so that we have these police stations run. Otherwise, they will close and we shall continue to get a lot of problems.

If it is the problem of Vote 102, I suggest that we select the votes that we consider to be priorities and pass them and leave those ones that we think are not priorities. Thank you.

6.10
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister and the chairperson of the Budget Committee for sorting out yesterday’s mess. They have come out very clearly, identifying what we actually need. 

From the presentation, it is clear that according to the law, we have the right to approve money above the 3 percent and that is why it has been brought to us here.

You are all aware that there is hunger, especially in Karamoja. And even in West Nile and Koboko, people are starving. Therefore, we need this money urgently so that food can go to our people.

On the issue of secondary schools for USE, you are all aware that some of the newly taken private schools were taken up after the budget and therefore they do not have any allocation. For example, last term the money was given at the end of the term and now the second term has started and they have no money. 

So, we really need to have this budget passed. We, Members of Parliament, should not waste our precious time discussing issues which are very clear and straight forward. Do you know how much time we have wasted on this debate? 

So, I support this supplementary budget. Let us put the question and pass this supplementary budget. Thank you very much.

6.12
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have a simple clarification, which I want to seek from the minister. 

We all agree that this financial year we approved the budget of 630,822,848,000. My understanding is that the reallocation, which is part (b) of the Ug shs19 billion, is part of the budget we approved. I do not agree with the minister. When you go ahead and say that the amount of money which is over and above the 3 percent is 62, 501, 546, 606, it is not correct. 

It is Parliament’s obligation to approve reallocation. Reallocation is different from supplementary because supplementary is over and above the approved -(Interruptions)- hon. Members, allow me to continue. This is simple mathematics.

Maybe the interpretation is the one that is confusing Members. If you have a budget- let me give a very simple explanation -(Interjections)- no, I am not misleading the House -(Interruption)

COL GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: There is no order. There is no order, hon. Member. Sit down commissioner. 

COL GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Order! And the man is on the wrong path. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Sit down. Madam Speaker, I just want Members to understand. I want to be advised. Before you even heckle, you must listen.

Madam Speaker, I agree that reallocation is an obligation of Parliament but there is a difference between spending over and above the approved budget and –(Interruptions)- there is a difference. I would love, if the minister came to the Floor and said, “The 19 billion was allocation; the 542 billion is the one which is over and above the 3 percent.” 

We must get the records right. This business of saying that reallocation is supplementary is not correct. We must make the records correct if we are to help this country. I thank you.

6.16
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the very first time I would like to associate myself with the arguments of hon. Nsubuga. That is my position too -(Interjections)- for the very first time. That is true. 

And as if that is not enough, I find the reasons the minister has given to justify Vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, provision of emergency relief food for Karamoja, and Vote 012, not satisfactory. 

As far as Vote 003 is concerned, it is common knowledge that the government has never given food relief, which is more than maize and beans. Government has never given rice, chicken, or chips. When you look at the amount of Ugshs10 billion that is provided for in this vote, these are a lot of metric tonnes of maize and beef. This would be justified if you were saying that it was going to cover Karamoja, Acholi, Lango and any other area. This amount is too much for Karamoja. Yes, I think the minister should give us additional information to justify this amount. 

Secondly, I do not find it satisfactory that the minister is seeking to spend an additional Shs 2.18 billion in just the mere process of sale of government pool houses. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mabikke, I want to associate myself with your analysis of this.

Yesterday, Prof. Kabwegyere was here and he was unhappy that there was no money. He was supposed to have money to address this issue of famine and the problem of the schools from different areas which have been blown by wind and whose students are not studying. I would love to see this item here shifted to the Prime Minister’s Office to address this.

In Kasilo there are three schools, with five classrooms each, which have been blown. The students are studying under the trees and when it rains they cannot study. But we do not see it here.

So, this is not an urgent thing. We can wait for it and it can be covered under Vote on Account so that we shift this money to the Prime Minister’s Office to handle these cases.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Mabikke, for giving way. I would like to associate myself with your analysis and argument regarding Vote 003 – Office of the Prime Minister. But I would really feel very comfortable if the Office of the Prime Minister came out and said that out of the Shs 10billion they would take such an amount to Karamoja, Lango, Teso and Acholi sub-regions. 

Just yesterday I was in Gulu attending burial of two who people who died of hunger. In total we now have eight people who have lost lives due to famine. As we talk, World Food Programme has now concentrated in the Karamoja region. 

I would like to propose that we add Vote 012 to the Shs 10 billion for the Office of the Prime Minister to make it about Shs 12 billion. We can then plan for these other sub regions – Teso, Lango and Acholi. This is a serious matter; we are talking about life. We might have to continue losing more people yet they are helpful to this country. We can defer this question of the pool houses to the next financial year in the interest of serving our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, please conclude.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you. We suppose that when Government sells, there are funds that accrue from such sales and that this is a planned sale. The accrued funds are sufficient to cover the issues that you telling us about. This is not satisfactory, Madam Speaker, and I pray that Parliament reallocates this money, perhaps to the Prime Minister’s Office. We can defer this to next year’s budget. Thank you very much.

6.21
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have to remind the House that when we raised this issue yesterday, it was on a technicality that required a resolution. 

I would like to suggest to the House that we have scored. That Government has come to make a request for supplementary expenditure over and above the 3 percent, is an achievement. This now enables us to ensure that from now onwards, if you come when you have already spent the money, you know what we will do to you. So, the first instance for Parliament is for us to accept that we have resolved a matter that was –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Kivejinja to talk on phone while a serious presentation is being made by the Leader of the Opposition? Is he in order to talk on phone despite attempts by the Prime Minister to restrain him? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are not allowed to use telephones while in this Chamber, please.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you. I would suggest to Parliament that we deal with the principle that will allow us move. You know that when you have formally presented the issue of supplementary – and we going to have to move on supplementaries very systematically. We could, as Parliament, ensure that our budgetary and accountability processes focus on supplementaries to ensure that the issues of supplementary are valid; to ensure that where supplementary expenditures have been spent by Government, they can account to Parliament and the country. This is a critical fast step; it is important that we accept it.

Secondly, I would like to say that I also had a big confusion about supplementary expenditure in respect of reallocations and I want to help the House get over it. 

If we approve, for the Ministry of Education and Sports Shs 5billion, but out of the that money Government decides to take away Shs 500million for reallocation to say, Ministry of Works, as far we are concerned, the approved budget for the Ministry of Education and Sports remains Shs 5billion. So, when they report on their budget out turn, they should indicate that other than having spent Shs 5billion given to the ministry, we spent less by Shs 500 million. The approved figure does not change with reallocation.

When you move Shs 500 million to Ministry of Works from Ministry of Education and Sports, it becomes a new expenditure and supplementary to that ministry. Approving that additional expenditure, the way we are doing, is correct. However, what we must now do is: When we are considering the ministerial policy statements, we should look at the report and say, for example, central government got Shs 1.133 from such a ministry. Is this reflected in their report on the budget out turn? If their budget outturn remains the same, then what we are doing would have been false. And there is no way for us to do that other than examining the budget out turn following this arrangement.

Therefore, approval of expenditure reallocations must be approved by Parliament. There is nothing wrong with what has happened. Our main concern must be in following whether a gap has been created or not. If a gap has not been created, then we will have every reason to suggest that this reallocation is one method of using money without going through Parliament. Otherwise, I do not see a big problem.

Lastly, I know that our people are dying and I appreciate what hon. Oyet said. But the Karimojong are also our people. All Ugandan are our people. The biggest challenge is for us to say that if you are providing for Karamoja, you must realise that we have a problem over and above Karamoja. So, I appeal to the Prime Minister and the Government of Uganda to immediately move –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of Opposition for giving way. But I would like to say that we are aware that there is famine in that area. And I want to inform this House that Cabinet met over this matter and agreed to have a special Cabinet meeting to handle it on Monday; we shall solve it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I want to thank my Leader of Opposition; he is making very valid points. But for a supplementary to exist, there must have been a budget. This means that I should have given you money to do an item and it was not enough. But if you look in these supplementaries, they are coming as fresh items. A fresh item seizes to be a supplementary. That is why we are saying that supplementaries should be for specific items we budgeted for and not new ones because we never fore saw them.  And that is why we created the contingency fund; whatever is out should go to the contingency fund.

Lastly, we accept that Karamoja is in hunger. But we have given to Karamoja food day-in and day-out. We are the ones making the Karimojong lazy and if we do not stop this policy, then we shall make the Bagisu also lazy and they will also ask for food from government. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank my Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee for his intervention. 

You see, when we sit here as a committee of the whole House, they call a vote. They do not call activities, and under that vote, we pass a figure. The activities are the things that we sort out in the sectoral committee meetings. As long as that particular vote requires additional funds above what you approved, that will be a supplementary regardless of what it does. What it does is the challenge of oversight that we as Parliament must exercise. In other wards, all the money that government asks for over and above the budget, Parliament must scrutinise and ensure that the money is not being wasted. 

Therefore, I think for today, we have made a good progress –(Interjections)– I will not move a motion. I am just making my last contribution. My appeal to members is that we have made good progress –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just for the record, I want to remind you, I am the Member of Parliament for Aruu County. The information I am seeking from my boss, the Leader of the Opposition is that for this Shs 10 billion that has been given to Karamoja, don’t we have the mandate to increase on this amount to about Shs 20 billion other than saying the a meeting is going to be called on Monday. This will enable all the areas affected by famine to be attended to, including Busoga. 

This Shs 10 billion - in Gulu, Kitgum and Padre, people are already dieing. So if this is a national Parliament, instead of rushing to give money, can’t we increase the amount by about Shs 5 billion to the Office of the Prime Minister so that they can have a comprehensive intervention in all the areas affected by famine?

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, I think it is a problem of poor wording. We all agreed that this money is not meant for only Karamoja. The Minister of Finance must be able to correct this wording –(Interjections)– when we were in the committee, we all agreed that this money is meant for Karamoja and all other areas affected. Don’t take it that Karamoja is the only area with famine. This money is for us all. Even with regard to the schools, there are schools elsewhere. We feel that this money should be spread all over the country wherever there is a problem. Thank you. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition for giving way. Hon. Members, I want to inform you about the dire situation in Karamoja. Even when they give the so-called relief – how can a whole household be given five kilograms of posh for a whole month? Actually even after the relief is given, people will continue dying of hunger. 

So this proposal of Shs 10 billion is very little. And the Karimojong have been victim of circumstances. The climatic situation there was not made by the Karimojongs. They just found themselves in that difficult situation. So, I do not agree with the comments that the Karimojong are being encouraged to be lazy. They want to work but the climatic conditions are not conducive. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Please, let us end this debate here. I have the right to accept your information. Hon. Members, let us be realistic. The financial year is ending – [Mr Otto: Information] – I am not taking any more information – [Mr Otto: We shall sort that out at home] – I am the Leader of the Opposition in this Parliament. I do not want the Opposition to be misunderstood as being segregative and as being insensitive. We understand the plight of the Karimojong; we understand the plight of our people. We will use the formal process to ensure that their interest is met. What we are dealing with here is a reality we cannot change. 

The budget here is ending. In fact the Secretary for the Treasury must have issued instructions for accounts to be closed. Therefore, the additional money will not be available in this budget; it is not available. When we pass a vote on account, we can deal with that matter as a matter of urgency. So, let us deal with this matter calmly. 

I would like to end by saying that we have made progress and that this matter can be resolved through a vote. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the concerns of Members of Parliament and their recommendations.

As the Leader of the Opposition said, this financial year is closing within the next 12 days and all these accounts are going to be closed. It is for that matter that I again reiterate that the House do approve this resolution seeking to authorise government to spend Shs 62,501,546,606 which is money over and above the 3 percent provision as provided for in the law.

There was an attempt to amend the vote on Ministry of Lands; this vote is funded from the proceeds of government pool houses sale scheme. It is from the proceeds from the collection account, which is in Housing Finance Bank and therefore it cannot be diverted to any other account other than that account. And if we do not spend it, it will attract arrears which will be applied immediately the new budget is approved which puts the next budget into another supplementary budget. 

On the question of Karamoja, the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business has clarified very well. I therefore move a motion that Parliament do approve this amount as stated over and above the 3 percent provision under section 12(1) of the Budget Act. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 115,602,719,000 be approved as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2008/2009 under Supplementary Schedule No. 2.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 21,432,594,000 be approved as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2008/2009 under Supplementary Schedule No. 2.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Aston Kajara): I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Supplementary Schedule No. 2 for the financial year 2008/2009 and passed the same without amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank you so much for the staying power and for the contributions. I do hope that the Ministry of Finance has benefited from the views of the Members and that next year, you will move consistently as the House has expressed. The Minister of Finance I think will invite us upstairs to do something. (Laughter) In the meantime, the House is adjourned to Wednesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 June 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

