13th June, 1995

The Council met in the International Conference Centre, Kampala at 2.00 p.m.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Mr. Y. K. Museveni, in the Chair)

The Council was called to order.

OPENING OF THE 9TH SESSION OF THE NATIONAL RESISTANCE COUNCIL

H.E. THE PRESIDENT, (Mr. Y. K. Museveni): Honourable Members, since the Ninth Session will be the last session of the National Resistance Council, I beg your indulgence to begin by reviewing the highlights of your activities these last nine years.

As you will recall, this Council started with only 38 unelected members in 1986, the historicals.  By 1989, the strength of the Council had been brought up to 282 members elected through the Resistance Council electoral colleges and the bulk of the critical and innovative legislation has been undertaken by the expanded Council.

During the last eight sessions, the National Resistance Council passed 113 Bills and 74 Motions.  Of the Bills passed 45 of them were in the field of administration, law and order, 12 in social policy, 35 on the National Economy, 19 on Government expenditure and 2 on miscellaneous issues.

I salute you, honourable Members of this August Council for your innovative spirit and for making paths where there was none before.  These legislative innovations have enhanced the quality of governance and demonstrated the quality of legislators we have in Uganda.  Allow me to single out some of the innovative pieces of legislation which have enriched governance: -

    (i) In 1987, this Council passed the Inspector General of Government Statute 
to promote accountable and transparent governance.  This institution has 
now established very firm roots in our country and it is my hope and 
prayer that, as it grows in stature, it will achieve the objectives for which 
you established it.

		You have also recently established Standing Sectoral Committees to 
examine the expenditure, administration, the implementation of policy of 
Government ministries and departments and this has further helped to 
promote accountability amongst the top echelon of Government.

    (ii) In the same year (1987), this Council passed the Karamoja Development 
Agency Statute to bring Karamoja within the mainstream of our nation’s 
Socio-economic development.  For a very long time the people of 
Karamoja felt abandoned or marginalised but with your innovative 
legislation and the appointment of a Minister of State for Karamoja in my 
office, at least there is now hope where there was once despair.

    (iii) This Council passed the Uganda Investment Code Statute in 1991 to 
provide an institutional framework for coordinating investment activities, and as I will show later on, this innovation has paid dividends within this short period way beyond our wildest dreams.



    (iv) You also passed the Uganda Revenue Authority Statute providing for the 
establishment of a revenue collection agency in order to streamline and improve revenue collection.  The results, as I will show have been phenomenal.

I could go on and on about the new ground broken by this Council but it will do simply to pay you the complement of being the most innovative legislators in the annals of our post-colonial history and the country is extremely grateful and proud to have you.

Through various pieces of legislation since 1987, the members of this Council have shown total commitment to the institutionalisation of democratic governance in this country through the support you have given to Bills emanating from the Executive branch of Government to enhance democracy.  The Resistance Councils and Committee Statute (1987), Local Governments (Resistance Councils) Statute 1993, The Constitution (Amendment) Statute (1987) and The Constituent Assembly Statute (1993) are some of the pieces of legislation that you passed to lay the foundations of democracy.

For the first time in the history of our country, the people of Uganda have had an opportunity to make their Constitution.  In the very last stages of this exercise, the people, through a free and fair election (and this was confirmed by both external and internal monitors of the March 1994 elections), elected delegates to the Constituent Assembly to debated the Draft Constitution which had come out of the synthesis of their views.  Many honourable Members of this Council are also delegates to the Constituent Assembly.

I am, therefore, confident that you wish to score the same success in the Constituent Assembly as you have scored in this Council; the making of a good and, therefore, durable Constitution should be your greatest achievement and legacy.  In your constitution-making you should strive to conduct your business as statesmen rather than politicians.  You are making the Constitution for your children and grand children and generations of Ugandans yet unborn.  This is a very weighty responsibility which cannot be successfully executed by those whose focus is on the achievement of the immediate political advantage.  Your work in the Constituent Assembly requires you to be brave and firm, above all it requires you to have a vision of the future of this country - A vision of stability and progress.  The legislation which emanated from this Council has fueled all the developments in the Constituent Assembly and you, the architects of the Constitution, must add your voice of sanity to the constitution-making exercise.  Be vigilant for even at this late hour, the exercise can be derailed by those who are more committed to attaining power rather than the making of a Constitution that will stand the test of time and the planting of constitutionalism in our country.

By passing The Constitution (Amendment) Statute (1993) and the traditional rulers (Restitution of Assets and Properties) Statute (1993), this Council clearly demonstrated that you were willing to take the past into your stride and to build this nation from our roots.

You agreed that the restored traditional institutions would be purely cultural and political in the past.  These institutions were manipulated by the players in the mainstream politics of our country with disastrous consequences.

I, therefore, wish to appeal to the honourable Members of this Council, especially those who belong to the Constituent Assembly, not to play the same games this time round, because if you do, all our efforts to revive our cultures and traditions can be torpedoed quite easily.

The emphasis the NRM Government puts on the promotion of our cultures and institutions should never be misinterpreted as an attempt to divide Ugandans.  Indeed, the assault that was made on these institutions by the mindless regimes of the past divided Ugandans more than it united them.  In this multi-cultural society of ours, we must respect each other’s cultures and traditions and seek to build a Ugandan culture from all of them.  Government is, therefore, determined to uphold the restored institutions within the boundaries of the Statutes that you passed for that purpose.

Honourable Members will agree with me that economics govern politics and the National Resistance Movement Government is keenly aware of this.  We have, therefore, tried our very best to revive and build an economy which was in shambles when we took power in 1986.  I am so keen on this subject that I have been politely accused in many fora of laying overdue emphasis on the economy to the exclusion of other things.  I wish to admit my guilt but allow me to emphasize that the economic wellbeing of a country is the basic foundation of stability and democracy and when the economy is healthy most other things are healthy too.  That is why I always dwell on the economy.

As a result of the various economic programmes implemented or under implementation, Uganda’s economic performance is one of the best amongst third world countries.  Allow me to outline the highlights of this performance: -

    (i) GDP growth is estimated at 7% this year well above the previous average of 5.7% in the past seven years, but slightly below last year’s growth of 8%.

    (ii) Although this year economic growth has been boosted by increased coffee prices, the country’s economic performance has been fairly broad-based.  For instance, agriculture grew by 3.9% with the cash crops registering 11.5% growth rate; industrial output grew by 15.5%, the service sector by 7.3% and the private sector expanded by 9%.

Although there have been shortcomings of probity in the Uganda Revenue Authority the hon. Members should be saluted for having created it because of the advances made in the collection of taxes.  Since 1986, the tax ratio to GDP has risen from 5.1% to 11% this year.  Of course this is nowhere near the ratio in other countries, even in Africa, but it is a big step forward and if we can increase the ratio to 16%, we shall balance our budget.  Revenue collection has risen from Shs.44 billion in 1988-89 to 500 billion in 1994-95.  This is quantum jump by any standards and Government will do all it can to work towards balancing the budget from our own resources.

In order to improve tax administration, the Uganda Revenue Authority will introduce Value Added Tax (VAT) next month and Ugandans will be given Tax Identification Numbers in due course.

Between 1991 and March 1995, the Uganda Investment Authority issued 4318 investment project applications of which 1580 were received.  Out of those, 1420 projects have been licensed and the implementation rate is 49%.  The total projected investments of the order of US$1.867 billion and this investment will generate 78,045 new jobs.

The rate of inflation declined from 16% in 1993-94 to 2.9% between May 1994 and May 1995.  Foreign exchange inflows during the year 1994/95 were as follows:

	1.   Coffee           	-     US$402 million
	2.   Non-Coffee   	-     US$136 million
	3.   Export Services	-     US$72 million
	4.   Private Inflows	-     US$392 million

Total foreign inflows	-     US$1.002 billion.

Government is in the process of rationalising the exploitation of our mineral resources and the developments taking place in this sector are very promising especially with regard to gold and oil exploration.

In Karamoja, six occurrences of gold have been identified and a Uganda registered company, Branch Energy Uganda Limited is going to spend US$7 million during the next two years on prospecting and development.  Another company, Anglo-Sudan Corporation is prospecting for gold in the Mityana/Mubende area.

Government recently entered an agreement with Uganda General Works and Engineering Limited to explore oil reserves in the Lake Albert area.  Other areas which the company is slated to explore are Rhino Camp, and around Lake George.  Oil potential has also been identified under Lake Wamala and the surrounding area as well as in Karamoja.

In addition to gold and oil, good quality lime has been identified; enough to meet our domestic demand and for export which could earn Uganda US$30 million per annum.  Two companies one, Guyanese and the other Kenyan have been granted mining licenses in Busia.

Government is committed to the privatisation of the economy because it is sound economics.  It is for that reason that we brought into this council the Public Enterprises and Divestiture Bill in 1993 for honourable Members to debate.  We salute you for having passed it into a Statute.  The Statute was intended to sanction the implementation of our privatisation programmes.  We have proceeded with the divestiture exercise and we have no regrets whatsoever.  Our aim is to divest 85% of all public enterprises by 1997.

As you all know, Government for many years sank money into parastatals that were losing money all the time.  These parastatals had become millstones around taxpayers’ necks.  We could not carry on like this forever.  The Ugandan taxpayer deserved a break.  It is unfortunate that the shrewd politicians of the past saw these parastatals as sources of patronage crucial to their constituency.  The NRM Government sees things differently.

In 1992 and 1993, the NRC passed four Statutes aimed at enabling the implementation of the Financial Sector Reform Programme in order to make the financial sector more responsive to the development needs of the country than before.  Though progress has been made in the above sector, the banking system is not yet very efficient with lending rates still very high due to excessive administration overheads and a large portfolio of non-performing assets.

In 1994, this Council passed the Non-performing Assets Recovery Trust Statute aimed at tackling the large non-performing  loans in the largest bank in the country – UCB.  Non-performing loans in that bank amounted to a colossal Shs.52.3 billion at the end of September, 1993.  I understand considerable recoveries have been made since then.  It, therefore, seems that we stumbled on the right medicine.  

Considerable skepticism has emerged in some quarters, and some newspapers have done their best to fan this skepticism, that the NRM Government is selling the country’s assets to foreign interests; in other words, that we in the NRM are unpatriotic.  This skepticism and grave accusations, hon. Members, have arisen out of ignorance of the facts and I wish t see our scribes develop an empirical approach to their profession.

Of the 23 public enterprises so far divested, foreign ownership is less than 50% and Ugandans are increasingly making a strong showing in the bids under consideration.  Overall foreign capital accounts for 38% while Ugandan capital accounts for 62%.  These ratios are healthy and Ugandans have got the enthusiasm and capacity to maintain them.

In spite of the good economic performance that we have achieved, the majority of Ugandans are still poor.  We have laid some of the infrastructure on which prosperity can be built but people take time and sensitisation to grasp and grab the opportunities available.  So it is the responsibility of all leaders to show people the opportunities available, to open their eyes to profitable economic behaviour.

Poverty is still a great problem largely because of the past distortions in the economic system.  While speculative economic activities and black-marketeering gave a false sense of prosperity, these practices could not create sustainable economic development.  As I have always advised, the answer to improving economic wellbeing lies in households engaging in productive economic activities.  Government can only supplement the efforts of people in the eradication of poverty and we are implementing various programmes aimed at increasing household access to productive opportunities.



These include: -

    (i) The Programme for the Alleviation of Poverty and the Social Costs of Adjustment (PAPSCA).
    (ii) The Poverty Alleviation Programme (PAP).
    (iii) The Entandikwa Credit Scheme.

These arrangements prove that Government is not contented with only the broad economic achievements but is committed to addressing the economic needs of the ordinary households.

Honourable Members, you no doubt, remember that our country was once a pariah in the international community.  This is now history and Ugandans can once again walk with their heads high in the knowledge that they have been reinstated into the civilised world.  This is one of the biggest achievements of the last few years in your efforts to restore decency.

Although there is thuggery and crime and although individuals can grossly abuse the human rights of others, unlike in the past, the NRM Government does not sanction the abuse of human rights by its organs.  We have done our best to discipline the soldiers who were, in the past, major violators of human rights.

Honourable Members will recall that in 1987 Government set up the Human Rights Commission.  The Commission handed in its report recently.  This was the first time a Government of Uganda has set up such a commission.  Though, due to financial problems, the report was completed late, it is an important landmark in the attempting to eliminate the practice of violation of human rights with impunity.  Government will study the Commission’s report and implement its recommendations.

Uganda signed the convention of the rights of the child.  We have also established the National Council of Children and the legislation to entrench the rights of the Ugandan child will soon be tabled in this Council.

Honourable Members, if Uganda is to have meaningful and rapid development, the gender question must be addressed urgently.  The National Resistance Movement right from its inception was and is a Movement of men and women.  Both men and women shared the hazards of war and both died in the struggle.  Some women showed great courage on the battlefield.  The men in the Movement learned to respect their women comrades in arms and that respect has been continued and embraces all spheres of our activities.

All of us must be happy that women are coming to the top in politics, administration, the professions business, and in all other spheres of human endeavor.  It is not sheer tokenism.  Women have made a solid impression in the corridors of power, in boardrooms and cabinets, and we are very proud in the NRM that for the first time in Africa, our Vice President is a woman.  We are very happy that many honourable Members here and in the Constituent Assembly are women.  The position of women will be consolidated and strengthened further by the National Resistance Movement Government.

Honourable Members,

The protection of the environment has come on top of the agenda internationally because humanity has come to realise that their many activities are leading to environmental degradation and ruin.  Right now, a suggestion is being floated around the world that there should be an environmental audit in the assessment of a country’s GDP.  We in Uganda are talking about environmentally sustainable development.  Government, therefore, formulated the National Environment Action Plan (NEAP) and recently this Council passed the National Environment Statute to enable the operationalisation of the action plan.

One of the major environmental challenges facing our country today is the water hyacinth clogging our lakes and rivers.  Government is fully aware of the socio-economic implications of this menace and we are doing all we can to grapple with it.

Honourable Members will appreciate that the water hyacinth finds its way into Uganda through the water bodies which this country shares with her neighbours.  Consequently, some actions to control its spread have jointly got to be agreed upon, which delays the actions which we might have wanted to take.

We are already experimenting with biological control methods but the results of this method are rather slow and our environmentalists are rather cautious; they have to make sure that once the insects which they introduce in our water bodies have eaten their way through the hyacinth will not eat anything else after that.  Recently, the Uganda Railway Corporation acquired an amphibious harvester.  Unfortunately, the machine has not performed very well but we are confident that whatever faults it has will be put right soon.  We shall also acquire more machines for the mechanical control of the water hyacinth.  Our scientists are also investigating the viability of chemical control methods but before any solid recommendations can be made they are being very careful that the cure they introduce does not do more damage than the disease.

With regard to the Civil Service Reform Programme, the process of Ministries’ reviews is almost completed to rationalise Government departments, including the optimal levels of manning.  This, along with other actions to follow, will ensure the delivery of better quality services to the public.

I wish to repeat here that Government is committed to the paying of a living wage to the civil servants.  Although this has not been achieved due to financial constraints, nevertheless measures taken during the past few years have enabled Government to increase the remuneration of civil servants by 165% over the rate of inflation.  Government will continue its efforts to increase the percentage of the Wage Bill in its budget.  Honourable Members, the NRM Government is committed to ensuring that all parts of the country enjoy peace and stability which are prerequisite for economic progress.

In the North, Government efforts in eliminating armed thuggery are taking a bit longer because of the external factor but I wish to assure this August House that the security of the North is on top of our agenda and we shall soon bring peace to these areas infected by thuggery.

Concerning cattle rustling, Government has put in place an anti-stock theft unit of a combined well-equipped force of 3000, police and vigilante units.  This, along with other methods, should go a long way in restoring peace in the areas affected by cattle rustling.

Government has so far demobilised a total of 32,000 soldiers and another phase of the demobilisation involving approximately 13,000 soldiers is scheduled to take place before the end of this year.  I wish to salute the demobilised soldiers for the way they have interacted with the civilians and for their valiant efforts to earn a living in the civilian sphere.

I would like to urge all the demobilised soldiers to take advantage of all the credit schemes available to establish themselves on firm economic ground.  If soldiers could come together and invest their demobilisation packages, they could become a formidable economic force and I advise them to organise themselves accordingly.

Honourable Members,

Much has been said about corruption in this country.  My observations are that corruption is not any worse now than it was under previous regimes.  What can be said is that corruption is nowadays persistently exposed by both Government institutions and the press.

In order to tackle the evil of corruption, Government established the office of the Inspector General of Government while this Council formed, from amongst its members, the Public and Parastatal Accounts Committees.  Furthermore, in 1992, this Council passed the Leadership Code Statute.  This has taken a ling time to implement but just before the 8th session was adjourned, the implementation of the Leadership Code was one of the business on the Floor of this House.  I am sure it will be one of those issues that will be addressed by the 9th session of the National Resistance Council.

Honourable Members, 

The National Resistance Movement’s struggle has been long and arduous and we treasure it.  We have always avoided adventurism and it is too late in the day for us to start.  Government is genuinely committed to a policy of good neighbourliness and peaceful co-assistance with other nations of the world.  This has all along been our policy and it will continue to be so.

We have worked hard in the forging and supporting of regional cooperation.  Uganda is a very active member of Kagera Basin Organisation, IGADD and COMESA.  Nearer home, we have actively supported the revival of the East Africa Community.  We have already paid our dues and already appointed a Deputy Secretary General.  The ball, therefore, in this matter is in other people’s courts.  In spite of the problems in the way of East African Cooperation, our belief that it is the best course of action for our sub-region remains unshaken.

Government regrets the turn of events in Burundi.  We believe that the problems of that country can be solved without resort to arms.  Dialogue and reconciliation is the way forward and Burundi should follow this road.

Honourable Members, there are 13 Bills and 2 Resolutions which are pending debate by the NRC, which constitute the business to be handled during the 9th session.  Some of these Bills outlined below concern topical issues of national importance.

    (i) The Capital Markets Authority Bill, 1994 which has implications in the 
national economy, has been exhaustively reviewed by the concerned sectoral committee and it should, therefore, be disposed without much difficulty.

    (ii) The Children’s Bill, 1994, concerning the rights of the child.

    (iii) The Uganda Development Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 1994 has significant implications on the divestiture of public enterprises under the holding of the Uganda Development Corporation.

(iv)	The Resolution seeking to submit names of persons for appointment as 
members of the Leadership Code Committee.  These appointments will facilitate the implementation of the Leadership Code Statute.

These and other pieces of legislation will require your usual commitment and cooperation to have them debated and passed before the next Parliament.

Honourable Members, the NRM Government assumed power with a well considered programme.  We have done our best to implement that programmed and we are proud of the achievements we have made in the political, economic, security and human rights fields.  We have restored hope where there was despondency and I believe we have laid the foundations on which the future development of our country can be built.

The National Resistance Council has played its rightful role by passing the enabling legislation, by scrutinising Government policy and administration and by contributing to the formulation and reformulation of Government policy.  I salute you for all this and call upon you to show the same dedication during the 9th and last session of the National Resistance Council.

I now declare the 9th session of the National Resistance Council open.

I wish you fruitful deliberations.

Thank you.


(The Council rose at 4.00 p.m. and adjourned until 16th June, 1995 at 2.00 p.m.)
