Thursday, 14 June 2012 

Parliament met 2.55 p.m. at Kampala Serena Conference Centre, Kampala.

NATIONAL ANTHEM (Three Verses)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

PROCLAMATION 

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a Session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may, by proclamation, appoint;

AND WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda is required under Article 155(1) of the Constitution to prepare and lay before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the 15th day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenue and expenditure of the government for the next financial year;

COGNISANT of the fact that the financial year 2011/2012 will end on the 30th day of June 2012;

AWARE that it is expedient that the President lays before Parliament the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the Financial Year 2012/2013 at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Article 95(2), I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 14th day of June 2012 at 1400 hours to receive the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the Financial Year 2012/2013.

AND FURTHER, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution and the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act Cap.258, and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including its forecourt, the yard and the gardens, be the precincts of Parliament for the above mentioned purposes. 

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala, on the 18th day of May 2012; Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President and Mrs Museveni; Your Excellency the Vice-President; my Lord, the Chief Justice; Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker; Rt Hon. Margaret Zziwa, Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly; Rt Hon. Prime Minister; honourable ministers; members of the diplomatic corps; Members of Parliament; invited guests; ladies and gentlemen.

I welcome you to the sitting of Parliament at which I expect His Excellency the President, to cause to be presented to Parliament estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year, as provided for under Article 155(1) of the Constitution. 

This is a very important duty as it puts into figures the aspirations of Government as enumerated in the State of the Nation Address, which we eagerly await to hear.

However, Your Excellency and the distinguished Members here, I wanted to draw your attention to the fact that this month of June has been particularly tragic on the African Continent, where we have experienced two aviation accidents: One in the Federal Republic of Nigeria on 2 June 2012, in which over 157 persons died; and another one in the neighborhood, in the Republic of Kenya, on the 10 June 2012, where the Minister for Internal Security and his assistant, that is, Prof. George Saitoti and Mr Ojede and their staff, perished in a helicopter accident in the Ngong Hills.

I take this opportunity to convey our heartfelt condolences on behalf of Parliament to the families of the deceased, and to the Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, and the Government of the Republic of Kenya. In that regard, may I request that we all stand up and observe a moment of silence in their memory?

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency and distinguished guests and Members of Parliament, as I indicated to you earlier, Ms Margaret Zziwa is present today. This is her first official function as Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly. We welcome her and wish her a successful tenure. (Applause)

On parliamentary business, I am aware that some Members have not returned the forms indicating their choice of committees on which they wish to serve during the second session. I would urge you to do that as soon as possible. This will enable the Clerk to prepare and present policy statements to the relevant committees once they are fully constituted. 

Your Excellency, I now believe that Members and invited guests are anxiously waiting to hear what you, through the Minister of Finance and Planning, have to present to the country.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMEMNT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2012/2013

3.07 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Your Excellency the President; the First Lady, Mrs Janet Museveni; Your Excellency the Vice President; the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly, Ms Margaret Zziwa; the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition;  honourable ministers; honourable Members of Parliament; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

I.	Introduction

1.	Madam Speaker, in fulfillment of Article 155(1) of the Constitution, I beg to move that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration of:

i.	The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Financial Year 2011/2012; and 
ii.	Proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the Financial Year 2012/2013. 

2.	Madam Speaker, Article 155(1) of the Constitution provides that the President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament estimates of revenue and expenditure for each financial year. I am accordingly performing this duty on behalf of the President, for which I am thankful. 

3.	Madam Speaker, the Budget Act 2001 requires that the national budget is prepared following comprehensive consultations with all stakeholders which obligation, I have fulfilled. 

4.	Madam Speaker, in the State of the Nation Address a week ago, His Excellency the President discussed the National Resistance Movement Government’s vision for the future of this country and clearly laid out the challenges to development that we face today. In addressing these challenges and in support of His Excellency the President’s vision, the theme for the budget for next financial year is “Priorities for Renewed Economic Growth and Development”. 

Madam Speaker, last October 2011, I stood before this august House and asked for your support and that of all Ugandans as we tackled the challenges facing us. I wish to thank you, and the people of Uganda, for the support Government received when we had to implement strict measures to combat a series of economic shocks. These strict measures included tightening both fiscal and monetary policy. I am happy to report that inflation is now easing and the exchange rate of the Uganda Shilling has stabilised.

II 	Economic Performance and Outlook

Economic Performance

5.	Madam Speaker, the key macroeconomic and sector developments over the last year are elaborated in the Background to the Budget 2012/13. I will therefore first highlight the performance of the economy over the last year. This serves as a backdrop to the key challenges, Budget strategy and priorities for renewed growth and economic development in the next financial year. Fiscal policy will support monetary policy to maintain macroeconomic stability, while at the same time increase resources available to address the binding constraints to economic growth and development. 

Economic Growth

6.	Madam Speaker, Uganda has faced both global and domestic economic challenges over the past year. Real GDP growth is estimated at 3.2% this financial year, 2011/12. However, there are signs that the economy is turning around, but requires addressing the challenges on the supply side. This involves budget prioritization, improving value for money, and better coordination across sectors. Given Uganda’s population growth of 3.5% per annum, it is imperative that we quickly return to faster, more inclusive and sustainable economic growth and development. 

7.	The slowdown in growth this financial year was due to drought, weaker demand for our exports from our traditional markets, high international fuel prices, and imported inflation from our trading partners coupled with the weak shilling due to a strong dollar globally. Growth in the services sector slowed to 3.1%, with trade, financial, education and health services sectors registering negative annual growth rates. The growth in industrial production slowed to 1.1% during the year. The hardest hit sub-sector was formal manufacturing, where growth contracted by 4.4%.  

8.	Madam Speaker, I am happy to report that the agricultural sector has performed much better this year, recording annual growth of 3.0% this year. This shows that agriculture can perform well given our climatic advantage.  The performance of the Agricultural sector has been spurred by increased cash and food crop production following favourable rains in the first planting season of the last calendar year. The hotel and restaurant sub sector also rebounded, together with positive growth rates in transport and telecommunications, real estate activities and other business activities, as His Excellency the President highlighted in the State of Nation Address. 

External Sector Developments

9.	Madam Speaker, the Uganda Shilling depreciated against major international currencies earlier in this financial year.  Depreciation of the shilling was a consequence of the widening balance of trade as imports continued to grow much faster than exports. Export of goods and services during the year totaled US$ 4.1 billion, compared to imports of goods which amounted to US$ 5.31 billion. In addition, Services payments were recorded at US$ 2.23 billion. However, the overall balance of payments was positive, on account of increased inflows of remittances amounting to US$ 2 billion, foreign direct investments amounting to US$834 million, and portfolio flows amounting to US$ 274 million. As a result, the Uganda Shilling has recently been more stable. 

10.	We must therefore continue to concentrate on export growth in order to reduce the gap between imports and exports which has been widening over the past years. This will entail: (a) increased production and exports of staple food crops to the region, (b) encouraging exports of value added goods, and (c) by shifting expenditures from imports to locally manufactured goods where this is feasible. Staple food exports have a sure regional market since basic foods have a high price inelasticity of demand and have lower transport costs in view of our neighbour’s proximity in the East African region. 

Inflation and Interest Rates 

11.	Madam Speaker, the economy has faced high inflation with prices rising over the early part of the financial year now ending. However, inflation is now receding. Annual inflation peaked at 30.5% in October 2011 but has now declined to 18.6 in May 2012. Food crop inflation that was 42.2% in May 2011 has declined to 8% in May 2012. In order to achieve this, the Bank of Uganda had to pursue a tight monetary policy using the Central Bank Rate that led to a rise in interest rates. The Central Bank Rate will be further eased as conditions improve. Tight monetary policy has succeeded in bringing down the general price level and has improved macroeconomic stability. Supply side (or fiscal policy) and demand management (or monetary policy) are not alternatives; they complement each other and both are necessary for sound economic management. Tackling inflation remains Government’s overriding macroeconomic objective in order to protect macroeconomic stability. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will continue to work together with the Bank of Uganda to realize this purpose.

Financial Sector Developments

12.	Madam Speaker, new technology is driving our efforts to improve financial inclusion, especially in the area of electronic money transfer and agency banking. The necessary amendment to financial sector legislation to accommodate alternative banking approaches such as mobile banking, bank assurance, and Islamic Banking are being undertaken. The Bank of Uganda has licensed four Mobile Money network operators to offer mobile money services, as a means of bringing about greater financial inclusion with the move to branchless banking across the country. By February 2012, the operators had registered 2 million mobile money clients and 13.2 million transactions worth Shs. 551.0 billion had been processed between January and March 2012. In addition, Consumer Protection Guidelines were issued by the Bank of Uganda and are now part of the regulatory regime of all financial institutions. 

13.	A significant development in financial inclusion in 2011 was a 60% increase in agricultural lending by commercial banks and other financial institutions. This lending went towards financing post-harvest activities and the purchase of equipment using the Agricultural Credit Facility. Government will continue to implement positive interventions to increase Agriculture lending through the banking system including the Uganda Development Bank. 

14.	Madam Speaker, Government has undertaken reform of the pensions sector with the view to increasing private savings which can be leveraged to finance domestic investment on a sustainable basis. In this regard, legislation to provide oversight and regulation of the pension sector became effective in September 2011. The Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority will be established in the next financial year. Pension reform, when completed, will be a key element in the development of our domestic debt market.

Fiscal Developments 

15.	Madam Speaker, as a result of lower economic growth, domestic revenues performed below target over the year, growing by 17.9% compared to the 21.6% growth recorded in the previous year. Total expenditure releases during the financial year were Shs 137 billion below the target of Shs 9,869 billion, mainly because of the delayed start to the construction of Karuma Hydro power station.

Economic Outlook

16.	Madam Speaker, the outlook for the Uganda’s economy must take into account the risks faced by the global economy.  The Euro Zone is projected to enter a mild recession, while the United States economy has not yet shown signs of a return to robust economic growth. Both have been major trading partners of Uganda. We must also be aware of the creeping exposure to global shocks arising from greater integration, which occurs through financial linkages, export receipts and workers’ remittances.

17.	Contrary to arguments that the country is disadvantaged by being land-locked, Uganda is actually land-linked with her neighbours who are providing significant demand for our products especially food. For Uganda to succeed in this global and regional economic environment, we must seize the opportunities which these challenges present and implement programs that will spur growth; accelerate social transformation; and ensure prosperity, within the context of East African Community integration.

III. 	Budget Strategy for Financial Year 2012/2013

Madam Speaker, the Budget strategy underpinning next financial year’s proposals will focus Government’s scarce resources to unlock the most binding constraints to help restore faster economic growth, while promoting more inclusion and sustainability. The budget proposals present emerging thinking on our macroeconomic and sector challenges, drawing on ideas, feedback and observations from all walks of society and stakeholder consultations held throughout the past year. The proposals envisage that Government will focus its resources to improve Uganda’s business climate and its comparative advantage of a conducive agricultural climate, land-linked location in the middle of East Africa and a young adaptable workforce, so as to truly undergo a structural change for economic transformation. Such a process has many challenges and needs unstinting policy support from across the entire Government and the Ugandan people.

Macroeconomic Objectives 

18.	Madam Speaker, the global, regional and domestic economic slow-down has constrained economic growth this year and affected macro-economic stability. It is urgent that the economy reverts to a more positive growth rate. Achieving this turnaround will require overcoming formidable challenges to share more equitably and sustainably. The budget strategy for Financial Year 2012/13 has been designed to renew economic growth to enable sustained and inclusive development.

The macroeconomic objectives of Government are therefore as follows:
i.	achieve a growth rate of at least 7% per annum in the medium-term;
ii.	the return to single-digit inflation rates; 
iii.	Improvement of Uganda’s Balance of Payments by reducing the current account deficit, through increased exports.

19.	Madam Speaker, Government recognizes that its own resources are limited and that the private sector is the principal partner in economic growth. Therefore, Government will leverage its resources to support private sector growth and development by lowering the cost of doing business in Uganda. Government will invest in infrastructure that unlocks the growth and development potential of the private sector. It will improve skills for competitiveness and ensure that education and training matches requirements of the job market.

20.	Madam Speaker, by virtue of its geographical location and favorable climate, Uganda is capable of becoming the food basket and distribution hub of the region. This will require the diversification of our markets, in particular to increase inter-regional trade with our neighbours. We will therefore concentrate on producing for food security and exporting staple crops which have a sure market. This approach will benefit from cheaper transport. The budget strategy will therefore prioritize the removal of weaknesses that obstruct growth in the productive sectors and hinder the implementation of critical infrastructure projects. This strategy will maximize our economy’s growth potential.

21.	Madam Speaker, the four main strategies to lower the costs of doing business and marshal private sector investment in Uganda are:

i.	Rehabilitation and expansion of road and electricity infrastructure to reduce transport costs and improve access to affordable energy to support the private sector as an engine of growth.
ii.	Research and Development to improve productivity, such as developing improved seeds and other inputs, provision of extension services in the field, and skilling our workforce to operate agro-processing industries e.g. mechanics, electricians, machine operators, carpenters, plumbers, etc.
iii.	Improving business efficiency by streamlining regulatory rules and business licensing reform.

22.	Madam Speaker, in implementing the Budget strategy Government will ask the following key benchmark questions when making any investment decisions and prioritizing support activities:

i.	Does this investment increase infrastructure stock?
ii.	Does the investment add value to the product or process? 
iii.	Does the investment lower the cost of doing business? And if so by how much? These are critical questions, Madam Speaker.
 
23.	I must reiterate that this focus on areas of Government comparative advantage emphasizes selectivity and not neglect of other sectors that is we are looking for the greatest sustainable good for the greatest inclusive number.

24.	Before I elaborate the priority interventions reinforcing the budget strategy for the Financial Year 2012/13, I will first outline the financing strategy that underpins the interventions I will propose later on.

Financing Strategy 

25.	Madam Speaker, the interventions I am proposing today will be financed using the following strategy. 

i.	Increased Revenue Mobilization from Domestic Sources
ii.	External Financing in form of Loans and Grants from development partners and private creditors
iii.	Public Private Partnerships that mobilize private sector financing for public projects

26.	Madam Speaker, tax policy will be used to promote investment in the economy to enable return to faster growth. Domestic revenues are likely to be affected by a number of opportunities and challenges, including development of the oil and gas sector, return to a conducive macroeconomic environment as Uganda returns to faster economic growth, and the integration of the East African Community. Government will maximize Non-Tax Revenues and improve tax administration at the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) in order to ensure that Uganda is fully prepared to benefit from opportunities, such as development of the oil and gas sector and the integration of the East African Community.

27.	Madam Speaker, I propose to mobilize Grants and Loans amounting to Shs. 2,679 billion, which represents 25% of the National Budget, and consists of project and budget support loans. Resources will be allocated towards counterpart financing of infrastructure projects and the improvement of service delivery. In addition, Government will borrow non-concessional loans to undertake major infrastructure projects that demonstrate the necessary commercial and economic benefits, for which other financing options are not available.

28.	Starting next financial year, Government will speed up project implementation and ensure that undisbursed borrowed funds will be utilized faster. Government will provide counterpart funding for project implementation to unlock loan disbursements and will seek external technical assistance where necessary.  For future projects, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will undertake rigorous economic analysis and review the Public Investment Plan to ensure alignment with the National Development Plan. In addition, selected projects will have to be in line with national objectives and have a satisfactory cost benefit analysis criteria. 

29.	Madam Speaker, Government will implement the Public Private Partnership Policy which entails a streamlined framework for project appraisal and contracting with the private sector to achieve efficient and faster development of public infrastructure. The Public-Private Partnerships Bill will be presented to Parliament in the next financial year and I seek your support for its enactment.

Debt Sustainability

30.	Madam Speaker, Uganda’s public debt is sustainable in both the medium and long term. The bulk of Uganda’s external debt portfolio has been contracted on concessional terms with a repayment period of 40-50 years, a grace period of at least 5 years, and interest rates of not more than 1 per annum.

31.	Given that our investment programs require more resources than we can raise domestically, it is feasible to borrow externally and prudently on favourable terms. Next financial year, Government will implement a policy that uses contractor facilitated financing as a means of raising resources for infrastructure projects. Guidelines will be issued to operationalize this policy. However, these borrowed resources must be utilised to boost productive capacity of the economy to increase competitiveness. This will enable our country to generate the necessary resources to service debt sustainably over the long term. To achieve this objective, Government will focus on improving efficiency in the use of public funds and ensure value-for-money for Government spending.

Resource Framework for FY 2012/2013

32.	Madam Speaker, the total amount of resources available in financial year 2012/2013 is estimated at Shs 11,157 billion.  Domestic mobilized resources, including tax collections and domestic borrowing will finance about 75% of the budget during 2012/13, whilst 25% will be provided by development partners. This represents an increase in domestic financing of our budget. Revenue collections for next financial year are projected at Shs. 7,251 billion. Total debt service including interest payments are projected to amount to Shs. 1,101 billion in financial year 2012/2013. This means that Shs. 10,057 billion will be available to support economic and social development programmes. 

IV. Key Sector Priorities for Financial Year 2012/2013

33.	Madam Speaker, in line with the objectives of the National Development Plan and the long-term vision of the socio-economic transformation of Uganda, the budget priorities in Financial Year 2012/2013 will seek to achieve the following:

i.	Removing infrastructure constraints in transport and energy to facilitate private sector development as the engine of growth;
ii.	Promoting support to the critical productive sectors of the economy including Agriculture and Tourism in order to generate employment and increase production;
iii.	Improving the quality of social services focusing on education, health and access to water; and
iv.	Strengthening Public Sector Management for efficient service delivery.

A.	Infrastructure

Road Transport 

34.	Madam Speaker, road transport accounts for about 97% of all freight cargo in Uganda. Government will lower high vehicle operating costs and reduce time delays by improving the national road transport network. The priorities in the road sector are:
 
i.	Rehabilitation and expansion of the road network with special emphasis on roads in agricultural areas and export routes; and
ii.	Developing alternative access routes to the sea through both the southern and northern corridors.

35.	I am proposing to increase the allocation to the Works and Transport sector to Shs 1,651 billion in the next financial year from Shs 1,291 billion in the current financial year. 

36.	Madam Speaker, this allocation will enable construction to continue on the following roads:

i.	Fort-Portal-Bundibugyo (104km);
ii.	Busega-Masaka (116km);
iii.	Nyakahita-Kazo-Kamwenge (143km);
iv.	Kawempe-Kafu (166km);
v.	Malaba/Busia-Bugiri (82km);
vi.	Tororo-Mbale-Soroti (152km);
vii.	Mbarara-Katuna (124km);
viii.	Jinja-Kamuli (60km);
ix.	Mbarara-Kikagati-Murongo Bridge (75km);
x.	Hoima-Kaiso-Tonya (85km);
xi.	Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba (92km);
i.	xii.	Gulu-Atiak (74km);
xiii.	Ishaka-Kagamba (35.4km);
xiv.	Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana/Kyanika (101km);
xv.	Masaka-Mbarara (154km).

37.	Madam Speaker, construction will be started on the following roads:

i.	Kampala-Entebbe Expressway (51km);
ii.	Muyembe-Nakapiripirit-Moroto-Kotido (193 kms)
iii.	Dualing of Kampala Northern Bypass (17km);
iv.	Construction of Mbarara Bypass (40km); 
v.	Upgrading of Kamwenge-Fort Portal (66km);
vi.	Upgrading of Atiak-Nimule (35km);
vii.	 Kalangala Infrastructure Project.

38.	Madam Speaker, Government is in advanced stages of finalizing funding for the following priority road projects:

i.	Olwiyo-Gulu-Kitgum (167 kms)
ii.	Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto-Lokitanyala (208 kms)
iii.	Kapchorwa-Suam (77 kms)
iv.	Villa Maria-Sembabule (48 kms)
v.	Mpigi-Maddu-Sembabule (135 kms)
vi.	Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi-Nyenga (74 kms)
vii.	Ntungamo-Kakitumba/Mirama Hills (37 kms)
viii.	Rukungiri-Kihihi-Kanungu-Ishasha  (74 kms)
ix.	Kyenjojo (Kabwoya)-Hoima – Masindi- Kigumba (137 km) 
x.	Buwaya-Kasanje-Mpigi-Kibibi-Mityana (90 kms)
xi.	Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko (111 kms)
xii.	Kayunga-Galiraya-Bbale (88.5 kms)
xiii.	Kabale (Ikumba)-Kanungu-Buhoma (120.0 kms)
xiv.	Ishasha-Katunguru (88.0 kms)
xv.	Kabale-Bunyonyi (6.0 kms)
xvi.	Mbale-Lwakhakha (41.0 kms)
xvii.	Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo-Afoji (104.0 kms)
xviii.	Masaka - Bukakata

39.	Madam Speaker, in addition, the construction works and repairs of the following bridges will be undertaken:

i.	Commence construction of Second Nile Bridge at Jinja;
ii.	Rehabilitation of Nalubaale-Kiira Bridge;
iii.	Complete Bulyamusenyu and Muzizi Bridges;
iv.	Complete 3 bridges on Atiak-Moyo-Afogi Road;
v.	Construct Kanyamateke (Kisoro), Karujumba (Kasese), Alala (Nebbi) and Kasaigi (Kibale) and Semuliki Bridges;
vi.	Construct bridges in North and North Eastern Uganda at Olyanai, Obalanga, Alito, Ajeliek, Ojanai, Opot, Aakol, Airong, Balla, Agali, Engeti, Kochi and Nyawa.

40.	Madam Speaker, in order to enhance road maintenance and rehabilitation at the district level, 142 units of road equipment have been procured and are to be distributed to local governments across Uganda. We expect this equipment to ensure prompt and efficient road maintenance.

Water Transport

41.	Madam Speaker, a sizable portion of Uganda’s population lives around our rivers and lakes. In the next financial year, the following projects will be implemented to address this challenge:

i.	In addition to the recently commissioned Obongi (Moyo)-Sinyanya (Adjumani) ferry, government will construct the Laropi-Adjumani and Amuru –Rhino Camp ferries;
ii.	Construction of the Lake Bisina and Lwampanga (Nakasongola)-Namasale (Amolatar) landing sites;
iii.	Design the Bukungu-Kagwara ferry; and
iv.	Repair the Marine Vessel (MV) Kaawa.

Rail Transport

42.	Madam Speaker, in recognition of railway’s potential, Government will undertake the following actions in the next financial year. 

i.	Complete the feasibility study to upgrade Kampala - Kasese railway;
ii.	Commence the preliminary engineering design for the Malaba - Kampala standard gauge railway line.

Electricity 

43.	Madam Speaker, access to electricity is essential for economic development especially for agricultural and industrial processing and production. Government will prioritize increased generation capacity, and expand the transmission and distribution network to reduce systems’ losses. This will result in higher efficiency in the electricity sector and better quality, access and reliability of power. In the next financial year, Government will undertake the following interventions:

i.	Fully commission the 250MW Bujagali Hydro Power Project;
ii.	Start construction of 600MW Karuma  Hydro Power Project; 
iii.	Complete preliminary designs for the 600MW Ayago and 140MW Isimba Hydro Power Projects;
iv.	Provide financial support in the construction of a total of 125 MW of renewable Mini Hydro Projects; 
v.	Further expand the Rural Electrification Programme to increase access to power; and
vi.	Ensure aggressive power loss reduction by rolling out pre-paid meters and investing in the distribution network.

Oil and Gas

44.	Madam Speaker, with respect to the Oil and Gas sector, Government has presented legislation to Parliament for establishing a sound legal and regulatory framework, as well as the institutional arrangements for prudent management of the oil resource. The Bills before Parliament are:
i.	The Petroleum (Exploration and Production) Bill 2012;
ii.	The Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill 2012; and
iii.	The Public Finance Bill 2012, which contains the framework for management of petroleum revenue.

45.	We look forward to Parliament’s expeditious enactment of these vital legislations.

A.	Production Sectors

Agriculture 

46.	Madam Speaker, the priorities in the agricultural sector include ensuring food security, providing raw materials for agro-processing and enhancing export revenues. Therefore, the sector holds the key to Uganda’s economic transformation, job and wealth creation. To complement Government Agricultural Zoning Strategy, Government has adopted a commodity based pilot project which will focus on 11 selected commodities for increased exports to regional and international markets. Apart from traditional commodities of coffee and tea, other crops were selected for both their versatility and flexibility as food security and export earning potential.

47.	Government will implement the following actions in the next financial year:

i.	the provision of improved seed and farm inputs and implements to increase production and productivity of  the eleven food security commodities, including:- maize, beans, coffee, market fruits and vegetables, rice, bananas, dairy and beef cattle and fish; 
ii.	supporting the seed industry and provision of improved breeding stock for the selected commodities; and
iii.	Completing the ongoing rehabilitation of irrigation schemes and embarking on establishing of new ones to increase the provision of water for irrigation, livestock and for aquaculture by partnering with the private sector.

48.	Madam Speaker, the commodity approach implemented with the zoning strategy will concentrate on a particular commodity in a specific zone. In this way, we will be able to produce sufficient quantities that will support domestic and regional trade, as well as agro-industrialization to add value and create non-farm jobs required for our workforce. In addition concentrating in a specific zone will allow the efficient provision of relevant services such as extension services in the field, road and electricity infrastructure and financial services.

49.	For instance maize farmers in specific zones in the country will be facilitated to access both improved seed, and also the means to access flour milling plants and equipment to add value to their produce. This will enable maize farmers to benefit from higher prices paid for maize flour instead of lower receipts earned from selling grain.

50.	Madam Speaker, in order to increase production, Government is consulting nucleus farmers in the private sector on how to provide cost effective agricultural mechanized support to small holder farmers. This will increase value addition, and therefore household income for small holders farmers across the country.

51.	Madam Speaker the total direct and indirect allocations to the agriculture sectors for the next financial year will amount to Shs 585.3 billion. In addition, the commodity based approach will herald increased coordination for greatest effectiveness between the relevant ministries and other stakeholders.

Tourism

52.	Madam Speaker, Uganda has emerged as a top tourist destination over the last year. Uganda is rich in flora and fauna, offering wildlife safaris, a variety of bird species and has most hospitable people. 

53.	Government will use its limited resources, working with the private sector,  to undertake the following:

i.	Improve accessibility to tourist sites by upgrading and maintaining road infrastructure
ii.	Support enactment of hospitality standards through grading hotels and hospitality training 
iii.	Promoting eco-tourism, in order to conserve our wildlife and heritage;
iv.	Implementation of cost effective tourism promotion using tourist companies and the internet.

Private Sector Competitiveness 

54.	Madam Speaker, Government will continue to focus its efforts on improving Uganda’s private sector competitiveness by: 

i.	Reducing physical costs in transport and electricity, among others); and
ii.	providing the necessary policy, legal and regulatory framework. 

55.	Madam Speaker, I am pleased to announce that a comprehensive review of business licenses has been completed, and recommendations made to simplify requirements, reduce discretionary powers, and eliminate redundant procedures. As a result of the review, I will eliminate about 27 licenses all of which were found to be either obsolete or redundant. An electronic licenses registry that will serve as a repository for all approved business licensing in Uganda will be established. Implementation of the agreed recommendations is estimated to result into savings in excess of Shs 78.3 billion for the private sector. I thank the Private Sector which took a key role in the process of business licensing reform. These measures will be implemented in the next financial year.

56.	Government will also establish a One Stop Centre to provide online registration services for the various licenses required to start a business.  In addition, a Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) Business Guide has been developed to provide SMEs with information on available financial, business development services (BDSs), and business licensing information. 

57.	Madam Speaker, the following bills which are aimed at improving further private sector competitiveness, are before Parliament for which I am requesting expeditious passage:

i.	Counterfeit Bill
ii.	Anti-Money Laundering bill
iii.	Industrial Property Bill
iv.	Accountants Bill
v.	Uganda National Bureau of Standards Bill

58.	For those bills passed by Parliament this financial year, I thank you, Madam Speaker.

C. Social Services

Education Sector

59.	Madam Speaker, in the Education sector, Government will continue to enhance the quality and relevance of education at all levels. This will be achieved by improving the effectiveness and efficiency in the sector by reducing teacher and pupil absenteeism, provision of scholastic materials and enhancing school inspection.

60.	Madam Speaker, the education sector has the largest share of our national budget with a total provision increasing from Shs 1,418 billion in the current financial year to Shs 1,669 billion in the next financial year. This amounts to 17% of the total budget. The sector provision will also cater for salary increases for Primary School Teachers and Science Teachers in Post O-Level institutions. I have allocated Shs. 290 billion for teachers, scientists and other civil servants.

Creating Employment Opportunities

61.	Madam Speaker, Government will work with the private sector to expand skills development to match labour market requirements as a key requirement under Business Technical and Vocational Training and Education (BTVET). Government recognizes that jobs will be created by the private sector, for which it will continue to support with skills development of the workforce.

62.	One such joint venture with the private sector is the Youth Venture Capital Fund for which Shs. 25 billion is being lent out to youth, through participating financial institutions. I am happy to report that remarkable progress has been made in the first few months of the scheme’s implementation. To date, Shs. 8 billion has been disbursed to 3,000 youth. In addition, a dedicated desk officer at a senior level has been appointed at the Ministry of Finance to deal with all youth venture capital fund matters and liaise with stakeholders. The Youth Venture Capital Fund progress report will be tabled when Parliament reconvenes. I am allocation an additional Shs 3.25 billion towards the scheme.

63.	Madam Speaker, to address the needs of graduates who have bankable project proposals but lack the requisite funding, I am establishing the Graduate Venture Capital Fund with an allocation Shs. 16 billion to be implemented with all participating financial institutions.

Health Sector

64.	Madam Speaker, the health sector has achieved progress by increasing availability of basic medicines and achieving immunization rates of children against major killer diseases of 90%. In addition, infant and maternal mortality rates have reduce to 54 per thousand persons and 352 per hundred thousand persons, respectively. However, the health care delivery system still requires major improvements to ensure access to quality basic health care for all.

65.	Madam Speaker, Government’s objective in the next financial year is to address poor child and maternal health, weaknesses in the drug management system, inadequate health infrastructure and personnel constraints. The following specific actions will be implemented:

i.	Motivate and retain health workers through gradual salary increases and construction of staff houses. With support from the Italian Government, 88 staff houses will be constructed in the Karamoja Region alone.
ii.	Commence rehabilitation of Mulago National Referral Hospital and construction of referral hospitals in Kirudu and Kawempe zones of Kampala, including finalisation of negotiations to construct a modern women’s hospital at Mulago.
iii.	Commence refurbishment of Kabale, Hoima and Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospitals;
iv.	Rehabilitate Kawolo Hospital in Lugazi and Itojo Hospital in Ntungamo utilising support from the Spanish Government.
v.	Provide solar powered fridges, Emergency Obstetric Care (EmONC) lifesaving medicines and kits, Family Planning equipment and commodities to health facilities countrywide. 
vi.	Conduct maternal and pre-natal death audits and  undertake community sensitization and mobilization. 
vii.	Protect children from pneumonia and diarrhoea by introducing pneumococcal and Rotavirus vaccines.
viii.	Reduce the prevalence of malaria by conducting indoor residue spraying and use of Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDTs) to improve diagnosis of malaria. 
ix.	Mitigate the effects of HIV/AIDS by undertaking Prevention strategies such as ABC, Circumcision, and Elimination of Mother to Child Transmission, in addition to enrolling an additional 100,000 people infected with HIV/AIDS on Anti-Retroviral Treatment. 

Water and Environment Sector

66.	Madam Speaker, Government’s priority in the Water sector will be to provide water for production. The component for bulk water supply previously under the Agricultural Sector has now been transferred to the water sector. As a result, the total allocation to the water sector in the Financial Year 2012/13 has increased from Shs 271 billion to Shs 355 billion.

67.	Madam Speaker, in the next financial year, gravity flow schemes supplying Nabweya, Lirima and Kanyampaga and small piped water schemes for Luanda, Kabumba and Ongino Rural Growth centers will be constructed, to improve rural water supply. Piped water systems will also be built in Lamwo, Agago and Nwoya, among many others. Piped water systems in Paidha, Patongo, Opit, Omugo and Agweg townships will also be completed and construction of new systems in Moyo, Ibuje, Kalongo, Purongo and Akujo will commence. Further investments in urban water supply will include the following:

i.	Completion of Nakaseke town water supply system and restoration of existing systems in Kakiri, Bukomansimbi and Wakiso towns;
ii.	Drilling of boreholes and construction of water supply systems in the towns of Ntwetwe (Kyankwanzi), Kasenje (Wakiso) and Zirobwe (Luwero);
iii.	Construction of new, expansion of existing and rehabilitation of water supply systems in Kaabong, Abim, Karenga, Namalu, Bukedea, Busia, Kapchorwa, Katakwi, Matany, Serere, Kachumbala, Namutumba, Kaliro and Bombo Towns, as well as Alwi Dry Water Project.

68.	Madam Speaker, Government, through National Water and Sewerage Corporation, will also undertake the following projects:

i.	Construction of Lubigi Water Treatment Plant;
ii.	Rehabilitation of Bugolobi Sewage Treatment Plant, and the construction of the  Nakivubo and Kinawataka waste water management plant;
iii.	Emergency rehabilitation and upgrading of Gaba I and II intake to increase water production capacity to 300 million litres per day;
iv.	Construction of a 4 million litres reservoir at Namasuba Hill.

69.	In order to address constraints in water for production, the following projects will be undertaken during the year:

i.	Construction of Andibo dam in Nebbi district, Kajodi Valley Dam in Mityana District, Nakabala and Nyamiringa (Kiboga).
ii.	Rehabilitation of Windmills in Karamoja Region;
iii.	Construction of Kitasi-Sanga-Kanyaryeru bulk water scheme in Kiruhura district;
iv.	Design of Rwengaaju irrigation scheme in Kabarole and Kulwodong dam in Abim District.

D. Improving Government Effectiveness

70.	Madam Speaker, experiences from the fastest growing world economies point to the important role an efficient public service plays in facilitating growth and development. An efficient and transparent public sector procurement process facilitates rapid private sector growth, and access to credit from financial institutions. An effective public sector facilitates the private sector to create jobs, supports forward and backward industrial linkages and ultimately leads to faster economic transformation.

71.	In order to attain our socio-economic transformation objectives faster, public sector efficiency and effective service delivery will therefore be of paramount importance starting next financial year. This is especially critical for six key service delivery sectors, namely – agriculture, roads, energy, health, education, and water. This is because the vast majority of infrastructure and social services provided to most of the population are delivered by these sectors. These sectors also take a substantial share of the National Budget, and form the major focus of the National Development Plan (NDP) strategies.


72.	In order to improve service delivery, the following actions will be emphasized:

i.	Further alignment of sector priorities and allocation of resources across the board towards strategic interventions of the National Development Plan (NDP). This means that resources will only be allocated to programmes and projects that have the highest impact in unlocking the binding constraints to socio-economic transformation as identified in the NDP.
ii.	Enhance implementation of the first phase of the National Identity Card Project by allowing economically active Ugandans to pay for the Identity Cards on a cost sharing basis.
iii.	Strengthened Performance and Contract management across the whole of government with emphasis on the six service delivery sectors. 
iv.	Ring-fencing of allocations and quarterly progress reporting on budget implementation to Cabinet for closer oversight of performance of the six service delivery sectors to ensure the growth stimulus is attained.  
v.	Enhancing the Cluster approach to planning, monitoring and evaluation to harness synergies between sectors.
vi.	Salary Enhancement for Public Servants with emphasis on Teachers and Scientists; The Ministry of Public Service is finalizing a paper to guide the establishment of a Salary Review Commission to address issues of wage disparities across Government.
vii.	Continued implementation of measures to eliminate inefficiency and waste in public expenditure by minimizing allocations to consumptive areas such as allowances, printing, workshops and seminars.
viii.	Review the entire budget to allocate more resources towards the critical growth sectors of the economy as identified in the National Development Plan (NDP).
ix.	Strengthen Public Financial Management by automation of Government financial management, payroll and procurement  processes and systems.
x.	Support anti-corruption agencies to tackle corruption in all Government agencies by strengthening controls and enforcement to reduce opportunities for corrupt practices.

73.	Madam Speaker and Honourable Members of Parliament, in view of the substantial resources allocated to the Roads, Energy, Water, Health, Education and Agriculture sectors, respective votes will be required to submit quarterly reports to Cabinet to provide progress implementation of agreed work plans.

V. Constitutional Self-Accounting Bodies

74.	Madam Speaker, the budgetary proposals of the following Self-Accounting Bodies have been submitted in compliance with Article 155(2) of the Constitution:

    i) Courts of Judicature
ii)	Electoral Commission
iii)	Inspectorate of Government
iv)	Parliamentary Commission
v)	Uganda Law Reform Commission
vi)	Uganda Human Rights Commission
vii)	Uganda Aids Commission
viii)	National Planning Authority
ix)	Office of the Auditor General

75.	In accordance with Article 155(3) of the Constitution, Government has made recommendations on these proposals. I hereby lay both the budgetary proposals and the recommendations of Government before this august House, as required by the Constitution.

76.	In order for me to submit a fully financed National Budget for your consideration in accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the budget provisions of these Self Accounting bodies are in accordance with the resource envelope conveyed to them in the course of budget preparation, including the presentation of the National Budget Framework Paper to Parliament, in accordance with the Budget Act 2001.

VI. Taxation and revenue Measures

77.	Madam Speaker, the objectives of the Revenue measures for the Financial Year 2012/13 are for revenue generation, reform of the tax laws, enhancing taxpayer compliance and to support tax administration.

78.	Madam Speaker, I will also announce some of the decisions agreed upon by the Sectoral Council on Finance and Economic Affairs of the East African Community (EAC) held on 18th May 2012 in Kampala.

Income Tax

Income derived from Treasury Bills and Bonds

79.	Madam Speaker, I propose to increase the withholding tax on income derived from Treasury Bills and Bonds from 15% to 20% as a final tax. This measure will generate Shs.16.3bn.  The details are contained in the Income Tax (Amendment Bill) 2012.

PAYE Threshold 

80.	 Madam Speaker, Hon. Members, I am proposing to increase the PAYE threshold from Shs.130,000 to Shs.235,000 per month and the tax bands will be adjusted accordingly. This means there will be no PAYE on income below Shs. 235,000 per month. The details are contained in Income Tax (Amendment Bill) 2012.

81.	Madam Speaker, I am also proposing that an additional 10% be imposed on individuals with chargeable income of Shs.120 million and above, per year.  The details are contained in the Income Tax (Amendment Bill) 2012.
Value Added Tax (VAT)

Re-instating VAT on the supply of piped water

82.	Madam Speaker, in this financial year, I propose to reinstate VAT on water at 18%. This measure will generate Shs.21.7bn.

Standard rating of biodegradable packaging materials

83.	 Madam Speaker, Hon Members, I propose to reinstate VAT on the supply of biodegradable packaging materials which is currently exempt. This is to enable suppliers to claim input VAT related to their products produced. This measure will generate shs 2.2 billion. The details are contained in the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill 2012. 

Re-instating the VAT exemption on gambling and lottery services and Increasing the Gaming and Pool Betting tax

84.	Madam Speaker, Hon Members, since the introduction of  VAT on the supply of betting, lotteries and games of chance (Gambling), tax administration has encountered  challenges in application. I am therefore proposing to reinstate the VAT exemption on gambling but increase the Gaming and Pool Betting Tax from 15% to 20%. This measure will generate Shs.4.3bn. The details are contained in the VAT (Amendment Bill) 2012.

Excise Duty

Increasing excise Duty on spirits

85.	Madam Speaker, Hon Members, I am proposing to increase excise duty on spirits made from locally made raw materials from 45% to 60%. Madam Speaker, I am also proposing to introduce a specific rate and an ad valorem duty rate on indentured spirits of Shs.2, 000 per litre or 80 per cent, respectively, whichever is higher, as a means to control undervaluation.  The measure will generate Shs.10.4 billion.  The details are contained in the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill 2012.

Imposing Excise Duty on cosmetics and perfumes

86.	 Madam Speaker, I am proposing to impose excise duty on cosmetics and perfumes at a rate of 10% as a revenue measure.  The details are contained in the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill 2012. This measure will generate Shs.4.1bn. 

Non Tax Revenue

Other Fees and Charges 

87.	Madam Speaker, honourable members, I am proposing to vary various fees and charges for the provision of Government services, authorizations and permits so that they are commensurate with the cost of rendering the service. This measure will generate Shs.31.7bn.  The details are contained in the Finance Bill 2012.

Review of Tax laws on Excise Duty, Stamp Duty and Lotteries and Gaming.

88.	Madam Speaker, I am proposing to reform the Excise Duty Law, the Stamps Act, the Lotteries, Pool Betting and Gaming Act and also introduce a Tax Procedure Code to improve compliance and ease tax administration. These Bills will be introduced 	to Parliament next Financial Year.

Decisions made at EAC Pre-Budget Consultations by the Ministers of Finance and the Economy

89.	Madam Speaker, Hon. Members, the First Sectoral Council of Finance and Economic 	Affairs considered Pre- Budget issues and the following  decisions, among others, were made and the details will be contained in the East African Community (EAC) Gazette.

Duty Remission, exemption regimes and preferential trade schemes 

90.	Madam Speaker, the Sectoral Council of Finance and Economic Affairs recognized the need to take stock and have an analysis of the existing duty remission schemes within the region to ensure equity and uniform implementation of intra EAC trade regime. 

Set Top Boxes for analogue digital and terrestrial transmission

91.	Madam Speaker, to facilitate smooth transition from analogue to digital terrestrial transmission by use of Set Top Boxes, import duty on Set Top Boxes was reduced from 25 percent to 0 percent for a period of one year. 

Food supplements and mineral premix used in fortification 

92.	Madam Speaker, given that food supplements and mineral premix are essential in improving nutritional deficiencies, the import duty was reduced from 25 percent to 0 percent for food supplements and mineral premix.

Vacuum packing bags 

93.	Madam Speaker, import duty was reduced from 25 percent to 10 percent on vacuum packing bags for one year to ease packaging by the manufacturers. 
94.	Madam Speaker, all these measures will come into effect on 1st July 2012.

VII. 	Report of Tax Expenditure for FY 2011/2012

95.	Madam Speaker, Article 152 (2) of the Constitution requires me to periodically report to Parliament on the exercise of powers conferred upon me by any law to waive or vary a tax imposed by that law. This is to report that this fiscal year, I have not exercised powers conferred by the Income Tax Act and Value Added Tax Act to waive any tax.

96.	Madam Speaker, Government has however paid shillings eleven billion six hundred one million five hundred forty two thousand four hundred forty three only (11,601,542,443) for some institutions and Non Government Organizations with tax exemptions clauses in their agreement.

VIII.	Schedule of Indebtedness

97.	Madam Speaker, article 159 (4), section 13 (1), (2) and (3) of the Budget Act 2001 require an account of the total indebtedness of Government. I therefore lay before the House a report reviewing all loans contracted and Grants extended to the Government. I wish to mention that Government did not extend any guarantees to any Agency, Company or Statutory Corporation in the FY 2011/12.

IX. Conclusion

98.	Madam Speaker, this budget statement reflects mutual positions and a collective determination for renewed economic growth and addresses the key challenges to socio-economic transformation of Uganda. In conclusion, I commend this budget to all the people of Uganda whose support will be crucial to realization of this budget’s objectives. 

For God and My Country.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, distinguished guests, Members of Parliament, as I stated earlier, Article 155(1) of the Constitution confers the obligation of presenting the National Budget to Parliament on the President. However, he has assigned that duty to the Minister of Finance to perform on his behalf. But the minister, having presented the speech to Parliament, we need to go by the well-established principle of management that he who delegates must remain responsible. Consequently, the President who is fully responsible for the contents of the budget may want to make a few remarks.

Before I invite him, however, I want to draw your attention to the provisions of Article 98(1) of the Constitution which provides that the President shall be the Head of State, Head of Government, Commander in Chief and the fountain of honour. (Applause) I also draw your attention to Rule 9(4) of our Rules of Procedure which provides that while the President occupies the chair of state within the Chamber, he may make a Presidential statement which shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comments or questions. (Applause)

Let me now invite His Excellency the President, to make some remarks. 

4.17
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Museveni): His Excellency the Vice President; the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship, the Chief Justice; Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker; the Rt Hon. Deputy Chief Justice; Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition, the new Rt Hon. Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly –(Applause)- ministers, Members of Parliament, Members of the Diplomatic Corp, ladies and gentlemen. As you heard, the economy grew by 3.2 percent this financial year. This is one of the lowest rates of growth in the last 25 years. 

Inflation had also gone up to 30 percent; it has now come down to 18 percent overall. And as you heard the minister read in her statement, food inflation is now 8 percent; it has gone back to a single digit. (Applause)

As I have told you in all my previous speeches, this is due to confluence of two sets of factors; the global problems on the one hand and our own mistakes within Uganda on the other hand. The global problems are well known to those who watch western media channels such as CNN and BBC, as well as those who watch the Russian Television Channel RT. The economies in Europe and USA are in trouble with failed banks, high-level of indebtedness and high employment rates. 

Consequently, domestic demand in the European Union declined by 4.2 percent in 2009. This has affected our exports to Europe. Demand for flowers, for instance, has declined by 70 percent. Demand for fish has declined to 40 percent. Nevertheless, the economy of Uganda is not just glued to the economies of Europe and United States. Fortunately, we have got our own internal and regional markets. Aggregate demand here in Uganda has not been as adversely affected. Uganda exported to the region goods and services worth $654 million in 2009, $873 million in 2010 and $1,170 million in 2012. Therefore, demand in the region has not been as low as the demand in Europe. 

We could have performed better if it had not been due to our mistakes by some of our actors in respect of delaying some projects such as Bujagali; the sugar projects - sugar projects like the one in Amuru – in case you do not know the places, they are Amuru, Lugazi; the big project by the Egyptians - the Egyptians are building a good abattoir, but they are being delayed by our public servants – this time it is not the political groups; the Nakawa-Naguru Housing Project; the Palm Oil Project in Buvuma etcetera.  

It is this self-illusory - arrogance and ignorance of various actors that is part of the problem. It would help our long suffering country and continent if all the actors were to realise that as far as the economy is concerned, there are two sovereign actors. The consumer – the one who buys the product and service, and the investor; it is those two. All the other players, high-sounding titles notwithstanding, for instance –(Interjections)- Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition - that is a very high sounding title –(Interjections)–unfortunately, it has no influence on the economy. All the other players, high sounding titles notwithstanding, are of no ultimate importance. 

If enough buyers, local and foreign, do not buy what you produce, that would mark the end of your business. If an investor does not agree to put his or her money, her skills and entrepreneurship in your country and goes somewhere else, that would be the end of that effort. 

Ignorance, however, misleads many actors to think that presidents, ministers, Members of Parliament and bureaucrats are the most important actors as far as the economy is concerned. This is dangerous self-deception. (Applause) You have seen governments and systems corrupted because one set of these two primary actors has malfunctioned; the consumers or the investors.

In a country owning natural resources, it gives it an importance, provided those natural resources are of a unique and strategic nature, and are found only in our country.  If you think that natural resources give you a veto on what business people can do, you should think about that very carefully, except if that natural resource is unique, of a strategic value and is found only in your country. 

We have, for instance, got coffee. However, coffee is not only in Uganda.  Therefore, international coffee-roasters are not bothered to come to Uganda.  They roast coffee from all over the world in other places.  We have to roast this coffee ourselves. Roasting means that other than removing the skin - roasting and grinding so that it can be packed to go to the supermarket. This has not been easy because our people did not have capital, technical know-how and entrepreneurial skills.

This is what brings us to the issue of competitiveness of a country vis-à-vis other countries in terms of attracting investments and also winning markets.  You must treat investors well and also treat the consumers well if you are to survive in the modern world.  You must ensure that investors have security, they have good infrastructure that will make their businesses profitable, by lowering the costs of doing business in your country, and that they are not delayed by corrupt or self-important officials, etcetera.  This is where some actors have let down the people of Uganda; by playing around with the two sovereign actors in the economy - the investor and the consumer.  

It is this failure, this arrogance, that have caused our economy to grow at only 3.2 percent this year.  True, the global economy is bad, but our economy would have grown at a higher rate if it was not for this mistake.
  
These actors also squander the contribution of Uganda People’s Defence Forces and the people of Uganda in bringing about stability.  This is a subject that I would not want to talk much about here, but those who are serious would know what that means. The peace we ushered in and the goodwill we have generated would have brought more development if all the actors were conscious of the two fundamental actors in a modern economy, which I have already talked about; the consumer and the investor; and if all of us were aware that our roles, high- sounding titles notwithstanding, are to search for value and facilitate these two fundamental actors in a modern economy.  

With the correct handling of the two actors, then, you solve the problems of employment, widening the tax base, provision of goods and services, foreign exchange earnings, social services, etcetera.

In spite of this obstruction, we have moved and we are now set to take off.  Through many struggles, Bujagali is now about to be completed. (Applause)  We shall, for the first time since 2005, have no electricity deficit for at least, the next two years.  (Applause)  This is an opportunity we are not going to miss again in spite of the shouts by some ladies and gentlemen here. We are not going to have this power shortage again and I can tell you this.  (Applause)  You may hang yourself but this will not happen. (Laughter) More mini-hydro stations will be built. 

You heard the Minister for Finance telling you that we are going to – because this Bujagali would give us a surplus of about 50 mega watts for about two years. (Applause) But within those two years, we are going to add another 125 megawatts from the mini-hydros and that is what the Minister for Finance was telling you.  We are also going to add another 50 megawatts from our crude oil. We shall use the crude oil to generate electricity.  More mini-hydros will be built and we shall start using our crude oil to generate electricity. We shall build Isimba and start on Karuma and the money is there as you know. (Applause)   We shall never get electricity shortage again. 

In my recent State of the Nation Address, I talked about the two categories (A and B) of roads that have been listed by the Ministry of Works to be worked on.  We are determined to work on all the 19 roads under category A and these were read by the minister. (Applause)  We shall use all ways of funding. As you heard the minister saying, some will be funded by external loans and grants, some will be funded by our own money – the 1,600 billion she read for you here. Some of them will be funded by what we call contractor financing - a contractor who brings his own money; and some we shall fund by borrowing from within Uganda, including borrowing from the NSSF as I said the other day –(Interjections)-  well, if you can stop it, you try, but it will happen and I am sure.

With the full knowledge of the importance of the investors to the economy, I will reactivate the Presidential Economic Council that will be meeting once every two months under my chairmanship or that of the Vice-President, in case I am not present. Mr Stephen Muyingo, my Senior Private Secretary in-charge of Economic Affairs, will be the Secretary of that Council. (Applause)  The Chairman of the Uganda Manufacturers Association and that of the Private Sector Foundation as well as a number of other private sector players will be members of that council. This is in order to eliminate once and for all the arrogance of the civil servants when they are designing policies.  They always ignore the views of the private sector, as I pointed out above, and yet the private sector are the prime movers of the economy. Officials in many cases act against the interests of our private sector. I have been told, for instance, that there is somebody who licensed the import of poultry meat; that somebody licensed the importation of dressed chicken. Dressed chicken means undressed actually. (Laughter) That means slaughtered chicken. Somebody has licensed the importation of slaughtered chicken. That is what I was told; probably this is not true. Who is this that can license the importation of chicken from outside and yet I have been promoting chicken production in the country? What is the interest of such an official? That means that if our peasants whom we are giving the chicken, if nobody buys what they produce because the supermarkets are flooded with imported chicken, that will be the end of our efforts. So, who is this? [HON. MEMBERS: “Amelia Kyambadde.”] Oh, it is Amelia? (Laughter) The Presidential Economic Council will harmonise such disharmonies. 

The Minister of Finance touched on the issue of nucleus farmers. These will be helped to provide tractor hire services to their neighbours. Also, working with the private sector, we are going to ensure milling of maize within Uganda so that we export maize flour instead of exporting grains, and at the same time, produce poultry and animal feeds within the country. I have instructed the Minister of Finance to study the usefulness of giving tax incentives to manufacturers who will take their factories upcountry. (Applause)

In conclusion, apart from the victory in the electricity field as well as intensified battle in the sector of roads, the following measures will help to stimulate production and consumption:

1.	Providing seeds and seedlings to the farmers for the 11 selected crops;

2.	Working with nucleus farmers to provide tractor-hire services to farmers;

3.	Working with the private sector to ensure that maize is milled in Uganda so as to add value to it and also to produce animal feeds within the country;

4.	Study the possibility of giving tax incentives to factories that will be set up upcountry;

5.	Raising the tax threshold to Shs 235,000 so as to stimulate savings and consumption. The signboard there was getting it wrong. It is from Shs 130,000 to Shs 235,000;
 
6.	Integrating the private sector in policy formulation in the form of reactivating the Presidential Economic Council to which leaders of the private sector will belong. 

Remember that while under feudalism, kings, princes and generals were the cardinal actors, in modern economies, the cardinal actors are the consumers and the investors. Governments are mere facilitators by providing peace, infrastructure, a conducive policy and a conducive regulatory framework. I thank you very much. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, on behalf of Parliament, I would like to thank you for fulfilling your obligations under Article 155(1) of the Constitution, and presenting the budget to the country. When we adjourn, we are, of course, all invited to the parliamentary gardens here at the Serena International Conference Centre to have more detailed discussions about the budget –(Laughter)- and possibly a display of some dancing skills by those who have got agile feet. 

I would like to state the following:

That I require the Secretary to the Treasury to present to Parliament, in compliance with Article 164 of the Constitution and the Public Finance And Accountability Act, the names of all the accounting officers of the ministries and institutions for the Financial Year 2012/2013.

Secondly, I invite the business committee to meet on 18 June 2012 to give a status report on the work outstanding at the close of the first session. The House will be adjourned to 26th June to do the following:

i.	Receive the list of accounting officers;
ii.	Constitute the sessional committees, and 
iii.	Consider the vote-on-accounts. 

The House is adjourned to 26 June 2012, at 2.00.p.m. Thank you. 

National Anthem (Three Verses) 
  
(The House rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 June 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

