



Thursday, 18 June 2020

Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to report that the Business Committee sat this morning to consider available business, to prioritise and present a legislative agenda for the Fifth Session of the Tenth Parliament. 

It was noted that given that this session covers an election year, the programme for Parliament is bound to be interrupted due to the roadmap of the general elections, which also includes the holding of party primaries. We agreed, therefore, in principle, that the calendar will run as follows:

1. The First Meeting, which commenced on 4 June, will run until 1 October. Ordinarily, this is a legislative meeting but taking into account the forthcoming activities, we shall also combine it with the oversight report stage. Therefore, we shall handle Bills and statutory reports. As such, committees are urged to set aside time and process as many statutory reports as possible since the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) require feedback on their mandates.

2. We propose to have a recess from 2 to 26 October 2020. In principle, we agreed that the Second Meeting will commence on 27 October and run to 17 December 2020 to consider committee reports. This will be subject to the activities that will be ongoing but in principle, that is our plan.

3. We plan that the Christmas recess will run from 18 December 2020 to 4 January 2021. 

4. We are also proposing that the Third Meeting commences on 5 January 2021 to 28 May 2021, which will be the Budget meeting.

In a bid to cover as much work as possible, we urge committees to constitute themselves into subcommittees, where necessary, and break up the work. Relatedly, a particular committee may wish to consider similar business at a go and prepare an omnibus report. 

I call for your indulgence, honourable members; given the amount of work anticipated to be handled in processing Bills and reports and the limited time we have, it may necessitate sitting on Fridays once in a while, but we shall be informing you when that is going to take place. The clerks are urged to put in extra effort to support the committees to meet their targets.

Honourable members, yesterday we received the sad news of the passing of Esther Nakajjigo aged 23 years. She was hit by a gate due to a heavy storm at the Arches National Park while exiting a shopping mall in Colorado, USA, at the weekend.

Esther Nakajjigo has been an activist, despite her young age. At the age of 17 years, she was named Uganda’s Ambassador for Women and Girls, after emerging winner of the Women Achievers’ Award of the United Nations Population Fund. 

She spearheaded many campaigns aimed at fighting for the rights of women and girls in Uganda, with her latest campaign being “the Saving Innocence Challenge”, a campaign that aimed at taking victims of teenage pregnancies back to school. Her life’s goal was to see every child access education.

Esther held nine awards, including the European Union leader in fighting violence against women in Uganda; Geneva Women’s World Summit prize; and the 2018 Luff Peace Fellowship winner at the Watson Institute in the US. She is also a Fellow of the Nelson Mandela Fellowship, a US Government programme for promising African leaders.

Honourable members, I would like to invite you to stand for a minute of silence in honour of this young Ugandan.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Government proposal to borrow up to 7.5 million euros from the Unicredit Bank, Austria, for the construction and equipping of an oncology and diagnostic centre in northern Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me send it to the Committee on National Economy. I think you will find answers there about where exactly it is going.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EFFECTS OF FLOODS ON UGANDA’S ROAD NETWORK

THE SPEAKER: Minister, before you start, can I encourage you to ask your state ministers to attend Parliament? (Applause)

2.47
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this is a statement by the honourable Minister of Works and Transport to Parliament on the damage inflicted by the recent spate of heavy rains on the road network. I am presenting this statement to inform Parliament of the damage inflicted on the road network by the recent spate of heavy rains in the country. 

The country has experienced heavy rains since September 2019. Consequently, the road and bridge infrastructure has been extensively damaged all over the country. Damage on road and bridge structures has affected both the national roads and district and urban community access roads.

The Uganda National Roads Authority is responsible for managing national roads and the district local governments and urban councils, through funding from the Uganda Road Fund, are responsible for maintaining the District, Urban and Community Access Road (DUCAR) network. The Kampala road network is maintained and managed by Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), and this has also not been spared by the recent spate of rain.

The role of the Ministry of Works and Transport in the roads subsector is to initiate, formulate, develop and review policies, laws and regulations as well as set standards relating to roads infrastructure. My ministry is responsible for enforcement of these policies, laws, regulations and standards as well as providing technical support to MDAs and local governments. The ministry is also responsible for strategic planning and monitoring the performance of the designated road agencies. The rehabilitation of the district, urban and community access road network is also the responsibility of the ministry.

Madam Speaker, the works and transport sector was allocated a total budget of Shs 6,126 billion for the financial year 2019/2020. Out of this budget, Shs 3,900 billion is for national roads’ development and Shs 272 billion is for national roads’ maintenance. That is partially where we have a problem - the disparity between development and maintenance. Shs 181 billion is for the DUCAR network and Shs 139 billion is for the maintenance of DUCAR while Shs 22 billion is for maintenance of the road network in Kampala.

The road maintenance funds allocated for various categories of roads were planned for routine manual, routine mechanised and periodic maintenance works on the roads and bridges. Some of the planned activities have been executed. However, the available funds are grossly inadequate to address both the planned maintenance works and the emergency intervention works arising from the damage inflicted on the road network by the heavy rains experienced in the country since September 2019.

At the onset of the heavy rains in November 2019, my ministry, as a safety measure, issued a circular requesting all Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) and town clerks in the districts to ensure safety of the road users by proactively placing warning signs on damaged roads and bridge sections, clearing blocked roads and landslides etcetera, and maintaining the drainage systems along the roads to allow free flowing of the water to minimise the impact of floods. We also advised them to revise the road maintenance work plans in order to cater for emergencies other than doing the routine. We worked on this in accordance with the Uganda Road Fund operational guidelines. So, the priorities, under guidance, were addressed. The ministry provided metallic pipe culverts to address these emergencies.

The problem at hand is that substantial damage has been inflicted on the road network due to the heavy rains which are still being experienced to date in some areas. The road and bridge infrastructure has been extensively damaged all over the country. The rains have severely affected the low-lying and mountainous areas of the country, leading to landslides, failure of embankment slopes, damaging and washing away of drainage structures such as culverts and bridges, flooding of road sections, and blockage of bridges and other drainage structures. 

Some of the most salient damaged roads include Saaka Swamp crossing between Kaliro and Pallisa districts, Ntungamo-Kabale Road, Fort-Portal-Bundibugyo Road and bridges on rivers Nyamwamba, Nyamugasani and Mubuku in Kasese District.

The Extent of Damage on the Roads
The national roads with swamps and low-lying sections have been flooded and water levels continue to rise, thus submerging the road infrastructure. This is being experienced in places like Kakuuto, Kasensero and also in Bukakata. Culvert and bridge failures on the road network are widespread all over the regions of the country. 

In the mountainous regions of the country, landslides have damaged some roads. The recent flash floods in Kasese District have destroyed bridges on rivers Nyamwamba, Nyamugasani and Mubuku. In other areas, high road embankments have experienced side slope failures, rendering the affected road sections narrow and dangerous to road users. Therefore, adequate funding should be provided to repair the damages on the road network.

The district, urban and community access roads have not fared any better. The network, comprising of a total of 138,509 kilometres, has been damaged by the heavy rains since September 2019. The damage caused on the DUCAR network ranges from landslides debris, culvert washouts, submerging and washing away of road sections, and damages to bridge structures, among others. Accordingly, adequate funds should be provided to repair the damage on the DUCAR network and rehabilitate the critical district roads in each region to ensure all weather accessibility.

On the other hand, KCCA has also not fared well with a total road network of 2,110 kilometres, of which 616 kilometres are paved and 1,494 kilometres are unpaved. The situation has not been any better. There has been significant damage on the road network as a result of the recent heavy rains and flooding within the various parts of the city. The damage on the roads has been manifested in the form of huge potholes - I think many Members have experienced this as you drive on the roads - gullies, damaged stone pitching, edge failures, broken culverts, rutting, cracks, et cetera.

Prioritised Interventions 
National Road Network
The selection of the prioritised interventions on the national road network takes into account the primary/arterial roads in each sub-region which must be maintained in a motorable condition to enable accessibility.

The prioritised interventions required on the national road network have been compiled per region. The scope of the interventions includes: raising low-lying road sections, drainage improvement works including culvert installation, gabion protection works and construction of box culvert structures in some areas. Other works include heavy grading, gravelling works, pothole patching and sealing of the damaged road sections. The estimated cost of the prioritised interventions on the national road network amount to Shs 52,578,209,177. Details are shown in the annex of this document.

District, Urban, Community Access Road Network 
The prioritised interventions on the DUCAR network mainly consist of repairing roads linking districts and those connecting to national roads in each of the regions of the country. These roads are in very bad condition and require urgent attention. The scope of the interventions includes installation of culverts, swamp raising and protection works using gabion boxes, heavy grading and re-gravelling works. The estimated cost of the prioritized interventions on the DUCAR network is Shs 5,635,275,247. The details are contained in Annex 2 of the document.

In line with the Cabinet directive on 2 December 2019, the ministry requires to stock emergency response items like bailey bridges, metallic pipe culverts and gabion boxes to provide bridging solutions in the event of serious damage to bridges on public roads. A stock of ten bridges of span of 18 metres, 24 meters and other various sizes; 12,500 metres of metallic pipe culverts; and 3,624 pieces of gabion boxes is considered adequate for this kind of emergency response. The estimated cost of these emergency response items is Shs 28 billion.

The total estimated cost of the urgent interventions on the DUCAR network is Shs 33,635,275,247. The details are contained in Annex 3 of this document.

Kampala Capital City Authority Network 
The priority road infrastructure requiring immediate intervention and repairs under KCCA road network was selected from each of the divisions. These include, among others, reinstatement of bridge structures at Kabuuma in Makindye Division, rehabilitation of damaged road sections along Sir Apollo Kaggwa Road, Ggaba Road, Salaama Road, Spring Road, Naguru Road and Hoima Road. The total estimated cost of these repairs amounts to Shs 11,500,334,177. The details are shown in the Annex 4 of this document. 

Madam Speaker, we had consultations with stakeholders. Most of the information is contained in the documents. The details of the damage in the various districts was submitted by the district local governments and urban councils. However, only about 54 districts and 20 urban councils responded. All the same, we went ahead and did further surveys and we have a comprehensive line-up of what is required in each of the districts.

I will make a rejoinder that because the rains have been continuing, you may find that some of the areas, which have been affected after we had compiled this list, may not have been captured. If they are there, then the ministry is ready to receive them and also see how to incorporate them in the plan.

Numerous requests for emergency funding from designated road agencies, which date as far back as October 2019, have been received by the Ministry Works and Transport, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Uganda Road Fund to address the damage inflicted on roads by the heavy rains.

A committee led by my ministry was set up and comprised of representatives from Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), KCCA, Uganda Road Fund (URF) and Uganda Railways Corporation (URC), which coordinated the updates of the damages on the roads. 

If we are to get the money, what is the implementation plan and strategy? Uganda Road Fund disburses funds to the designated agencies for road maintenance activities on the national roads, district, urban and community access roads. The available budget from URF for the financial year 2019/2020 for emergencies was only Shs 3.6 billion. This financial year, only Shs 2.6 billion was released to handle emergencies on the DUCAR network. As I have already said, that was just a drop in the ocean.

It is apparent that this funding is not enough to cater for all the interventions required on the DUCAR network, national roads network and KCCA roads. Consequently, all designated road agencies lack funding for the required emergency interventions. Designated road agencies planned for road maintenance activities including routine manual, routine mechanised and periodic maintenance but not for the heavy emergencies.

Once funds are availed -
(a) The funding for the interventions on the DUCAR network will be routed through the Uganda Road Fund to benefit local governments and KCCA, which will implement the interventions.

(b) The funding for the intervention on the national roads network will be released to UNRA, which will implement the interventions.

(c) The funds for the emergency response items, namely the bailey bridges, metallic pipe culverts and gabion boxes will be released to the Ministry of Works and Transport, which will centrally procure the emergency response items.

Therefore, emergency funds in form of additional cash limits or supplementary budget should be provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the tune of Shs 97,713,818,601 to handle the prioritised interventions. The summary is shown in the annex to this document.

In conclusion, there is need to address the above situation by implementing the identified interventions in order to restore road connectivity in the affected areas. The prioritised interventions will require immediate attention within this financial year while the rest of the interventions can be addressed in the next financial year.

It is my prayer that the prioritised interventions on the damaged road network be addressed, and this will require funds estimated at Shs 97,713,818,601. These interventions will enable us to respond to those emergencies and restore our road networks. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. I lay the documents on the Table.

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister, for that information. Members can look at the annexes but I know that just this week, we have addressed the issues of Kampala. Yesterday, we passed a loan request for the Kampala roads. We also passed a supplementary budget for different roads in Kampala.

Honourable members, you can take a look at it and if there is an area which you find lacking, you can come back to us on it next week. Otherwise, the paper is noted.

3.04
Mr Elijah Okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, just like you have said, yesterday the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development put in a request for money. I pity the Minister of Works and Transport because almost every constituency is affected. You saw what is happening in Kasilo on television. All the roads are almost cut off, including the main UNRA roads. The equipment there cannot do the work because of the water.

I would like to know whether the minister has put in the request for the money he is asking for to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Is it in the supplementary budget or is it coming in the next budget? We need to know. The minister always comes and says, “we need money”, but have they put in that request? 

I remember that in this financial year that is coming to an end, the Minister of Works and Transport had submitted to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development a request of about Shs 40 billion to help with the road network. I do not know whether that money was released or provided for in the supplementary budget. He should not stop at saying, “we need money”, yet the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not providing it. 

Madam Speaker, we need that money urgently in the supplementary budgets that are coming. Also, was the Shs 40 billion, which was requested for by UNRA through the Ministry of Works and Transport, provided to help the ministry, so that we can move? Thank you. 

3.06
Mr william nzoghu (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement he has given to this House.

I wish to remind the honourable minister that the level of damage to the infrastructure within the Rwenzori sub-region goes beyond the interventions that he has mentioned and goes beyond culverts. The bridges on rivers Lhume and Lhubiriha were equally damaged.

Secondly, I also expected to hear from the statement by the minister, given that he led that team, something about the schools, health centres and other essential infrastructure like water, especially the gravity flow schemes that were equally destroyed. What is the way forward? Will you scatter the statements and maybe have the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Water and Environment bring different statements altogether? 

I thought that since the matter that the minister is presenting on the Floor is about an emergency, it should have been comprehensive to the extent – 

THE SPEAKER: No; honourable members, we are the ones who asked him to make a statement on the effect of the floods on the road network. Now you want to hear about the schools, health centres; no! Look at the Order Paper; the matter is about effects on the road network. That is what we asked him to come and present a statement on. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, the reason I am talking about that is because as I speak, there are a number of people who are still in internally displaced camps within Kasese District. The honourable minister should be able to also give us some reasonable picture about that. 

THE SPEAKER: No; honourable members, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is expected to come here with that, and you are aware of that. Hon. Nzoghu, I do not know what has happened to you today. 

3.08
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Works and Transport for his elaborate statement regarding the status of the roads in Uganda after all the floods. 

I come from Lwengo District and we have been using the new Kampala–Masaka Road. Before this road was commissioned, there were repairs going on. There is a 10-kilometre stretch in Lwera that is consistently being repaired since the road was commissioned. They have always been going down to replace the culverts. 

I am trying to say that these floods are a wakeup call. The Minister of Works and Transport should, from now on, revise the road specifications and the specifications for culverts. There are two types of culverts - the steel culverts and the concrete ones. If they use steel culverts, what gauge are they? If they are concrete, what thickness are they? 

The lifespan of these roads is very limited. We should have roads, which can last for at least 20 years. I know roads have got lifespans. If we choose to take the one of five years or 20 years, they are there – (Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give in regard to that stretch in Lwera is that it is not about the road alone; the encroachment on the wetland has also caused a number of issues. There have been a number of accidents on that road as well. On a daily basis, we get people dying at that spot. That is the information I would like to give.  

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, hon. Namayanja. That is a true statement. I, therefore, urge the Government, especially the Minister of Works and Transport, to revise the road specifications, including the specifications of the steel and concrete culverts. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byandala, sanitise your hands and switch on the microphone.  

3.12
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Katumba Wamala for the report he has given and I genuinely sympathise with him. 

In 2010/2011, the roads maintenance budget was more or less the same as he has told us today. At that time, the minimum required maintenance budget was Shs 600 billion. We made a decision to get user charges to raise the maintenance budget by putting a fee on the fuel. I do not know whether this policy is still going on - putting a user fee on every litre of diesel or petrol bought. In that way, by 2013/2014, the budget had already gone beyond Shs 500 billion per year. 

Therefore, I advise my colleague, my brother, Gen. Katumba Wamala, to revert to the user fees. It is the only way we can get sure money to maintain roads because everyone who uses the road pays the fees and it goes to maintenance. 

Let me also conclude by informing Gen. Katumba Wamala that what he has told us about the emergencies is on a small scale. We are going to get more rains than what we have received in October, November and December. Therefore, he should get prepared. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a lot of work. Minister, do you have anything to respond to?

3.15
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was a question on whether this has been communicated to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Yes, we have already had an interaction with the finance minister on this matter and we are waiting for the response. 

About the Masaka–Lwera road section, as I said, there is need to also look at some of those sections. Uganda National Roads Authority is specifically looking at improving that section of the road. Possibly, instead of having the normal culverts, we shall look at putting up box culverts because of the volume of the water and that will raise the level of the road. 

These are some of the interventions we are going to do on some of these roads that have been highly affected by the floods. I would like to thank Members for supporting this because, as others have said, the effect of floods is everywhere and it is really challenging.     

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON BRIDGING THE DEMAND SUPPLY GAP THROUGH ACCELERATED RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROJECT (BDSGAREP)

3.17 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement on Bridging the Demand and Supply Gap Through Accelerated Rural Electrification Project. This matter was raised by hon. Justine Khainza on 14 May 2020. She specifically wanted to find out about the performance of the loan that had been passed by this House. 

Madam Speaker, the loan was worth US$ 212 million for the electrification of all subcounties in the country. The purpose of this loan was to ensure that we connect the various subcounties that do not have electricity. 

On 31 October 2017, the Government, represented by the Rural Electrification Agency (REA), signed a contract with a Chinese firm called TBEA Company Limited, worth US$ 212 million, as I had mentioned earlier. The project is being financed through a concessional loan from the EXIM Bank of China and aims to electrify all the un-electrified administrative headquarters in the country. These are the subcounty headquarters and environs, town councils and divisional headquarters. 

Madam Speaker, the project duration is for three years. Madam Speaker, can I remove this since there is social distancing here? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, the project duration is for three years from the date of contract effectiveness, which was on l2 July 2019.

We have had to schedule the implementation in six phases. We have phase 1, which includes the project launch schemes, which are 20 schemes in number as provided in schedule C, which I am going to read. We have phase 2, phase 3, phase 4 and phase 5.

Madam Speaker, the overall implementation plan is to ensure that all lines for which construction is completed are commissioned within the shortest time possible and handed over to the respective service providers for management and commencement of implementation of customer connections.

Construction progress has been as follows: Construction works commenced in October 2019. There were delays and I am going to read the reasons for those delays. The commencement was in October 2019 with a target to complete works by December 2021. In preparation for the project launches, which are scheduled to take place in 20 districts spread across the country, REA and the supervision consultant, EPTISA, cleared TBEA to commence construction works in the following phase 1 districts: 
1. Kapchorwa District 
2. Bugiri District 
3. Kibuku District 
4. Kumi District 
5. Madi-Okollo District 
6. Adjumani District
7. Otuke District 
8. Omoro District 
9. Kyegegwa District 
10. Namutumba District 
11. Kassanda District 
12. Kiboga District
13. Kagadi District 
l4. Kibaale District 
l5. Isingiro District 
l6. Kanungu District
17. Bundibugyo District
18. Rakai District
19. Manafwa District
20. Ntungamo District.

Madam Speaker, the project launches had been planned to commence on 12 April 2020 with the first one to be officiated by His Excellency the President, but this was not possible due to the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown.

It is envisaged that the first phase of these schemes - at the time of writing this report - shall be ready for commissioning by end of May and June 2020. However, I would like to state that this has not been the case. As I speak, the engineers from REA are in the field doing the pre-testing and I have been informed that by end of June, all the connections to the national grid should be complete. 

So far, REA has managed to coordinate several shutdowns with Umeme and other service providers to facilitate the interconnection of the new schemes with the existing lines. Some of the lines for which the interconnection has already been effected include the following:

1. In Kiboga District, the Lwamata Subcounty and Kyomya Subcounty schemes are ready for commissioning and REA is currently coordinating shutdowns with Umeme to facilitate the testing process. 

2. In Kumi District, Atutur Subcounty scheme, covering Akalabai-Kajamaka/Opetot, is a 4.09km line. This scheme interconnects with the 33KV Mbale-Kumi line and is operated by Umeme Ltd. 

3. Orapada Primary School in Atutur Subcounty, Kumi District, with a scheme of 0.15km also interconnects with the Mbale-Kumi 33KV line operated by Umeme.

4. Oswapai-Kapokina-Atutur line in South Division Subcounty, Kumi District, also interconnects with Umeme.

5. In Kapchorwa, Kabeywa Subcounty - these ones are ready for commissioning - there is Chepterit-Tangwen-Sunguta-Kokowmasewe line, and Kwoti Subcounty. 
4. In Kyegegwa District, we have Kyegegwa Subcounty and Kigambo Subcounty schemes. These are also ready for commissioning and REA is currently coordinating the shutdowns.

More schemes should have been ready for commissioning, according to the earlier implementation schedule, but as I mentioned, the COVID-19 lockdown has affected this. 

Madam Speaker, the project financial performance has been a little low. At the time of writing this report, it was at 29 per cent with Interim Payment Certificate number three (IPC No.3) under processing. It is envisaged that the contractor will deploy in 71 districts by December 2020 and this will bring us to 68 per cent performance.

Construction in phases 2-6 districts is expected to commence as per the table below. Madam Speaker, I will only mention the districts by phase and I will not into the dates because these are all on your iPads. 

Phase 2 will be between April and December 2020 and the districts are as follows: Bukomansimbi, Lwengo, Masaka, Kazo, Lyantonde, Jinja, Soroti, Ngora, Bududa, Oyam, Moyo, Rubirizi, Kitagwenda, Mityana, Nakaseke, Ntoroko, Kamuli, Kyotera, Koboko, Amuru. 
Phase 3 is also between this period of April and December 2020 and the districts are Butaleja, Dokolo, Kisoro, Maracha, Mubende, Tororo, Zombo, Wakiso, Butambala, Mpigi, Kaberamaido, Abim, Mayuge, Mbale, Kakumiro, Buhweju, Masindi, Lira, Kayunga and Buliisa. 

Phases 2 and 3 will be handled between April 2020 and December 2020. 

Phase 4 to phase 6 districts include the following: Gomba, Kyankwanzi, Rubanda, Bushenyi, Mitooma, Mbarara, Bunyangabu, Kabarole, Hoima, Alebtonq, Amolatar, Ibanda, Sembabule, Kasese, Mukono, Busia, Butebo, Buyende, Apac, Sironko, Yumbe, Nebbi and Pakwach. There is the next page, which has Kyenjojo, Luwero, Budaka, Bugweri, Iganga, Namayingo, Serere, Agago, Kitgum, Pader, Gulu, Pallisa, Namisindwa, Bukwo, Kween, Amuria, Bulambuli, Bukedea, Kapelebyong, Katakwi, Kole and Kwania.

Madam Speaker, the works will also commence this year but will conclude by December 2021.

I wish to inform the House that the lockdown has impacted on the project progress in terms of completion of designs since investigations and route surveys could not be carried out. The other challenges for the delay in commencement include the following: 
a) The contractor had to first get approved subcontractors to implement the project, which was a protracted process.

b) Materials had to be sourced from both internal and overseas sources, which took quite some time.

c) There was also a misunderstanding because TBEA had initially thought that it was the responsibility of REA to carry out the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) studies for the project yet this was the company’s responsibility under the contract.

The following measures have been undertaken to address the challenges: One is the movement permits we acquired and these are being shared amongst the various ongoing projects under REA. 

To date, TBEA has contracted 45 local sub-contracting firms for the execution of the construction works under labour and transport arrangements. You can confirm that as of now, the various contractors are in the different sub counties doing their work. 

A total of 24 local sub-contracting firms out of the 45 have already mobilised-to-site with a total of 47 construction teams and about 850 workers at different sites. 

Presently, for the MV lines, a total of 9,124 foundation pits have been excavated. Some 7,846 poles have erected; 4,000 sets of fittings have been installed and 282 kilometres of wires have been strung. 

For the LV lines, 13,619 foundation pits have been excavated, 10,799 poles have been erected and other fittings have also been installed. 

In order to ensure adherence with the Buy-Uganda-Build-Uganda (BUBU) policy, all the wooden poles and concrete stubs to be used under this TBEA project are being locally sourced. 

TBEA has, to date, contracted four pole manufacturing companies and all have delivered the poles to the various construction sites. The quantity of the wooden poles ordered to-date is 61,415. I do not think I need to go into this, but the emphasis here is that we are moving into BUBU and we need to thank the various investors who have come in to invest in this area.

TBEA consented to execute their contractual responsibility and they are in the initial stages of acquiring the Workforce, Research, and Analysis Project (WRAP) study of the implementation of the consultant.  

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I request you to note the progress made by the Government in implementing this project. Of course, there has been some slowness but also COVID-19 has affected the implementation of some of the projects. 

Measures have been taken to address the challenges faced in the initial stages of the implementation of the project to ensure enhanced coordination and implementation of the project activities.

Madam Speaker, allow me to mention – this is not in the statement – but the last time when this matter was raised, the issues of the leadership wrangles in REA were raised. Allow me to state that a new statutory instrument had been issued by my senior colleague, hon. Goretti Kitutu, but this was challenged in court. The two engineers, who were suspended, Eng. Werikhe, who is the Deputy Executive Director and Eng. Turyagyenda had been suspended for one month. The one month has since elapsed. They were asked to respond and they have written their responses to the board. 

However, with the new statutory instrument in place – yesterday, the High Court dismissed the case that had been brought forward against the new statutory instrument. Therefore, we hope that we should be able to constitute a board that will be able to listen to the issues of the two engineers who were suspended by the board. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, you may recall that we had asked our committee to look at some of these issues and make a report. I know that the report is ready. Let us listen to the report and then, we debate these issues concurrently. We are bringing forward item No.23 so that it can be handled now.
  
3.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Keefa Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity to present the report of the committee. This report has been on our iPads for a couple of weeks now. Hopefully colleagues have had the opportunity to look at it. 

On the 3rd of October, hon. Guma Gumisiriza rose on a matter of national importance and raised concern over the delayed performance of this project. 

Just as we had started investigating his concerns, we also received a petition from the Electrical Voice of Uganda – these are sub-contractors that TBEA had invited to bid and had prequalified them but at a certain point, TBEA decided to change its mind and dropped majority of them. 

They had several concerns. Just as we were finalising the report, on the 14th of May, hon. Justine Khainza, supported by hon. Kibalya and hon. Nambeshe added other matters to it. 

I think hon. Khainza’s matters were very much what had been raised earlier – the issue of delayed performance of the project. She also raised the issue of management issues in REA. 

Hon. Kibalya added another dimension to it; the issue of variance between what is in the Memorandum of Understanding that was signed by the Executive Director – Mr Godfrey Turyahikayo and what was later signed by Eng. Turyagenda who was then acting as Executive Director.

Hon. Nambeshe added an issue which we have not been able to look into – of money that he said was missing. That it had been misappropriated. He also mentioned the issue of witch-hunting. 

We have added all those issues together and we beg to report. 

Madam Speaker, I must point out, that it has not been a usual investigation. First of all, we had a purported letter, which I brought to your attention allegedly signed by you, directing us not to continue with these investigations and that the matter is being investigated by the board of REA.

As we continued, we then had the pressure of probably not reporting that this would cause serious concern to the donors. But also, that if we reported, then it would generate a lot of controversy about issues which are internal fighting within REA. 

We present the facts to you in our report. I would like to first of all highlight that there are fundamental governance issues in REA, which, unless they are resolved, put this project at risk. Unfortunately, it is the same thing that is likely to affect other projects. 

The committee gave the background on the inception of this project – just to bring you up-to-date and provide a context of what has happened; this project was sold to the Uganda Government by TBEA. They approached the Government saying they were very helpful and that they can help the Government with its rural electrification. 

After writing to the Government, the President was impressed and he wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, directing them to study the proposal and expeditiously handle it. 

After that, a combined team of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development did the due diligence but there was an omission in their due diligence – although they were taken to China and they had board presentations, TBEA claimed to have done several projects in Africa but in their report, they do not cite a single project and that remains one serious anomaly in the due diligence. They just confirmed their legal status, technical capacity and financial strength.

Indeed, just before the due diligence was done – and hopefully this helps to clarify hon. Kibalya’s issue – TBEA signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. It is very important to understand that this was non-committal since it was just a working document to provide a working framework to get things moving. On one hand, TBEA committed to starting the mobilisation of finances, while on the other hand, REA committed to starting the surveying and detailed scoping in order to get things together that were later put in the commercial agreement. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to find out whether the chairperson of the committee is proceeding well. You asked him to read the report and he is giving us the background, which is almost well addressed by many Members of the House. I pray that he could go to the report because our iPads do not have these reports. We would like to capture what he is reading from what they found out. Is he proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you have the report?

MR SSEWUNGU: The iPads are not functioning. Even then, we know the situation we are going through.

THE SPEAKER: If they are not functioning, you listen.

MR SSEWUNGU: Couldn’t he read the report? I am seeing him reading from his head – maybe, he is very intelligent.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, you are sitting very far, how can you see what he is doing there? I am told there is a bit of problem with the iPads. Therefore, please, listen.

MR KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, the report is about 24 pages and I thought it would take a long time. Therefore, I was trying to summarise. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you giving the highlights?

MR KIWANUKA: Yes, please.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KIWANUKA: Now, the commercial contract was signed on 31 October, 2017. Again here, Members, I am inviting you to seriously note the explanation for the delay of the project. Although the commercial contract was signed on 31 October, 2017, it was not presented in the House until 25 April, 2018. Even then, it is also important to note that the commencement or the effectiveness date was subject to certain conditions being met, one of them being the signing of the loan agreement. The loan agreement was not signed until January 2019. The other one was advancing the contractor some money so that he could start. That did not happen until April. 

All these have brought about a significant delay. When it was presented to Parliament, we were told it would be a project to be undertaken over 36 months, which is three years. I think the assumption was that it would start from 31 October, 2017. There was a lot of excitement because we are told that even the contractor had already been mobilised. However, that element around conditions for the effectiveness of the contract, did not come out that clearly or there was a bit of an oversight on that.

Unfortunately, Members have said they do not have the report but on page 8, under Table One, we have a summary of the key project components and activities. There are also highlights of the financing of the project, with some of the money coming from EXIM Bank and other funding coming from the Government of Uganda. 

Table Two shows the structure of the loan. 

About the loan request proposal being processed in Parliament, I would like to remind you and draw your attention to some of the fears that were raised at that time. The first one was that there was a concern about giving such a big contract to one contractor. It was explained that in order to get the money from EXIM Bank – the minister explained that they could not get together 20 contractors to go EXIM Bank.

The second problem was about the due diligence and the limitations that were highlighted, that not a single project which had previously been undertaken by TBEA was visited.

The committee also observed the issue of the project delay, that although it is being said to be finishing in 36 months, it had already delayed. I am sorry that you do not have the report on your iPads but the committee had tried to provide the timelines which summaries, probably, everything I have been talking about:
    • On 14 December 2016, the Government of Uganda signed a memorandum of understanding with TBEA. 
    • From 14 – 19 December, 2016, the Government of Uganda did the due diligence in China. 
    • On 31 October, 2017, the Government of Uganda signed a commercial agreement with TBEA. 
    • On 25 April, 2018, Government of Uganda submitted a loan request to Parliament and it was passed on 24 May, 2018. 
    • On 16 January, 2019, over six months later, is when the Government of Uganda signed the loan agreement with China Export and Import Bank.

Madam Speaker, we have not had a good explanation on why there was such a significant delay but what we have been told was that they were negotiating something to do with sovereign guarantee. What is it that they were guaranteeing in order for us to get this money? As the minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here, probably, they will provide an explanation on that. 

The contract became effective on 12 July, 2019 and there were certain mobilisations that had to be done before the contract could commence. The contract subsequently commenced in August 2019 and the actual construction started in October.

Hopefully, with that, Members have got a good feeling of why there has been a significant delay in the implementation of this project or the poles – hon. Waluswaka talked about the poles in his area.

In processing this, we also had a concern about the variance. Of course, as said earlier, hon. Waluswaka had concerns about what was in the Memorandum of Understanding and how that has changed over time. In the Memorandum of Understanding – but I said that was non-committal and it was just to get things working – the subcounties were supposed to have been 287. Under the commercial agreement, they remained 287 but in the current scope, we have 620 administrative units. 

The medium voltage was supposed to cover 2,543 kilometres. In the commercial agreement, that was extended to 3,839 Kilometres, which is rounded off to 4,000 kilometres.

The low voltage was supposed to be 1,827 Kilometres in the Memorandum of Understanding. In the commercial agreement, it is 5,921 Kilometres. Right now, the scope is 6,000 kilometres.

The other thing that has been added in the commercial agreement is the three-phase connections, which is 4,454 and remains the same in the scope. Single-phase customer connections is 168,335, which remains the same in the current scope. Supply of materials for last mile customer connection that was supposed to have been 160,000 in the Memorandum of Understanding, is now 170,000 and the same in the current scope.

There was also something, which had been provided for, which was construction of the (REA) Headquarters but that was dropped. Probably, that eventually helped with expansion of the scope.

We were concerned whether all these variations would not affect the quality and whether it remains in the same price. However, we have been assured that that is covered in the contract. In other words, there is no risk to the contract because of these variations.

Madam Speaker, as rightly mentioned by the honourable minister, construction has started but there are some challenges, which were noted and which have already emerged. The good thing is that we have been assured that TBEA has agreed to find ways of mitigating that challenge.

Although, the power cables are supposed to be 100 millimetres, in some areas, they have been using 50 millimetres. This was noted as a matter of serious concern. However, we have since heard a report back that they have agreed to rectify that issue. They are also going to correct a number of lines, where they had been using low capacity conductors or smaller cables.
There is also another issue, where TBEA was supposed to have procured 17 vehicles for the project especially to assist REA in the supervision of the project. This issue remains contentious. TBEA is instead preferring to either hire or get them, as and when they want. For this, we have proposed an amendment to the contract so that some of these things are clearer and specific. That remains a contentious issue.

The impact of that is that REA cannot go out to do effective supervision because they are relying on the use of vehicles that they have had in the agency. We are, therefore, recommending that Government should appeal to the local – okay, the other issue is that – of course COVID-19 has had a serious impact on the project. In some areas, the contractors have been working but in others, they were stopped. We do not know how things will move but it is very important that there is cooperation on this project so that work can continue uninterrupted throughout the country. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the local authorities and the security agencies should not interrupt the project implementation as long as the sub-contractors are observing Ministry of Health’s Standard Operating Procedures.
In addition, TBEA needs to also expedite the process of procuring the project vehicles to enhance the capacity of the project team in the delivery and supervision of the project.

There was an issue about the environmental impact assessment. On this, the contract provides that TBEA will be providing monthly reports on environmental impact management to REA. Since the beginning of the project, these have not been provided, which is not good for the future. 

We, therefore, recommend that TBEA has to be serious about observing the contractual requirements of the project. Government needs to also empower REA, as the project owners, to superintend over the contractors in this complex Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) Contract, if we are to achieve quality work within the targeted deadlines.

There has also been a contention on the resettlement action plan. The resettlement action plan is a legal requirement of the project. Whether people are being compensated or not, at least there is need for a study to know how much damage they have caused on peoples crops or cultural trees. This has happened in Kassanda and a few other areas. The project at the moment has been sued in court because of some of these issues. However, the project started without the resettlement action plan.

Madam Speaker, it is not clear now how much, for those claiming for compensation, is to be compensated. It is a serious anomaly on TBEA because it has not done this study. The argument has been that probably, they will not do but someone else. The good news is that right now, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has prevailed over them and they have agreed to do it. We do not know how long it will take but the first phases of the project should not have started without this study. 

A lot of progress has been made on the designs. The project team complained that the delays on the designs have been mainly because TBEA is somehow feared to be using junior engineers. Because they are using junior engineers, it is taking long for REA and the project consultants to do a review of these plans. When they do them, they require a lot of amendments. That is causing a lot of delays.

At the moment, a number of detailed designs have been submitted and finalised but 58 designs, which is a very big number, have not yet been submitted to REA for review. 

We recommend that Government needs to intervene to ensure the designs are completed in time to avoid project overrun, which may come with addition costs to the project. Without the designs, they cannot mobilise sub-contractors to the field. We need to understand this as a very serious problem. For the Members who were asking why the contractors have not started on their lines, that is the problem. 

I said that we received a petition over and above what hon. Guma Gumisiriza had raised. This petition had a number of issues regarding the sub-contractors. First of all, they argued that they had been invited by TBEA to bid as sub-contractors, on this project and TBEA took them through the procurement process. At a certain point, TBEA pre-qualified them and they stared negotiations with them. However, after a certain time of about nine months, things fell apart. 

First of all, TBEA was not giving them clear Bills of Quantities. It preferred paying a flat fee, not considering the uneven surfaces, not taking into account the swamps, the rocky areas and areas that would require murram. For all those areas, it just wanted to pay a flat fee. 

There was an issue of paying the sociologists and environmentalists. These are the people who go out to talk to the people. There was an issue of not providing the sub-contractors with written terms of reference. Madam Speaker, this has been reported to the committee as a very common practice among major contractors. It is not just in the Energy but also in the construction of roads and in other sectors.

There was also an issue of advance payment, which TBEA was reluctant to pay, as you can see in the report. However, I think the most controversial were the rates that TBEA was preferring to pay the sub-contractors.

On the MV lines, TBEA was being paid $ 2,132 per kilometre but it preferred to pay $ 1,400 per kilometre. On the LV lines, according to the commercial contract, TBEA was being paid $ 1,254 per kilometre. However, TBEA preferred to pay the sub-contractors $ 1000 per kilometre.

TBEA was being paid a block figure for transportation of materials but it was insisting that the materials would be delivered to regional offices throughout the country and then the sub-contractors, within a radius of 100 kilometres, should pick them from the warehouse but at their own cost. However, the sub-contractors were insisting that this is a measurable cost and therefore, somebody needs to pay for it. 

There was also concern that they had been dropped and other sub-contractors were picked. Some of these sub-contractors who were picked were reported to be inexperienced. Some of them, from the records available - and we have attached the record and profile of the sub-contractor in the report – had registered in January. That is when the invitation for bids by TBEA came out so they immediately registered to bid. Others registered much later, in March.

More interesting is that there were some who had put engineers as a face for their companies to show that they are very credible. However, when these controversies started, those engineers dropped out.

Madam Speaker, on this, we sought the opinion of the Office of the General Counsel to Parliament and the advice has been that although TBEA had attempted to follow the PPDA Act, this was more of a commercial contract between the sub-contractor and the contractor. 

Therefore, their advice was that the contractor has the discretion to find his or her own sub-contractor, as long as they meet the qualification of people agreed upon during the bidding process and in the contract. He added that the pre-qualification earlier done by the contractor was at his own volition and not necessarily an obligation under the PPDA Act. So, our hands got tied on that.

Having said that –

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you could wind up. Try to summarise. 

MR KIWANUKA: Having said that, there is an inherent risk that the sub-contractors may fail. Government, therefore, needs to supervise this project very closely to mitigate any risks that may arise as a result of the sub-contractor.

The Government needs to empower REA, as the project owner, to preside over the contractor in this EPC programme to ensure that quality of work is achieved. We had other complaints from the sub-contractors, which I have mentioned; that these are general concerns around how the contractors deal with the sub-contractors and not just with this project but in all other projects.

On that, we are recommending that the Government of Uganda needs to develop a mechanism on how such can be monitored to ensure that in such contracts, there are clear scopes, measurable and agreeable milestones, itemised BOQs, clear terms of reference and fair payment terms, as a way of protecting the local companies.

There are also issues around how the contract was designed. There are figures, which are lumped together and then a lot of things are said that they are going to be implemented under that item, which are very difficult to quantify.

On that one, Madam Speaker - and a lot more – we are recommending an amendment to the contract so that, that anomaly is corrected. We have said if there is a problem of agreeing with the contractor, REA should find a way of sorting it out with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and if necessary, even with the donors. 

I would like to conclude on the issue of the complexity of managing an Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) contract. An EPC contract is sometimes referred to as a turnkey contract. Normally, such huge projects are where a contractor is expected to do the design, the procurement and then, also the construction. They just give you the key to the facility and then you start using it.

The expectation is that they are motivated; that they have goodwill of doing the project. However, I think that at the back of all this, we need to bear in mind that often, it is motivated companies that always get these contracts. They are motivated in maximising the wealth of their shareholders, which is briefly put as profit and often, they are very difficult to manage.

In this case, we have a good management team but there are problems with the actual governance, which has to supervise the project team. With instability, it is very difficult to manage such a huge and complex project.

The minister has briefly mentioned some of the things that have happened there; that the statutory instrument that was there was amended, which is the right of the minister. However, the problem is that there was not much consultation with stakeholders.

The Board members that have been there - At the moment, I think the Board has been dissolved and yet, there are a number of issues coming up from time to time. I have a lot more details in the report. For colleagues who will find time to read it, you get a feel of the issues that we are dealing with, which puts this project at risk right from the supervision.

There is also a problem that REA is dealing with such contractors. Managing such contractors requires full Government support. There is need for Government to closely look at this project, look at the support that the project management team is getting and then, look at how we can effectively move forward on this.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the committee meetings and a number of other papers. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the Committee on Natural Resources. I would like to know whether the Ministry of Health has brought the designs for the houses of the Karamoja project. I want us to conclude that loan today. We were waiting for the design of the houses. 

Hon. Khainza, do you have any comments? Is hon. Guma here? 

4.08
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for the assurance that the project has commenced and it will continue between April and December 2020. What we wanted to know was the progress so that we give feedback to our people to be assured that the work has commenced. What I like most is the concurrent way of the phases. She talked of Phase I and Phase II being done concurrently. 

Pertaining the fundamental governance issue that the chairperson raised, now that the court has untied the hands of the political supervisors, who are the ministers, I believe this will be handled administratively. We do not want these governance issues getting in the way of the project.

Finally, I appreciate the issue of the local content. We just passed the Local Content Bill. Therefore, it is my prayer that as the project commences countrywide, our local people are also engaged in the works of this project. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Guma is not here. Hon. Oboth – but I would like to know from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development the statutory sequence of commitments. You had a dramatic journey. They did something in 2016 and rested. They went back in 2017 and then, did nothing for one year. 

4.10
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement and the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources. 

This Parliament appropriates a lot of funds to the energy sector. Five years ago, we would not have even debated some loans because they were very essential, going into water and electricity. We knew that five years ago, accessibility was about 20 per cent. Now, I am told it is about 41 per cent. It is good progress but not the best.

The management issues notwithstanding in REA, we see some progress across the country. I just wanted to invite ourselves to imagine REA without those problems. Probably, we would be at 80 per cent. So, on the statutory instrument and management, the first supervisors of these people are the ministers. 

Wherever there is money in Uganda, there are problems. What can we do? There are a lot of suspicions. People are suspecting each other as if they are practising witchcraft. (Interjections) Hon. Okupa, you know what I am talking about. (Laughter) Just for the record, I am not suggesting that hon. Okupa knows a lot about witchcraft. He and I went to REA at one point, not to ask for any favour but to tell the Executive Director to act like the Executive Director and the Deputy Executive Director to act like a deputy to avoid the conflicts. You will bear me witness, hon. Okupa. We told the Deputy Executive Director that “if the Executive Director still wants to be the ED, you should be the deputy”. Some of us go there to peddle lies and rumours to get benefits. As a result, we delay the progress of the energy sector. 

Personally, I am happy that my sister, hon. Sarah Opendi, is there. I hope she will take me –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, protect me from hon. Okupa. 

THE SPEAKER: Allow the chairperson to speak. 

MR OBOTH: My prayer is that we find a mechanism to put more focus on the management because we are wasting a lot of time. There are many divisions in REA. For those who read the Bible, you would find one group is for Apollo, and another group is for Paulo, as if any of them created REA. In fact, in this Parliament, we had recommended that REA should be an authority so that that it attracts the best out of the best, but it is still merely an agency and yet, a lot of money is being injected there.

This Parliament has supported the energy sector but surprisingly, some of us will pay the price in our constituencies where there are rotten poles. We will be taken as liars because electricity has not been connected there. 

The chairperson of the committee gave a very complicated report almost like that of a consultant. What a finding. How does that, however, translate to the actuals on ground? We want to see what you are doing to help us so that there is electricity in Kamuli, Tororo, Butaleja, Amuria and everywhere. The problem is not that there is no money. There is money but the squabbles are derailing us. Can there be humanity so that those who are fighting for positions or deals – (Member timed out.)

4.15
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for the statement and the committee for that complicated report. They did, however, highlight most of the issues. 

All of us were excited about especially the local content and the fact that we were going to increase electricity coverage in our areas. We saw the poles being dumped in the areas, and there was indeed excitement.

We are coming from a heavy rain period and some of these poles are rotting. I am wondering who is going to be responsible for replacing them. We hope the contractors are not going to pick these rotten poles and use them as they are. There should be supervisions so that the poles that are spoiled are not used. 

Following what hon. Oboth has said, these officers who cause the delays and wastage should be held culpable because who will pay for the poles. Our people supplied good poles and they were paid for but they cannot do the work now.

Madam Speaker, we are grateful that we have got assurance that the project has commenced and that we will get electricity. We hope that those who caused this loss will be held accountable. Thank you. 

4.16
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the committee for the report and the minister for the statement. I think these two reports leave a lot for us to understand as a House. What are the prayers of the committee to this House to take action?

I will focus on the question of the legality of all the things involved here. For example, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed much earlier in 2017 for the contractor to start mobilising equipment. However, the contractor did not even have the contract. How was this done because in contracting in construction, an MoU is an obligation. You are required to pay anything that is required in that MoU. The contract was signed on 31 October 2017 even before the loan request came to Parliament. There are a lot of illegalities.

The third issue is that Government undertook a sovereign guarantee. Under the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, that is a loan. A sovereign guarantee is a bond undertaken by Government to guarantee liability by a third party. Who was it meant to protect? How can Government undertake that guarantee without the approval of Parliament? There are many questions.

Lastly, there are so many breaches. Didn’t this contract have a lien clause? You told them to buy cars; they did not. You told them to buy a certain type of wires; they did not do it and bought a different size. You told them to get specific conductors; they did not but they got very low voltage conductors. You told them to undertake an environmental impact assessment; they have not done it.

You do not have designs and you want them to do it. These alterations also will cause variance in the cost.

Madam Speaker, looking at this contract – I used to be a vice chairperson of the Committee on National Economy - I see a lot of problems in this contract. The committee has not helped us to bring clear issues to the House so that when we vote on this matter and adopt the report, we have clarity of the problems, where the project is and what is happening about the third party contracting of these other sub-contracts. We are not clear on that.

I seek guidance; how shall we proceed on this matter when this is a very important project for this country and all of us worth 200 million?

Lastly, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development – I am happy that my sister, Sarah Opendi and Engineer Kitutu are strong persons. Can they help us to clarify what is going on in the ministry? It has been a problem. Hon. Oboth was there and tried with a report in 2019. We adopted certain things in the last Parliament but nothing has been done. Now we have this project of 200 million. 

By the way, it is not only this project; there is one in Karamoja. From nowhere, we have heard that the contract has been cancelled and a new one has been brought. He is doing it and putting the cement poles. The power should have been switched on in June last year. Right now, the poles are still lying there. Good enough, these ones are cemented. Very many are still lying in the bush in my constituency.

What is happening to the management and the work? These things are not clear. Madam Speaker, I pray that you send the minister or our committee to find out what is going on. We can get time to read the report and find out the prayers to this House so that the House can take actions that are proper to guide this project and it can be implemented for the good of Uganda. Thank you. 

4.22
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With pain, this is a project where the National Resistance Movement (NRM) was going to score 98 per cent. However, with this dilly dallying, we may go around 87 per cent in the coming elections. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the chairperson told us that the delay in the approval of the designs – these electrical designs are approved by electrical engineers - however, because of the fighting that my brothers here have said, you find that the people do not want the Executive Director (ED), the Deputy Executive Director and the technical engineer to do their work.

I would like to request the House that whether the other people were suspended - because the Board works on behalf of Parliament - let people come and do the technical work. Let the Executive Director, the Deputy Executive Director and the technical people remain in their offices. Otherwise, without the engineers in the office, they will say, “We have delayed to approve the designs.” We are going into an election, moreover a scientific one.

I request that for political reasons - waiting for the designs does not stop a contractor from taking poles, say to Butaleja – (Interjections) – that is when you will know that they are rotten poles. When they bring and commission them, you may not know whether they are good or not. Therefore, when our voters see the poles, they will know that things are coming. Honourable members, some of the districts are for December 2021. What shall we tell the people during campaigns when we promised them? 

Madam Speaker, let me take information –

THE SPEAKER: No, your two minutes are over. 

4.24
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) as an institution for the work they have done for us in the constituency previously and also note that the delay was not by them alone. It was also by the Government. As they said, the final agreement was signed in 2019.

If there is an office where members of Parliament go and sit for almost a whole day on a daily basis, it is in REA. There must be transparency. There is a time we used to have a list of all electrical projects in every constituency so that you know from the beginning that these are the projects in my area and you did not need to go there every day.

I also fault REA for not being transparent enough. This is almost the biggest project in REA; a project of bigger spectrum covering the whole country. Therefore, they should give every Member of Parliament, in their pigeonholes, a document showing where projects are going to be implemented now that we are going for the fire. 

The variations in these projects are very big. I hope the ministers supervise them to the extent that we are – (Member timed out.)

4.27
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I stammer when I wear the mask - with your permission, I beg to remove it. 

THE SPEAKER: Can’t you speak with it? Okay, you speak. 

MR MACHO: I stammer when I have it on. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister, Sarah Opendi, for a very good and clear report. When she was reading her report, I wondered why she came to this ministry at this time when we still wanted her somewhere. Anyhow, that is what my mentor, the President, chose. 

Honourable minister, in your report, you majorly talked about the challenges. Your major challenge is the delay by the project in sourcing materials but I am happy that you clarified that the materials were supposed to be sourced both internationally and internally from Uganda, which promotes our BUBU Policy. 

I would like to agree with my friends who talked about the rotting poles but I would like to add that there are also blowing transformers. In Busia, where some transformers delivered by the same company, almost all them – since the minister is in charge now, through the statutory instrument, which some of us believe was brought out without a lot of consultation – why do we say so? It is because one of the biggest challenges for the delay of this project is a governance issue at the top management; the infighting between the ED and the deputy. 

I would like the chairperson of the committee to clarify - because he told me that due to the leadership fights, the President wrote a letter to direct investigations into this project. We heard that some people were summoned by the CID Director but all this has gone very silent. We also needed to know something about that in your report. 

In fact, I do not know why you are silent on that matter. I do not know why you did not bring out leadership issues as one of the major challenges because that is the major challenge. We have local materials; the land onto which to plant those poles, but the issue is about leadership. 

Therefore, for the success of this project, which I believe is our penalty for the NRM for some of us to succeed with almost – (Member timed out.) 

4.30
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we receive the reports about these projects, I thought I should share information, as a case study from my constituency. There was a project in my constituency under rural electrification. The first problem – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! 

MR TWESIGYE: My first observation is that these contractors normally hide the designs from the stakeholders and leaders. Since you cannot access the design, you do not know the location of the transformer and which people should have power. They also start sending their agents to contact people who should have power according to the design but tell them that they will not get power. They then start soliciting for bribes from the people supposed to get power. That is the first weakness. 

I do not know but I think REA owns these projects. In my constituency, the design I got from REA showed a certain size of transformers. You would find that a trading centre is supposed to receive 100KV transformers but when they show the transformers - I have two cases; instead of 100KV, they installed a 50KV transformer. That matter was reported to REA but up to now, REA has never changed that transformer. The engineer said they did not have the 100KV transformer in stock and that they would change it when they get new stock.  
Therefore – (Member timed out.) 

4.32
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report presented. 

It has really been a genuine concern. If you recall, even the former minister in that sector also failed to give us exactly – but at least, this one has tried. 

I have heard one of our colleagues say that they can bring poles - poles were brought to my constituency between 2015 and 2016 but up to today, they are idle. Unless the ministry becomes serious - when you go to some areas, for example, Kisoga, you can see wires up but there is no power stepped down. All those people from Kisoga up to Kiyoola do not have power but when the ministry is supervising around and they see wires up, they think the area has power. 

When you go to Mpaata Sub-county, you can only access power when in the area of the former prime minister. Otherwise, in the whole area, wires are up the poles but power has not been stepped down for use. Those were some of the issues I raised in regard to that ministry. It is as if the ministry cannot supervise and so, it doesn’t know what exactly is happening on the ground.

This loan was supposed to help the people in those areas to have power. The problems of using television sets for learning – now our people cannot access power. I, therefore, would like to urge the ministry to supervise these works if our people are to benefit from those big huge loans.

When it comes to – (Member timed out.) 

4.34
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and the chairperson for the report presented. 

We are now fully aware that the delay has been due to the confusion at the REA offices. I hope steps will be taken to solve this problem because we do not want this to continue; it is causing us to miss services. The people that appointed them should take action against all those people that bring all that confusion; they should be removed and replaced by those ready to work. 
 
Secondly, the method of distributing this rural power – we expect this power to reach schools, health centres and other trading centres in the rural areas. However, from what I am observing in Koboko, they are only reaching sub county headquarters, leaving out schools and health centres. 

Madam Speaker, we are going to receive power in Ludara. I got excited when I received a letter and thought that we would soon get power. However, when I read that letter again, I noticed that the power to Ludara would be tagged from Wandi and it will go through Terego - for those who know West Nile, from there, it goes to Yumbe and then to Midigo. After that, it will come back to Ludara. How many miles and how long will it take to reach Ludara? - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MS BABA DIRI: There is power from Arua-Koboko-Oraba, which can be connected only six miles to Ludara. Why do you take such a long journey to bring power to Ludara rather than coming from Keri to Ludara? I think these are ways of wasting money and creating delays. Thank you very much.

4.37
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Sarah Opendi and the chairman for the reports. 

Madam Speaker, from the report of the chairman, it is very clear that our civil servants in the ministry and REA are not knowledgeable about the procurement of EPC or loans of the Chinese. The Chinese also have their set rules that you must follow. That is why you saw things going up and down. You came up this time because they were not following what the Chinese have put up.

It was very annoying for somebody to start complaining about the level of education of engineers. Whoever gets the job is approved by the client. How can you start complaining? You are the one who approved and said yes, this one is the right engineer. Even in sub-contracting, they cannot sub-contract unless you authorize and then you start complaining that the contractor brought wrong people.

Madam Speaker, I think the best thing is, let the Prime Minister use this – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, technical man, you have half a minute but we are heading to curfew.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Prime Minister to use this project to get consultants and train our civil servants in Energy and REA so that they can do better in the next projects. I thank you.

4.39
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister who made the statement. From the report and the statement of the minister, it is very clear that we failed to supervise the technical people at REA. Instead, we have joined them and formed cliques that ended up delaying implementation of the project of extending power through the country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the minister to some of these issues. One, we would like to know the roles and functions of the Executive Director and the deputy in the Act. This is where the problem originated - like what has been happening at City Hall between the Lord Mayor and the Executive Director of KCCA. Therefore, we would like this to be addressed so that their roles and functions are clear and so that they can work. 

This has been the source of the problems for REA. REA started well, with good speed, the country was happy and this Parliament joined to support it by passing all the loans. However, what has happened with all the monies that have been presented is that we cannot perform and this is the concern.

I would like the minister to tell us why, during negotiations for extending low voltage, 1,800km was negotiated yet the acting Executive Director renegotiated it to 6,000 kilometres. Who were the people who negotiated the first one and why did they do that? What action is being taken?

Madam Speaker - (Member timed out.)

4.41
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the book of Galatians chapter 3, when St Paul came to the Galatians, he asked, “Who has bewitched you?” They were behaving as if they did not know what was happening. For any country to collapse, tamper and play with the energy and transport sectors. People need electricity so that they can do activities that can socially and economically empower them.

Therefore, the question now should not be over emphasising the problems in REA. Rather, we should see the way forward. We don’t want a situation where these sub-counties will not be connected because of these scandals. As Government, we should find a way forward and the minister should come out clearly and tell us that despite the challenges at REA, these sub-counties will all be connected to electricity. That will be very important to us. That is my prayer, despite the challenges at REA. Thank you.

4.43
MR ISAAC MUSUMBA (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I speak as a Member of Parliament for Buzaaya County. In so doing, I have three questions for the people who govern this sector. 

First, I thought there was a plan to have concrete poles; why are we still using these miserable pieces of wood, which even before the wires are hung up, are already rotting, falling and are in a very poor state? Can we have an explanation on concrete poles?

Secondly, in my area, some lines have been constructed - Wankole, Buluya and Kisozi - but in those places, the power has not been commissioned. In the areas where power has been commissioned, they say oil was stolen from the transformer. I do not know whether that is the correct description of events but the transformers are not working. Can those managing this sector replace these transformers because we are getting fatigued by looking at wires that do not deliver electricity? 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, is the issue of physical planning. The people managing that sector are putting the poles next to the road. If you want to extend the road, you may have to – (Member timed out.)

4.45
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for the statement and the chairperson for the report.

I am standing before this Parliament to say that some parts of Kole District have never seen power from the time Amin’s regime was overthrown in 1979. Yes, I have to mention this because this is where I come from. The President made several pledges on the issue of power in Alito sub-county in Kole District. By then, Alito had not yet been split into two sub-counties. 

Now we have Alito and Okwerodot sub-counties in Kole. We had power but in 1977 when there was insurgency, all the wires were looted. Madam Speaker, we have made this appeal to REA before and to the Government to give these sub-counties power because it has derailed development in this area. 

There was a team of surveyors and engineers that went to Alito Sub-County around September last year. They did a lot of measurement, even indicating where the poles and the transformers would be placed but up to now, even if you make a follow up, there is nothing on the ground. The only thing that we, as Kole, were waiting for, was the delivery of the poles and other – (Member timed out.)

4.47
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): How I pray that hon. Opendi was the State Minister for Energy! If the energy she put on the issue of the gold mines was focused on REA, things would move. 

Madam Speaker, there is one question that needs to be answered. In Serere District, there is a line constructed with wooden poles and another with concrete poles. People are asking why one side has wooden poles and the other has concrete. I think we need to standardise this issue. 

Secondly, Members have spoken about the issue of governance. Hon. Oboth, I would like to confirm that we tried our best to sort that problem but it only worked for a short time and it has gone back. The issue of camps in REA needs to be sorted out. It is similar to what we found in Bank of Uganda. If that is not sorted out, forget about this loan. Forget about electricity in your places. 

The ministry should work and help us to sort out, eliminate and have people who are ready to work together. Otherwise, it will be like the loan we passed here on UDB for the fisheries modern landing sites for 29 landing sites. We ended up with only seven which have also collapsed. The waters have swallowed them. If we passed this loan for extending power in the last Parliament and we are going to the next Parliament without electricity in the sub-counties, what is happening? 

In Kasilo, REA did the survey but I see them trying to do the same thing. I am told that they are now reviewing the designs. The contract was signed in 2017; what are they still doing? 

I also would like to bring to the attention of the colleagues the fact that the contractor is stubborn. We are told that he is behaving that way because money exchanged hands and they are demanding their refund. This matter should be sorted and that is when we shall be able to know that TBEA does work correctly. Otherwise we are going into the next Parliament without fulfilling what the President promised to all the subcounties of this country. 

4.50
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wonder why the chairman, while carrying out his investigations – I actually have two issues; one is to do with Kamuli District and the other, Kalungu District. 

In the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, I do not know why the chairman and the committee never gave us information about the Police Mineral Protection Unit (PMPU). I wonder how the human resource in police managed to give only one region all the police officers in this area. 

Let me read them: SP Joseph Keigomba – Commandant; SP Sarah Mwesigwa Ataamba – Finance and Administration; SP Caleb Abel Tashobya - in charge of Investigations; SP Ian Kakuru – Legal Officer; ASP Joshua Mwesigwa O/C Airport, PMPU; ASP Isaac Kafureeka – Zonal Commander, Ankole; ASP Lauben Wasiima – Zonal Commander, Kigezi; ASP Moses Musinguzi – Operations Officer; ASP Yoweri Mutabazi – Logistics Officer, PMPU; ASP Ruth Kumusiima – Deputy, Investigations; ASP Kenneth Ampurira, O/C Muma Detach; ASP Kenneth Gumisiriza, Kabwigo Zonal Command, Mubende; ASP Anna Kentaro – Busia, Customs; ASP Duncan Kansiime O/C, Buhweju – (Interruptions)

MR KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. In view of the fact that we are talking about energy, is the Member in order to bring in matters of the Mineral Police Protection Unit? 

For your information, honourable member, moreover a lawyer, there is another report that is soon coming to the Floor of Parliament on mining and it talks about those issues. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, earlier, we said that this is a sector where the ministers have avoided coming to this House. Members have many issues that they would like to raise. It is in minerals but it is part of that ministry. (Applause)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, let me ask the honourable member to use his pigeonhole very well because we get all these issues in our pigeonholes. 

I was still going on; ASP Anna Kentaro – O/C, Busia, Customs; ASP Duncan Kansiime O/C, Buhweju; ASP Bonny Tumwesigye O/C, Busia; ASP Daniel Namanyu O/C, Kasita and Lugigi; ASP Felistus Mbambu O/C Kamalenge; ASP Levis Mwesigye – O/C, Lwengogwe; ASP Shakina Birungi – In charge, Revenue and ASP Nathan Alyompa. All these 20 officers in PMPU are from one region. That is a management issue. It is as if I, as Muganda, or a Musoga or an Acholi do not have policemen. 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, about Kamuli and Kalungu Districts, in 2015, we passed a loan here – allow me to represent your area a little on this Floor of Parliament – giving Kamuli, Kayunga and Kalungu districts a service territory area which was passed in 2015. 

Power is being distributed. Now they are building lines and in these districts, the areas that are supposed to get power are not getting power and they are not being put on the grid. However, REA officials are demanding for money from our rural people to extend lines to them. Yet these four districts were meant to get power with the entire district on grid. That was the loan we passed in 2015 although it started in 2019. Madam Speaker, what is happening in Kamuli is what is happening in Kalungu and it is what is happening in Nebbi. 

As I conclude, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development will not manage mineral issues when we have one tribe. Luckily enough, I marry from that side so nobody can intimidate me - (Laughter) - we cannot allow this. Do we have other people in the police or is it one tribe managing this mineral area? Mbwenu nakigamba. (Laughter)

4.55
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have one serious concern about the ministry of energy and the department of REA.

I have done some research about how contracts are awarded to contractors in the REA department. It seems there is a very big question and I think we need to follow this up because I believe some contractors who are given work to do lack the capacity to do what they are supposed to do. For example, there are some contractors who were awarded a contract to do some work in Luuka three years ago but these contractors come and throw there some three poles this year and they disappear. 

We are approaching campaign time and our people are demanding for power. They saw a contractor coming three years ago; what are we going to tell them? Honourable minister, we need to follow this issue up very seriously such that the sector can award contracts to contractors who can handle the work. Thank you.

4.57
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we are talking about REA projects, I implore Members to take keen interest. I have a case in my constituency where a survey was done, mapping was done and a contract was signed but later on the sub-contractor was directed that they had to put only 20 poles per transformer – and we have heard from the report how much is spent on these poles and the transformers. This is where much of the money is eaten.

Madam Speaker, the sub-contractor had also been directed to, as much as possible, minimise on the number of poles and transformers to be used until I raised the issue with REA and the contract was cancelled. Actually, it was also verbal – as the chairperson of the committee reported that some of these sub-contractors are not given written contracts.

There is also one area where we should pick interest and that is where a survey is done, mapping is done, a contract is signed and at the end of the day some areas are removed from the scope. We need to pick interest in that area. I would recommend that when the project is to be in a certain area, leaders should be given at least a copy of the contract and the scope such that we can easily monitor and supervise some of these projects. I thank you.

4.59
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. What I would like to do is to read the law and this law is very interesting for all of us. Section 15 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 is very clear. It says, “Commitment of approved budget;
After approval of the annual budget by Parliament, the Secretary to Treasury shall issue the annual cash flow plan of Government, based on procurement plans, work plans and recruitment plans approved by Parliament.”

Madam Speaker, REA comes to Parliament, does this and we approve and it is on the basis of the work plans and procurement plans that we give them money. Section 45(5) says that an accounting officer shall be responsible and personally accountable to Parliament for the activities of his Vote or that sector. 

Madam Speaker, we are running up and down – and I would like to thank hon. Ssewungu. I think as Parliament, we have not supervised REA very well. Is it because of the person at the helm, who is the accounting officer, coming from a region that is not touched? Why am I bringing this? As we speak, a loan of about $80 million is expiring for non-utilisation by REA to extend electricity. My proposal would be that anybody who – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Anybody who does not do his work is held accountable and the reason this work is delaying is because of the need to make money. Why would you be given money to spend and you do not spend it? It means you are waiting to be bribed so that you can spend it. Therefore, anybody who does such act should be held for abuse of office and corruption.

As Parliament, why should we be going to REA to sit, waiting for lines which we have passed? Why? What we should be doing now is to arrest those people involved. In fact, we should direct our police to go and deal with that.

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg you that we have talked and talked and the people of Uganda have been waiting for power. I went to Karamoja; they put poles there and disappeared. I went to a certain village near my place; they put poles and disappeared and the poles are rotting and this is a cost to the people of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, don’t you think this is now the right time that we put up a committee – I think the Committee on Natural Resources has done its work but we need another committee to really find out why the Rural Electrification Agency has failed to perform its functions yet we gave them money. We must find out the cause. With that, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister?

5.05
MS MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I would like to appreciate the questions and concerns that you have raised regarding REA. 

Some of the issues Members raised were in regard to the poles that were delivered and left lying for years, up to now. Hon. Waluswaka, you were trying to tell us to take poles to your place. These are some of the problems that we do not want to happen again. We do not want to politic. We have given you timelines. Allow us to move with those timelines and we can assure the population that we are going to deliver on those timelines that we have set.

Madam Speaker, I was equally a victim of this. I grew up very close to Senior Quarters but we grew up seeing power just at the Senior Quarters until I got to this Parliament. Poles would be brought and they would lie there and you would think power was coming but people were just looking for votes. Once they were elected for the next five years, nothing would happen. It was until I came to this House and we now have power in my village.

Madam Speaker, for the issues surrounding REA – as you all know, my senior colleague and I are new in this sector – we found these problems there and I would like to assure the House that we are firmly going to deal with this governance issue to ensure that REA performs its tasks that it is supposed to perform and firmly. This is why I really request that political interference should not come in because that is also part of the problem.

On the other issues that have been raised, for instance the low-voltage transformers that were delivered, we are certainly going to follow this up to ensure that the contractor who put the 50-KV transformers instead of 100-KV actually delivers the 100-KV once they have been procured.

Also, importantly, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the issue of transformers blowing up is a major challenge brought about by the theft of the transformer oil – and this is ongoing. We are trying to discuss not only with REA but majorly with Umeme to see how we can protect these transformers once they have been delivered. Everywhere the transformers have been put, the transformer oil is stolen and definitely without the oil, the transformers blow up.

Madam Speaker, hon. Musumba raised the issue of the concrete poles versus wooden ones. For this particular contract that was signed, the poles that were supposed to be used are the wooden poles. However, we have other monies, where the concrete poles are being utilised.  Looking at the fact that the concrete poles last longer, although, they are slightly expensive, this is a decision that we will have to make; to move with the concrete poles because they last longer.

Just as I have mentioned, the delays were there but we are definitely going to work very closely with REA. We hope to have a new board in place, so that it can supervise not only us but work with the board to ensure that supervision is taken forward.

Part of the reason the new statutory instrument was issued is because three of the board members are permanent secretaries. We all know that permanent secretaries are busy. They could not be available for supervision. These are some of the changes in the new statutory instrument so that we have board members who have time and not busy with other Government responsibilities.

Madam Speaker, on the allegations of bribe, investigations on this TBEA project are ongoing by the Criminal Investigation Directorate (CID). We hope that they will be able to conclude their investigations soon. We shall definitely inform the House accordingly, once the investigations are completed.

There are other investigations that have been undertaken by the Inspector General of Government. These reports are actually available. We hope that necessary actions will be taken as per the recommendations in there.

Madam Speaker, I would like to assure the House that we are going to follow up. You know my energy. Although I am in the mineral’s sectors, we shall work as a team with my colleagues in the energy sector and my senior colleague, to ensure that we, and Members of Parliament, closely supervise this project. I would like to assure you that we shall be updating Members so that they can know the subcounties, the scope of the work and the name of the contractor in order for them to help us with supervision.

Lastly, on the issue of the minerals, I would like to state that this is not an easy sector, especially in regard to the gold mines. My life has been threatened but I have assured the mafias that before they blow my head, I will get them out of the gold mines. I only need support.

On the issue raised by hon. Ssewungu on the names he read, I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, to direct the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come and make a statement in that regard. Otherwise, it is police that is deploying these people. I have also seen the names but that is beyond me. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. Let us work together to clean up and supervise this REA project. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the re-assurance. We are energized by what you have said. We expect that every month, you will give us an update on what has happened – (hon. Ssewungu rose­_) - Honourable member, we have other work. I put the question that the report of the Committee on Natural Resources be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we asked the Chairperson of the Committee on Health to assure us about the size of the houses, which are going to cost Shs 175 million. Hon. Bategeka, if you could present so that we finish with that loan. The Minister of Education and Sports, I think has a response concerning the online examinations. After that we shall hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Is the Minister for Internal Affairs here?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, as the honourable minister has rightly said about the names I read - she made a prayer that the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and explain how one region gets 20 people in one sector yet they are causing problems. 

I do not know whether, Madam Speaker, you can issue that directive for the minister to come and explain to Parliament the issue of reshuffles in regard to those people. Otherwise, it is not fair.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I heard about what they call mineral protection unit, I was in shock because it was not brought to this House. I just heard that they were there. So, I would like to request the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and explain first, how they established that mineral protection unit and its composition. Otherwise, it has no national character at all, as you heard from the names. Please come and update us next week. Yes, hon. Bategeka.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO EURO 10.0 MILLION FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ITALY TO FINANCE THE KARAMOJA INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PHASE II PROJECT UNDER THE HEALTH SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN (HSDP)

5.11
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Honourable members, you may recall, yesterday the Speaker directed the Committee on National Economy to obtain technical drawings for the staff houses for health centres III and IV, regarding the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project Phase II.

The committee has since obtained the following technical drawings from the Ministry of Health. The copies are uploaded onto your iPads though I am told the iPads are not accessing internet. Anyway, I have given a copy for the Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition. 

The designs include architectural drawings, mechanical and electrical drawings, and structural drawings. It is quite a bulky document but I can describe – (Interjections) - I consulted the hon. Eng. Waluswaka. He has copies of this too.

The houses in question are 15.47 metres long and 15.55 metres wide. Madam Speaker, we are looking at page 2. I have given the length and width. There are four bedrooms but it is a double staff house with four rooms, four stores, four kitchens - two outside and two inside. There are two lounges. The others are details, which you can read. I am still describing the - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Please, can you clarify? When you say, “four rooms,” I think you need to be clear. Are they four bedrooms or you mean two bedrooms, one store and a sitting room? That is why we asked the hon. Eng. Waluswaka to explain what is contained in those architectural drawings; the purpose was for him to make it so clear to us. If you give us measurements for length and the width, it will not help us.

MR BATEGEKA: Madam Speaker, the house is described as a double staff house of two bedrooms, although, it can house – there are four bedrooms in total but it is a double staff house split right in the middle.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have got the designs. Please allow him to present.

MR BATEGEKA: I am describing what I have – (Interjections) – no, the toilets are not bedrooms. The bedrooms are indicated as bedrooms and they are four. The toilets have been indicated also. The stores are also indicated as stores and there are four stores in total. I have already told you the width – (Interjections) - 15 by 15, which is about 225 square metres. If you take the entire square, that is what it is. 

Madam Speaker, when I consulted Eng. Waluswaka, he advised me that the price of Shs 175 million is worth it. Therefore, I beg to present and lay on the Table what I have. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have got the designs here. Each house has two bedrooms, a lounge, a toilet, a shower, a kitchen, a porch and an outdoor kitchen. So, it is quite big.

Honourable members, this is what we were waiting for. Therefore, I now put the question that this House authorises the Government to borrow Euros 10 million from the Government of Italy to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Phase II Project under the Health Sector Development Plan.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: However, honourable members, there was a point raised by hon. Mutonyi yesterday about the lack of privacy. There are two bedrooms; one for the parents but the children (the boys and girls) are supposed to sleep in one room. You know, those are colonial structures.

Finance minister, in future if you are building houses for the people of Uganda, at least let us have a minimum of three bedrooms; one for the parents, one for boys and another for the girls.

5.18
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, we can even get the third bedroom. What I would propose, honourable members, is that since there are two kitchens and the outside kitchen has a store - In fact, the outside kitchen can be a room to sleep in instead of having two kitchens. The engineers can adjust such that we have three bedrooms. Instead of waiting for these engineers, we can just direct them. That is what I am proposing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have already passed that loan. I would like to invite the Minister of Education and Sports. We gave him an assignment yesterday concerning – Study this. Please, can you respond quickly?

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, arising from the question raised by hon. Okupa yesterday, the Ministry of Education and Sports this morning consulted with the administration of the Law Development Centre.

In our consultation, we confirmed from the administration of LDC that despite the fact that schools and higher institutions of learning had been closed by Government due to the COVID-19 pandemic, LDC had started teaching online. We would like to confirm that we established and they accepted that they had resumed teaching online.

Madam Speaker, they further stated that teaching online was on the assumption that 70 per cent of their students had access to e-learning. 

The ministry engaged them and we agreed, in principle, that until Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, advises otherwise, LDC should stop. I would like to state that they accepted to stop and they have stopped. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You might want to check Uganda Martyrs University. I received an email last night from a student complaining about the same issue. 

5.21
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, honourable minister, for that swift action. However, I need you to crosscheck. Unless they are saying that from tomorrow, they are stopping but today, they attended classes online. I am saying this because I have a daughter in LDC. 

If there are any people here who are in LDC, they can confirm that today, lectures continued. Therefore, you need to follow it up to ensure that they are not disobeying the directives as given by the Ministry of Education and Sports and the President of this country. Thank you.

5.22
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance and indulgence. Law Development Centre is a unique institution. The idea of some institutions being home and others being at school is because some may graduate before others and have an advantage in life after school.

However, Law Development Centre is a monopoly. It is the only institution that passes advocates in the country. Therefore, I do not know why we would have a problem with LDC doing online exams. It is not competing with any other institution.

This country is short of lawyers and advocates. I am just seeking your indulgence. Who would lose if Law Development Centre continues with online education? If Makerere was doing it, we would lose because KIU and UCU would not be doing it. However, LDC is the only institution releasing advocates in this country. I was just thinking that we could address our minds collectively.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the people did not complain, we would not mind but complaints come to us and we have to act. 

Can I now invite the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? You are supposed to answer some issues.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE GOVERNMENT ECONOMIC POLICY RESPONSES TO COPE WITH EFFECTS OF COVID-19 AND STRATEGIC ECONOMIC DIRECTIONS FOR SUSTAINED GROWTH

5.24
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This subject was virtually covered in its entirety in the way I had prepared in my speech of the Budget. Therefore, I would beg this House that I do not make a repetition. What I would have said on this item is already said in the Budget speech.

Madam Speaker, I would beg the indulgence of this Parliament that I do not present this matter. However, I have yet another subject, which is new, that I would like to suggest. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed. Part of the information we wanted was contained in the Budget speech; on the stimulus and others. That is what he is saying.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think the other issue was that of the variances of the figures that the minister read.

THE SPEAKER: That is what we are coming to now. Minister, we also asked you to come and – Our chairperson of the Committee on Budget had issues with what you presented in your Budget speech. If you could address that -

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That is what I was waiting for but I did not want to dictate what is on the agenda. That is your prerogative, Madam Speaker.

This is a statement on the issues raised by the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget on the variance between approved Budget estimates and Budget Speech for Financial Year 2020/2021. 

Madam Speaker, on Tuesday, 16 June 2020, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee of Parliament made a statement on the Floor of this Parliament regarding the variances between the approved Budget Estimates and the Budget Speech for Financial Year 2020/2021. Consequently, I was requested to present a statement on the Floor of this Parliament regarding the variances between the approved budget estimates and the Budget Speech for Financial Year 2020/2021. Any wrong impression that may have been caused to Parliament and the general Public is highly regretted.

As you are aware, I presented the budget for Financial Year 2020/2021, which was considered and approved by Parliament in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 in April 2020 and subsequently, on Thursday, 11 June 2020, I presented the Budget Speech to this Parliament.

You will recall that on Thursday, 4 June 2020, as required by the law, His Excellency the President presented the State of the Nation Address. In his State of the Nation Address, he outlined key measures and interventions to address the COVID-19 Pandemic, among other things.

In order to address the economic impact of COVID-19 Pandemic, I presented loan financing from the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and African Development Bank for approval by this Parliament, which would finance the interventions highlighted in the State of National Address. Subsequently, the financing was considered and approved by Parliament as a source of financing the economic stimulus package after the budget had been approved.

In addition, I submitted Supplementary Schedule No. 3 for Financial Year 2019/2020 on 28 May 2020 (a copy of which is attached to this statement) for consideration by this Parliament clearly indicating the MDAs and activities to benefit from this funding based on their relevance in respect to mitigating COVID-19 effects. This also includes funds to mitigate the negative socio-economic impact of COVID-19 in a bid to ensure that the economy remains resilient. I have attached a table which shows the summary of approved estimates by Parliament against the figures presented in the Budget Speech. 

The difference arose out of the fact that we received additional funding from the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and African Development Bank after the approval of the Budget. I thought it proper and fitting to inform the country through Parliament of these new additional resources and how Government intended to allocate them. 

You will recall, during consideration of the Budget by Parliament in April 2020, that I promised this Parliament to come back and update the House on the review and re-alignment of the Budget to address the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic, which position I reiterated in my Budget Speech. Indeed, I should be appreciated for securing additional funds for the country in these difficult times. (Laughter)

Should I read the table, Madam Speaker? I hope you have it on your system. The table below shows a summary of the approved estimates by Parliament against the figures presented in the Budget Speech.

Category
Approved Estimates (Billion)
Earmarked IMF and World Bank Financing (Billion) 
Budget Speech Proposed Allocations (Billion)
Uganda Development Bank
Shs 103
Shs 455.8
Shs 1,045
Domestic Arrears
Shs 450
Shs 233
Shs 673
Uganda Development Corporation
Shs 38
Shs 100
Shs 138
Rehabilitation of adversely affected schools, health units, water points, and other social infrastructure and provide relief to vulnerable households
affected by floods
Shs 64.77
Shs 42.23
Shs 107
Enhance the provision of improved agricultural inputs using NAADS e-Voucher Scheme to farmers and up-scaling agricultural extension services to boost production of key agricultural commodities
   -
Shs 300
Shs 300
Expanding labour intensive public works in urban and peri-urban areas
   -
Shs 130
Shs 130
Youth Fund, Women Entrepreneurship Fund and the Emyooga Talent
Support scheme
Shs 256
Shs 256
    
Provide credit through SACCOs and Micro Finance Institutions to support
micro and small-scale enterprises
   -
Shs 97
    -


Please note that whereas Shs 103 billion was approved for funding under Uganda Development Bank (UDB), I pronounced a figure of Shs 1,045 billion in the Budget Speech as a medium-term commitment including Shs 455 billion from the IMF's borrowing.

With regard to the Youth Fund, Women Fund and Emyooga, the funding levels are the same as approved by Parliament namely: Youth Fund is Shs 130 billion, Women is Shs 225.89 billion and Emyooga is Shs 100 billion.

I would like to reiterate that while presenting the Budget Speech, I clearly indicated that at a later time, I will review the Budget to take care of the measures to mitigate COVID-19 impact on the economy as pronounced by His Excellency the President while presenting the State of the Nation Address.

Therefore, the figures which I pronounced in the Budget Speech were a consolidation of all the funding for the COVID-19 economic stimulus package including what was appropriated by Parliament, and the additional resources secured after appropriation for which I will seek parliamentary approval at an appropriate time.

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Does the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, hon. Lugoloobi, have anything to say?

5.35
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, in my opinion, this was an attempt to overthrow the Constitution. (Applause) It is because the responsibility of providing appropriation of resources is entirely the work of Parliament. What the minister was doing was actually to appropriate resources on behalf of Parliament, which I think is technically wrong.

I think it was sufficient for the minister to indicate that, “I’m going to come back with revised figures” after presenting the figures as they were appropriated by Parliament.

However, for him to go ahead and declare that these figures have been allocated when they were not, is wrong. Right now, we are processing a supplementary budget. 
The figures in the supplementary budget are the ones he is referring to as if they were for the Financial Year 2020/2021 yet they are for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

I cannot see how the figures for the Financial Year 2019/2020 can be interpreted to be for the Financial Year 2020/2021. There is a total contradiction. These are totally two different financial years. 

The best the minister should have done is to say, “I’m guilty as charged,” and then he waits for the sentence. I cannot see any other way out.

Madam Speaker, I have nothing to add. He has admitted by himself that he went away from the figures that Parliament appropriated. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable minister, I think the matter is clear that you attempted to usurp our powers. You need to apologise to us and then come and we formalise it.

6.38
Mr Joshua anywarach (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let us bring history into context. Last year, when we passed the Budget for the Financial Year 2019/2020, we pointed out one thing; the fiscal indiscipline of Government.

Remember, we approved an estimate of the Budget Framework Paper of Shs 34 trillion. When the budget speech came, we were seeing Shs 43 trillion. We said to Government, “This is not only budgetary, but also fiscal indiscipline. Where are you going to get the extra Shs 10 trillion from?”

How do you disrespect the whole Budget Framework Paper of Parliament? Now it is becoming the order of the day. They have gone into figures. My teacher taught me that the figure you should fear most is zero. Traditionally we think zero is a useless number but if somebody adds a zero to 10 billion, it becomes 100 billion.

Therefore, this must be taken so seriously. The minister should come and apologise. That time, they did not comply with the Public Finance Management Act all the way. We said, “It’s okay for this time but do not repeat it.”

For every budget that we are passing, there is at least some violation of that Act. It is becoming a practice. We need to stamp our feet – (Member rose_)

The Speaker: Honourable members, it is getting to curfew time. We need to leave. 

Mr kasaija: Madam Speaker and colleagues, let us understand each other well – (Interjections) – when I gave this good news of having managed to secure additional resources, I did not say that I was going to spend the resources before I come back here. I only informed the country and the House that there are these additional resources that have been obtained. We will make a proposal that these resources be spent like this and I will come back to this House to seek appropriation through a supplementary.

Therefore, how do I usurp the power of Parliament? I did not. I only informed the House and the country of these additional resources. I will not spend them until Parliament has appropriated or has had a say. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, it is a quarter to six o’clock. We are really late. There is a curfew; what do you want me to do?  

Ms ogwal: Madam Speaker, I stand on point of procedure. For the first time on record, I would like to thank and congratulate the chairperson of the Committee on Budget for being vigilant. 

When we concluded the budget for the financial year that is coming in July, I had wanted to congratulate the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that we concluded the budget process without the apology of the minister for the first time in 10 years in a row.

Unfortunately, I had wanted to pronounce it even after but when this thing came up, I am standing to propose damage control mechanisms if it can be considered.

First of all, it is true that the figures read by the minister did not agree with the figures we appropriated in Parliament. That is a matter of fact.

What we can only do right now is that for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to do what he has always done every year; to apologise. Then, we can go back to put it on record. He has to put it on record because he already did when he was reading the budget.

Therefore, he has to put it on record to say that he had pronounced this when it should have been that and we correct our records.

Secondly –

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think that is what he has done.

Ms Ogwal: Madam Speaker, still, it is not clear. He has to apologise first.

Finally, we have talked about a supplementary budget, which is being brought this week and you know the financial year has closed –

The Speaker: Honourable member, do not pre-empt the report of the Committee on Budget. They will report to us and we will know what to do.

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.


(The House rose at 5.44 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 June 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
 

