Thursday, 12 June 2008

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall, Kampala.

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

National Anthem (One verse)

PRAYERS

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice President of Uganda, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, Your Lordship the Chief Justice, Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the honourable Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, the Vice Chairman of the National Resistance Movement, traditional leaders, honourable ministers, your excellencies the ambassadors and high commissioners, honourable Members of Parliament, leaders of political parties and political organisations, distinguished invited guests, ladies and gentlemen; it is my greatest pleasure to welcome you to Parliament for the second sitting of the third session of the eighth Parliament of Uganda. 

Clause 1 of Article 155 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states thus: “The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the next financial year.” 

The Speaker of Parliament has been notified that his Excellency the President has entrusted the aforesaid responsibility with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We are here therefore gathered today to witness the Minister discharge the presidential constitutional duty in the above regard. Now, I invite the honourable minister to move a motion.

PROF OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your Excellency the Vice President, Your Lordship the Chief Justice, Rt hon. Deputy Speaker and honourable colleagues; the last three days have been a momentous period for us because there has been an exchange between Members of Parliament and your office, Mr Speaker. We were made to understand that at a certain moment before the Minister of Finance presents the budget, we would be able - (Applause) - to discuss a matter which is of extreme national importance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members - [Hon. Members: “No! no! no!”] - We shall not hear anything. The procedure is that anybody who wants to move a motion - [Hon. Members: “No! no! no!”] Then this is not Parliament. Anybody who wants to make any submission after the communication from the chair must have seen the Speaker. I want to point out that there are members who told me they have a matter and I will allow them to address the House. (Interjections) - I will not allow you to address the House.   

(Thereupon, Members of the Opposition withdrew from the Conference Hall.)

THE SPEAKER: I must point out that this House is governed by the Rules of Procedure which we decide ourselves, and it is my duty to follow those rules. 

I want to remind members that if you have any point you want to raise that is not on the Order Paper and is after the communication from the chair, you must have been to the Speaker and indicated to him the kind of subject you want to bring up. You cannot ambush the Speaker by just standing up when notice was not given. This is what we resolved and we shall continue to follow that procedure. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION MOVED UNDER RULE 46 (1(B) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

2.34
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO(NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, you recall that this morning a team of Members of Parliament and I approached you in your office to reclaim the dignity and the integrity of this House, which has been grossly undermined by the way the Police has been executing its mandate. In this meeting with you this morning, you did accept and said that at an appropriate time you will allow Members of Parliament to move a motion on how they wish the integrity of this House to be restored. I am therefore very happy now to come and move this motion under rule 46 (1(b) of the Rules of Procedure.

This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to establish a select committee to investigate the conduct of the Uganda Police according to the rules of the House. (Applause) 

AN HON. MEMBER: Seconded.

MR DOMBO: The motion having been seconded, I wish to proceed as follows:

WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda establishes the Uganda Police Force which shall be nationalistic, patriotic, professional, disciplined, competent and productive and its members shall be Ugandan citizens with good character;  

AND WHEREAS the said Force shall protect life and property, preserve law and order, prevent and detect crime and co-operate with the civilian authority and other security organs established under the Constitution and with the population generally; 

AND WHEREAS recently, the Uganda Police Force has degenerated from its constitutional and legal mandate and acted unprofessionally and at times illegally; 

AND WHEREAS many members of the public, including Members of Parliament, have been victims of the wanton, illegal, uncouth and unprofessional behaviour of the Uganda Police; 

AND WHEREAS the above behaviour seems to be deliberate and on the rise;  

PURSUANT to Parliament’s mandate under Article 214, be it resolved by this Parliament hereunder:

1. 	That the Parliament of Uganda condemns in the strongest terms possible the recent, humiliating, dehumanising affront to the three Members of Parliament namely, hon. Nabilah Sempala, hon. Susan Nampijja, hon. Sam Lyomoki; this is in addition to the earlier incidences involving other Members of Parliament who underwent similar treatment. 

2. 	That a select committee of Parliament be set up for purposes of investigating the illegal, unprofessional conduct of the Uganda Police Force, in particular.

3. That the select committee reports to Parliament in four weeks from the date hereafter.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

Speaking for this motion, I want to say that the NRM leadership fought for the institution of the rule of law -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dombo, you are moving under which rule?

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, it is under Rule 46 (1(b). Like I was saying, you will note that the NRM leadership has been at the vanguard of the establishment of the rule of law and order in this country, and this is a value for which the NRM government has been recognised everywhere. We move outside this country with pride because of what the NRM administration has done. Any attempt to create a bad mark on the NRM administration by the wanton and unprofessional conduct of the Police shall not be entertained by us as members of NRM. 

You will note the good relationship that has existed until now between the institution of Parliament and the Police. Mr Speaker, you will remember that a few years ago, you led a crusade within Parliament to raise funds, and members raised their personal funds, to help the Police access means of operation. [Hon. Members: “Yes!”] With the money we raised, the Police was able to buy operational vehicles. [Hon. Members: “Yes!”] It becomes so dehumanising that the same vehicles for which members contributed are the same vehicles on which the Members of Parliament are trampled and dehumanised when they are doing their work. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, we know the responsibility of the three arms of Government. We know the Judiciary, the Executive and the Legislature and we know the government has enjoyed proper working relations with the three arms of Government. 

Mr Speaker, you know how the committees of Parliament have been struggling to ensure that they facilitate the Police to enable them do a professional job. However, the conduct of the Police in recent times leaves a lot to be desired. [Hon. Members: “Yes!”]  Many Members of Parliament are wondering whether there is a problem with recruitment, management or with training. We, Members of Parliament, cannot sit here and keep quiet and watch posterity condemn us; at an appropriate time, we should come up to protect the institution of Parliament and the rule of law in this country.

Mr Speaker, I want to remind Members of Parliament and the world that recently when there was an affront on the Judiciary, it took the judges to extend an arm to carry out unprecedented action of ensuring that the courts of law were closed in this country.

As a Parliament, I want to tell you that there have been attempts to ask Members of Parliament to walk out on the reading of the budget, but NRM Members of Parliament refused. We said Parliament’s role is to receive the budget, debate and pass it, so we cannot run away from our responsibility but we can take on the challenge that we were supposed to. That is why you see that when the members of the Opposition walked out, we knew we had consulted with your office and we knew that at the right time, you would give us this opportunity to ensure that we protect the integrity of the institution. The budget process must go ahead as it is scheduled within the region; Uganda should not be an exception. 

Mr Speaker, I want to tell honourable members that the Inspector General of Police rang me this morning and I did raise similar concerns with him. I told him as Members of Parliament we want dignity and dignified treatment as a Parliament and at the same time behave in a dignified manner. There were even attempts yesterday from members to bar the Inspector General of Police from coming here. We refused! We said that this is a public institution and everybody who has been invited and is able is free to come and participate in the functions of Government. 

Members of Parliament proceed by way of resolutions. We proceed by way of motions and that is why we chose the civilised manner of proceeding with this motion so that a select committee can be set up and the conduct of Police be investigated. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, this motion has been moved under Rule 46 (1(b) as an urgent matter and when it was moved, over five members stood in support of the motion. From the account that has been given by the mover, I realise that it is an important motion that should be considered by the House. However, I want to read our Rules of Procedure so that people are clear that we act based on rules. 

The relevant rule now will be Rule 51. When this kind of motion is moved and the Speaker orders that the matter is a definite matter of urgent public importance - and I have so ruled - the Speaker shall appoint a time on the same day when the motion may be moved and that is when you will participate. The seconder will move and then others will participate. In these premises, before we adjourn today and after the budget has been read, we shall debate this motion. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/2008; AND THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2008/2009

2.45
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Your Excellency the Vice President, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I beg to move that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of the revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the Financial Year 2007/2008 and the proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2008/2009.

Mr Speaker, Article 155(1) of the Constitution provides that the President shall cause the preparation and lay before Parliament estimates of revenue and expenditure for each financial year. I am accordingly performing this duty on behalf of the President. 

The budget I am presenting today is a statement of the revenues that government expects to collect in the Financial Year 2008/2009 and how it plans to allocate these revenues as it pursues its vision for the economic and social transformation of Uganda and prosperity for all our people. The theme for this year’s budget is “Strategic priorities to accelerate prosperity for all”. 

It is the NRM Government’s continued desire and determination to transform Uganda into a country of opportunity and prosperity for all Ugandans. Expenditure will therefore be focused on areas that will increase employment opportunities and on the critical infrastructure and institutions of Uganda. 

The structure of the budget speech today is as follows: I will first present highlights of economic and fiscal performance in 2007/2008 and outlook for Financial Year 2008/2009. I will then outline some of the emerging trends in the domestic, regional and international economy. Thirdly, I will present the priorities and strategy for expanding employment and growth opportunities during the coming financial year. Finally, I will announce the proposed taxation measures and the way forward.

Economic Performance and Forecast 

Economic Growth 

Mr Speaker, real GDP growth in Financial Year 2007/2008 is estimated at 8.9 percent. This is considerably higher than the growth rate of 6.5 percent, which we projected in last year’s budget speech. To avoid doubt, let me point out that the figure I am reading is the rate of growth after removing the effects of the rise in prices. The figure of 9.8 percent growth, which the President cited in his State-of-the-Nation address, was the market rate of growth and he was careful to say so. When the impact of inflation is removed from the figures, it then becomes possible to compare the rates of growth of various years, and this is where we get the rate of 8.9 percent after removing the inflation.

Mr Speaker, the economy has grown substantially faster than we had anticipated. It is a remarkable performance of our economy given the extreme pressures we encountered such as the floods in the East and disruption of our export and supply routes to the sea. Next fiscal year, real GDP growth is projected to grow by 8.1 percent. We are expecting better prices for our export products especially coffee, fish and tea as well as continued strong demand for regional exports mainly food stuffs. 

We also expect continued strong expansion in manufacturing, construction, transport and communications. The medium-term objective is to achieve average GDP growth rates of at least eight percent per annum. The optimistic economic outlook is premised on government commitment to re-direct public investment to the critical growth sectors of the economy that will lead to productivity enhancement. This includes addressing infrastructure constraints, particularly transport and energy, as well as addressing productivity issues in agriculture. Sustaining a high level of growth will entail shifting resources within the medium term fiscal framework from largely consumption to investment. 

Investment is certainly one of the most strategic activities of the economy. Government has always been committed to creating an attractive and enabling environment for the private sector as an engine of growth. 

Private investment grew strongly over Financial Year 2007/2008 at 15 percent in real terms, which is consistent with private investment growth of the last five years. The percentage of GDP private investment has risen from 13.7 percent in Financial Year 2001/2002 to 21 percent in Financial Year 2007/2008. Public investment grew by 23 percent in Financial Year 2007/2008, much higher than in the last five years. 

Exports 

Mr Speaker, the growth of our export sector has continued to be very strong. Total export earnings for both goods and services are projected to increase by 15 percent to US$ 2,293 million this Financial Year; that is 2.2 billion up from 1.9 billion last year. This is an increase of US$295 million in one year! 

Merchandise exports, excluding services, are projected to increase by 15 percent to US$ 1,520 million in the twelve months to June 2008. All the exports of services are projected at US$ 541 million in the same period. Coffee export receipts are estimated to increase by 32 percent from US$ 228.5 million in financial 2006/2007 to about US$ 301.6 million in Financial Year 2007/2008. This increase is on account of an 11 percent increase in the coffee volumes and 19 percent increase in the international coffee prices. 

Export earnings from non-traditional items such as bottled water, beer, foodstuffs, cement and other items usually regarded as non-tradable grew by 32 percent in 2007/2008 following a 117 percent increase in 2006/07. This is on account of increased regional trade with our neighbouring countries. Overall non-coffee export earnings are projected to increase by about 10 percent from US$ 1,010.8 million to US$1,116.0 million for the 12 months to June 2008. Remittances from Ugandans working abroad are estimated at US$ 1,392 million in Financial Year 2007/08 up from US$ 646 million in Financial Year 2006/07. Remittances are increasingly becoming a major source of foreign exchange earnings and are playing a strategic role in supporting macroeconomic stability as well as private investment.

Business Environment 

Mr Speaker, it is our objective to make Uganda a leading competitive destination for private investment in sub-Saharan Africa by reducing the cost of doing business. Over the last year, Government has implemented programmes to improve the business climate by implementing the following measures to reduce the cost of doing business:

a) 	The reduction of the energy deficit through the introduction of alternative energy sources.

b) 	Improving the regulatory environment by passing a number of commercial policies and laws that are important for business operations.These included the Tourism Act and the Bio-technology and Bio-safety Policy.

c) 	Improving the efficiency of the land registry leading to reduction in the time taken to transact mortgages. The time taken to complete a search has been reduced from 12 days to 30 minutes for the sorted files -(Laughter)- and mortgage transactions reduced to three days.

d)	The construction of the National Data Transmission backbone connecting Kampala, Entebbe, Jinja and Bombo.

In the Financial Year 2008/2009, Government will continue efforts to improve the business environment by implementing the following actions:

a) Enactment of additional commercial laws including the Counterfeit Bill, the Mortgage Bill, the Free Zones Bill, the Company Bill, the Insolvency Bill and amendment of the Investment Code.

b) Completion of basic infrastructure such as roads in the Kampala Industrial and Business Park at Namanve and the allocation of industrial plots to investors.

c) 	Improving access to financial services by complementing the credit guarantee schemes available in a number of commercial banks with government resources and further capitalization of Uganda Development Bank.

d) 	The establishment and launch of the Credit Reference Bureau in the first quarter of Financial Year 2008/2009 that will improve the ability of commercial banks to screen loan applicants. This will contribute to reducing default rates on loans which in turn should lead to reductions in interest rates.

e) 	Fast-tracking infrastructure investment for priority sectors such as roads serving mining areas and facilities of tourism attraction.

Mr Speaker, Government is committed to maintaining a high level of public/private policy dialogue through the Presidential Investors Roundtable and regular consultations with private sector organisations including the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda (PSFU) and the Uganda Manufactures Association (UMA). This dialogue ensures that Government is fully aware about the constraints to doing business and that decisive action to mitigate these constraints are implemented.

Trends in Key Macroeconomic Indicators

Inflation

Mr Speaker, it has been a fundamental policy of this Government to maintain stable prices for all goods and services without interfering in the operations of free markets. This year was no exception. Despite difficulties arising from high prices of fuel on the international markets and escalation of domestic food and other commodity prices that built up in the second half of the financial year 2007/2008, the Government maintained economic stability through macroeconomic measures that did not interfere with the markets. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the upward pressures on prices were compounded by a remarkable increase in both domestic demands and regional demand for goods and services and particularly for Uganda’s farm products. The combined effect of these pressures is that annual underlying inflation will average 8.6 percent this financial year. Over the medium term we expect inflation to fall back towards the target of five percent per year when the impact of these price shocks is reduced. 

Mr Speaker, maintaining low inflation at an average of five percent will continue to be the cornerstone of Government’s macroeconomic policy. Low inflation is essential for a stable economic climate in which the private sector can make long term investment plans and the purchasing power of everyone, and especially the poor, is protected.

The Exchange Rate

Over the year, the exchange rate has faced appreciation pressures with the Uganda shilling appreciating by about 11 percent against the United States dollar between June 2007 and March 2008. This persistent strengthening of our shilling reflects the strength of our economy. Our exports are doing well, tourism is booming and there are inflows from portfolio investors such as those buying into Ugandan companies. 

The strengthening of the shilling means that people who want dollars can buy them cheaply while sellers of dollars have been getting fewer and fewer shillings for each dollar they sell. The Government will mitigate the effects of the continued appreciation by investing in areas that improve private sector productivity. With improved productivity, private export firms will be more competitive. In the short to medium-term however, the Bank of Uganda will only intervene in the foreign exchange market to prevent excessive fluctuations in the exchange rate.

Interest Rates

Due to the structural constraints in the economy, lending interest rates have remained high. This is because of a number of factors which include high operational costs, absence of long-term finance, high risks of borrowers, high mitigation costs for contract enforcement, inefficiencies in land and company registries, which however we are working on as you have heard, a few banks controlling a large share of the market and inadequate insolvency laws and cumbersome procedures.

In order to reduce interest rates, the launch of the Credit Bureau would enable lenders to make informed decisions about borrowers thereby reducing lending risks. The Bank of Uganda will dialogue with commercial banks to promote transparency in determining lending terms and collaborate with them to regularly publish bank charges in the print media. Bank of Uganda will also license more deposit-taking institutions in an attempt to increase competition.

Credit to Private Sector  

Commercial bank credit has continued to grow despite high interest rates. Between June 2007 and March 2008, credit to the private sector grew by 43 percent from Shs 1,792 trillion to Shs 2,569 trillion. The year on year growth of credit to the private sector up to March 2008 was 49 percent.

Financial Sector Developments

Micro-Finance 

In 2005, the Government embarked on the policy of creating financial infrastructure throughout the country so that all our people can have access to safe financial institutions in which they can save their money. This programme is expanding steadily and has now reached 800 sub-counties out of the 1,020 sub-counties, municipalities and town councils that we expect to cover. This is a coverage of 78 percent which is a remarkable achievement in such a short time (Applause).

I would like to commend the Minister of State for Microfinance, Hon. Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho for his focused determination and progress in this very important effort by the NRM Government (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I am confident that a revolution in the financial landscape of Uganda is underway and that it will be for the great benefit of Ugandans. I therefore call upon all honourable Members of Parliament and all Ugandans and development partners to support this effort and not to obstruct it.

Let me also point out that there has been extensive consultations on the regulatory legislation for microfinance institutions. Although it has taken longer than we originally anticipated, it is in the national interest that we consult stakeholders so that we produce legislation that takes into account their views and interests. The Microfinance Institutions Regulatory Bill is due for submission to Parliament as soon as the consultations are concluded and I expect this to happen within a few months.

Bank Performance 

The banking sector remained sound in 2007. It grew considerably in 2007, both in terms of size and number of institutions. Following the lifting of the moratorium on the licensing of new banks, Bank of Uganda approved five new private commercial banks to start operations. The entry of new banks has stimulated competition in the sector, resulting in expansion in the branch network from 160 branches in December 2006 to 213 branches by the end March 2008; the deposit base of banks increased by 26 percent from Shs 3,175 trillion in March 2007 to Shs 4,014 trillion in March 2008. In the same period, the total banking sector’s advances or loans grew by 49 percent as I noted earlier from Shs 1,703 trillion to Shs 2, 542 trillion. 
The total non-performing loans as a percentage of total advances were estimated at 3.94 percent as at end March 2008. This was well within the prudential limit of 10 percent. All banks held adequate liquidity to meet operational requirements with an average ratio of liquid assets to deposits of 51 percent, which is well beyond the minimum statutory requirement of 20 percent.
 
Anti-Money Laundering

In January 2005, Cabinet approved, in principle, the draft Anti-Money Laundering Bill. However, it was recognised that further consultations with stakeholders was necessary prior to its submission to Parliament. These consultations have been concluded and the Bill will be tabled in Parliament during Financial Year 2008/09. The anti-money laundering legislation will facilitate financial crime prevention, the fight against terrorism, and will enhance corporate governance and accountability.
 
Capital Markets

Social Security and Pensions Reform

Mr Speaker, as I reported last year, there has been a vigorous debate over the reform of the pensions sector. In February 2008, a Pensions Regulatory Framework was approved by Cabinet and the Bill to be presented to Parliament is being drafted. It is expected that the regulatory authority will be established by December 2008, which shall supervise all pensions and retirements benefits schemes in the country. Once this has been accomplished and the savings for pensioners fully protected, the pensions sector will be gradually opened up. The medium to long term objective of the reforms in the pensions sector is to protect funds of pensioners and retirees while at the same time utilising these resources for mobilising domestic investment capital. 

Mr Speaker, there continues to be considerable anxiety over pensions arrears. I am pleased to announce that following financing of arrears to the tune of Shs 280 billion in Financial Year 2007/08 of which Shs 200 billion was for pensions, we have now provided a further Shs 300 billion for arrears –(Applause)- in Financial Year 2008/09 of which Shs 122 billion will cover the remaining pension arrears. (Applause) All verified pension arrears are expected to be cleared in the next two years. 

Now that sufficient funds have been provided to cover all pension arrears, I appeal to those administering the programme to act zealously in assisting claimants to obtain their funds quickly and efficiently. 

The Ministry of Public Service has completed a policy paper to convert the present system of pensions to a contributory scheme. When this is implemented, there should be no more accumulation of pension arrears. 

Fiscal Performance and Forecast

Revenue and Expenditure Outturns

The projected outturn for URA revenue collections this financial year is Shs 3,160 billion, reflecting a surplus over target of Shs 83 billion. This is equivalent to 13.1 percent of GDP. 

As we scale up public investment in infrastructure, it will be necessary to improve further our tax revenue collection. This will be mainly by improving the efficiency of URA. I want to take this opportunity to commend the URA for what has been achieved to date –(Applause)- and to encourage the Authority to do even more. 

Mr Speaker, I also wish to commend taxpayers who have met their tax obligations in a timely manner. 

The outturn on government expenditure, including donor-financed projects, is projected at Shs 5.0576 trillion during Financial Year 2007/08, which is equivalent to 21 percent of GDP. This compares with the expenditure outturn of 22.1 percent of GDP in the previous fiscal year. 

The fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP is estimated at 7.5 percent for Financial Year 2007/08, which is an increase from 7.1 percent in the previous year. This is mainly on account of the need to create the fiscal space to allow more expenditure in priority growth sectors of the economy.

Opportunities and challenges

Mr Speaker, last year I reported four major opportunities and challenges in both the domestic and international arena that the Ugandan economy was facing.
 
First, we were witnessing the promise of a transition to peace in Northern Uganda. (Applause) We predicted that peace would result in an increase in the demand and supply for goods and services, including infrastructure, and would increase the growth in the Gross Domestic Product. This has indeed happened. Demand for goods has grown strongly and has outstripped supply, leading to higher prices. 

I believe that in the foreseeable future, our brothers and sisters in Northern Uganda will not only have peace, but also access to basic goods and services. I shall return to this subject later in this speech. For now let me note that the increased demand and the increased prices could be a stimulus that will lead to increased supply and incomes for our people in the months ahead. 

The second major challenge we noted last year was that we were surrounded by an emerging regional peace that would bring with it an unprecedented increase in the demand for goods and services. This called for a supply response, which should also spur acceleration in economic growth. Regional demand has grown beyond our expectations. The response is confirmed by the strong GDP growth and record regional export figures. 

Thirdly, there was a remarkable worldwide rise in the prices of raw materials, including oil. Mr Speaker, the surge in food and oil prices has gone beyond our wildest expectations. I am confident that in the coming year, Uganda will take full advantage of the rising food and oil prices to expand employment and to increase economic growth. 

Finally, I referred to the worldwide technological revolution in information technology that makes international employment possible without the physical movement of labour. Mr Speaker, we have since laid the electronic backbone cable and this work is continuing. We shall not rest until Uganda is fully connected to the external submarine cable, which will reduce the cost of using the Internet and turn Uganda’s landlocked position from a competitive disadvantage to a competitive advantage. (Applause)

The budget strategy for Financial Year 2008/2009 is a strategy for Prosperity-for-All. Mr Speaker and honourable members, you are all aware that Prosperity-for-All is the central theme and message of the NRM election manifesto of 2006. In the Financial Year 2007/2008 budget, I indicated that the government strategy was to address the entire range of constraints, which often stand in the way of production, marketing, access to financial services, and cost of capital. 

In order to attain Prosperity-for-All, the budget must address both the private sector concerns as well as the provision of public goods and services such as security, law and order, energy, roads, education, health and water.

In Financial Year 2007/2008, we announced that there was enormous room for expansion in production, processing and marketing of tea, coffee, cotton, fruits, honey, rice, potatoes, dairy productions, vegetable oil, poultry and fish.

Mr Speaker, agricultural production requires the traditional factor inputs of land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship. In Financial Year 2007/2008 we promised that government would step in to help our people solve the complex problems associated with the management of each of these inputs.

With respect to land, in order to assist people who are landless or whose landholding is too small to realize an income that is above the poverty line, government set aside a revolving fund to be used as a land acquisition loan facility. The facility was to be disbursed through Post Bank and participating SACCOs and would be secured by the land that is acquired. I allocated Shs 3 billion for this programme to initially cover 30 districts with each district getting Shs 100 million. I regret the slowness in disbursing this facility. However, I am glad to report that this money has finally been disbursed to Post Bank and it is ready for disbursement to SACCOs. 

An additional Shs 3 billion has been allocated in this Financial Year 2008/2009, bringing the total to Shs 6 billion. An agreement has been signed with Post Bank to ensure timely and efficient disbursement of this facility.

I call upon honourable members to assist the people you represent, especially the poorest who have little or no land, to access this facility. Maximum pressure should be exerted on both Post Bank and SACCOs to administer these funds quickly and competently.

The programme to train farmers in the use of fertilizers, pesticides, farm machinery and irrigation and to disseminate tested crop varieties and production techniques to farmers to improve their agricultural yields using the NAADS has been extensively and intensively reviewed and restructured. 

In 2006/2007, 64 districts were covered by NAADS. In Financial Year 2007/2008 we provided an additional Shs 12 billion for the rolling out of NAADS to all the districts not yet covered by the programme. This brought the expenditure of NAADS to Shs 60 billion in the current financial year. As a result, NAADS has now rolled out to 712 sub-counties in 79 districts. 

Mr Speaker, I am happy to announce an unprecedented 62 percent increase in NAADS allocation by Shs 37 billion, bringing the total allocation to NAADS to Shs 97 billion. This additional funding will be for inputs for the small farmers who cannot afford to purchase the necessary agricultural inputs. 

I am also allocating Shs 2.8 billion to commence a nationwide move towards mechanization of agriculture. By the commencement of the next season in September 2008, NAADS will have imported 500 walking tractors with standard implements to be distributed to farmer groups in 500 parishes to begin the drive to increase agricultural production. These tractors have been tested over the last year and found to be versatile in all regions of Uganda. 

Honourable members will need to know that a phased approach to mechanization is necessary to allow developments of the necessary training and maintenance support to be needed to created across the country.

Capital (Micro-Finance)

The emphasis government has put on the development of savings, credit and co-operative organizations, remains particularly important in mobilizing savings and credit for the people. While out of the 1,020 sub-counties, only 381 had SACCOs in Financial Year 2006/07, in this year nearly 800 sub-counties have already indicated that they have a SACCO. This means that in 2007/2008, the number of SACCOs has more than doubled. 

For Financial Year 2007/2008, I provided Shs 10 billion for micro-finance infrastructure. This year, I am providing an additional Shs 22 billion, bringing the total to Shs 32 billion in Financial Year 2008/2009.

Co-operative Development

Mr Speaker, in the Budget Speech of 2007/2008, I dwelt at some length on the role that co-operatives should play in Prosperity-for-All programmes. I noted that it is difficult for a small individual farmer to solve the problems of financing, production, processing and marketing entirely on his own and compete successfully in the world market. Indeed we know that in many parts of the world, including the most advanced economies, governments intervene to assist farmers and other businesses.

Let me once again take this opportunity to urge Ugandans to join the savings and credit co-operatives and production and marketing co-operatives; these co-operative offer a genuine opportunity for Ugandans to act together to defeat the curse of poverty in our country.

Government proposes to strengthen district cooperatives and management of co-operative societies by:

(a)	Training the officers to supervise them.
(b)	Supporting the formation of enterprise based co-operatives.
(c)	Carrying out a needs assessment for refurbishing storage facilities at primary society level.
(d)	Refurbishing and equipping stores.
(e)	Coordinating NAADS activities with cooperatives.
(f)	Amending the Cooperatives Societies’ Act of 1991 to improve the supervision and regulation of co-operatives.

I have allocated Shs 2 billion for marketing, research and implementation of the co-operatives’ activities. Additional funds will be available to co-operatives which engage in value addition and agro-processing.

Processing and Marketing

Mr Speaker, the central component of government strategy for faster economic growth is to maximize industrial development and to promote innovations in science and technology. Government will provide the necessary support to innovative scientists to enable them to develop commercial technologies and prototypes. Specifically, scientists will be supported in research on banana development, fruit juice processing and Malaria research. This activity has been transferred to the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology in line with its mandate. (Applause)

Industrial Workspace

Mr Speaker, industrialisation is truly essential to raising labour productivity, add value to products, earn higher export revenues, and create employment. Government will, in Financial Year 2008/09, develop an industrial park in each of the four regions to provide investors with workspaces in industrial parks. These parks will be serviced with the necessary facilities such as electricity and water. In the long term, industrial parks will be built in Arua, Lira, Gulu, Soroti, Moroto, Mbale, Mbarara, Tororo, Iganga, Jinja, Luweero, Nakaseke, Nakasongola, Bushenyi, Kabale, Kasese, Fort-Portal, Hoima, Rakai and Mubende. 

A framework for the operationalisation of these industrial parks on a public-private partnership basis is being prepared. I am providing an additional Shs 16 billion for the construction of these regional, industrial parks.

Industrial Bond

In order to further support industrialisation, we plan to increase capital funds for processing and marketing through the issue of an Industrialisation Bond managed by the Uganda Development Bank to raise at least Shs 20 billion for small and medium enterprises and co-operatives involved in processing. These funds will be made available to the private sector at affordable interest rates. The intention is to create a significant revolving fund to be accessed primarily by manufacturing entities in the small and medium enterprises sector particularly targeting value addition in agro-processing.

Mr Speaker, these measures are aimed at unleashing the potential of small and medium-sized enterprises in agro-processing, and to specifically provide support to agro-processors in specific zones so that increased production is processed and marketed. 

Small and medium sized enterprises present the greatest opportunity to generate employment, increase productivity and stimulate economic growth. Preliminary estimates show that there are over one million small and medium sized enterprises in Uganda today that employ over 2.5 million people. 

Small and medium enterprises are, therefore, a critical source of new jobs and play a crucial role in income generation, especially for the poor.

Government’s renewed focus on addressing the constraints faced by SMEs will be marshaled through the establishment of a private sector-led SME Development Steering Group with Enterprise Uganda as its secretariat. It will oversee proposed SME interventions and its membership will include the Uganda Development Bank (UDB), Private Sector Foundation of Uganda (PSFU), Uganda Manufacturers Association (UMA), NAADS, Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI), Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB) and the Ministries of Finance, Agriculture and Trade and Industry.

The steering group will be responsible for developing interventions for SME development. Interventions will include the provision of financial, organisational and entrepreneurial support to target sub-sectors engaged in agro-processing. The group will also develop and oversee implementation of a one-zone-one-product strategy that is patterned on the one-village-one-product movement, which has worked remarkably well in Japan. 

Government shall implement agreed interventions through existing institutions. For example, the commercialisation of processing technology will be done by the Uganda Industrial Research Institute and standardisation of products by the National Bureau of Standards.

The government will also support a Loan Guarantee Scheme for commercial banks that provide credit to agricultural and agro-processing projects. (Applause) This will be available for projects appraised and vetted by commercial banks, for which the scheme will guarantee 50 percent of the lending. This will support value addition activities by agro-processors outside the designated industrial parks. 

I am also providing tax incentives for new investments in agro-processing, which I will return to when presenting tax proposals.

The increase in agricultural and industrial output resulting from these measures should go a long way to respond to both the growing domestic demand due to the transition to peace at home, as well as the growing regional demand for both foodstuffs and processed products.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, these efforts by government will complement and not compete with the efforts of the private sector. As these complementary efforts evolve, we hope to make increasingly vital improvements in the design and definition of our public-private partnership arrangements, which will constitute the cornerstone of the emerging Ugandan economy.

These interventions in the drive to attain Prosperity-for-All call for co-ordination at the centre and change agents who are strategically situated in the rural areas. At the centre, a Prosperity-for-All co-ordination unit in the Office of the President will undertake the overall co-ordination and monitoring of implementation. 

In the rural areas, all the sub-county chiefs and LC III chairmen have been trained to assist in making Prosperity-for-All a reality. Focus on the sub-county as the unit of planning and accountability will continue and where possible we shall try to go even further down to the parish to ensure that prosperity programmes are actually being implemented.

Mr Speaker, I would now like to highlight the major priorities of the Financial Year 2008/09 budget. This year’s background to the budget contains extensive reports on sector performance in the Financial Year 2007/08. I will, therefore, restrict myself to the major priorities for the forthcoming budget.

As honourable members are well aware, our budget strategy has been to maintain high rates of economic growth, low inflation, a sustainable external balance and overall macro-economic stability through fiscal discipline. 

I regret that budget discipline makes my ministry extremely unpopular. However, budget discipline must continue to be a cornerstone of our overall budget strategy in order to maintain economic stability.

Mr Speaker, the Financial Year 2008/09 budget strategy places emphasis on aligning our expenditures to the priorities which best support the vision of the government. The priorities must have the first call on all new resources in Financial Year 2008/09. 

The priority areas in Financial Year 2008/09 are as follows:

a)	Development and Maintenance of Transportation Infrastructure;
b)	Energy Infrastructure;
c)	Industrial Development;
d)	Human Development; and
e)	Security and Governance.

The specific goals of government in these priority sectors are as follows:

a)	To urgently embark on new road development, and implement a vigorous national, district and community road maintenance program.
b)	To increase agricultural production through mechanization, and provision of tested varieties and improved breeds nationwide.
c)	To commence the construction of the Karuma Hydro Power dam and critical power transmission lines, and conduct feasibility studies for Isimba Hydro-power Project.
d)	To enhance the pace of industrialization by providing financial, organizational and technical know-how and support to agro-processors. 
e)	To implement minimum service delivery standards in the health centers for reproductive health, child health services including immunisation, and control of communicable diseases including HIV/AIDS and Malaria, and to improve the quality of UPE and USE. 
f)	To extend comprehensive peace and security and to reap widespread benefits from the peace dividend, and to maintain law and order in all the areas of Uganda.

Infrastructure Development and Maintenance

Transportation Infrastructure

Mr Speaker, government proposes to make the development and maintenance of Uganda’s road network the first priority. There is an urgent need to build all-weather roads and to maintain national, district and community roads. We must increase efficiency and effectiveness in the implementation of road projects, complete projects in a reasonable time and do so at a fair and competitive cost.

I have made a total allocation of Shs 1.1 trillion in Financial Year 2008/09 to the road sector for road development and maintenance. Including development partner project assistance equivalent to Shs 347 billion –(Applause)- this now makes this sector the largest single allocation in the whole budget, overtaking the education sector for the first time in many years.

Critical strategic investments will include the construction of the Northern Transport Corridor into a dual carriageway from Busia/Malaba to Katuna. I have provided US $200 million in Financial Year 2008/09 for work on this international highway and a total of US $600 million over the next three years for the construction of major highways. The facility will be availed on a special fund in the Bank of Uganda and will be drawn on presentation of the relevant implementation documents in line with an agreed work plan based on contracts. 

The development of these major routes will be done through government partnership with the private sector in a manner that enables the greatest efficiency in delivery of new highway roads at the least possible cost.

This is the first time that we are committing such substantial funding from our own budgetary resources to the construction of major roads. This has become necessary because it is now clear that the cost of delay in the disbursement of donor funds that are tied to the fulfillment of conditionalities is harmful to the economy. 

Sir, the delays in disbursement allow the roads to deteriorate thus increasing the costs of future repair. As we wait, the deteriorating roads increase the wear and tear on vehicles, increase the time of travel and the consumption of fuel. When the funds are finally released, we find that substantial increases in road construction costs have occurred as a result of the increases in cost of inputs used in construction 

It is for these reasons that government has decided to allocate our own resources to this effort instead of being totally dependent on external funding. We shall, of course, continue to seek external funding since our resources are insufficient to meet our infrastructure needs. However, urgent national road arteries should not be captives of conditionalities, notwithstanding the good intentions of our development partners. 

Mr Speaker, with regard to improving road infrastructure, the construction, upgrading and rehabilitation of the following roads will either commence and/or continue in Financial Year 2008/09:

1.	Fort Portal – Bundibugyo
2.	Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana
3.	Soroti–Dokolo–Lira
4.	Gayaza–Zirobwe
5.	Kaisotonya–Hoima
6.	Matuga–Semuto-Kapeka
7.	Mukono–Katosi
8.	Nyendo–Sembabule
9.	Mpigi–Maddu
10.	Mbarara–Kikagati
11.	 Ntungamo–Mirama Hill
12.	 Muyembe–Moroto
13.	 Kapchorwa–Bukwo
14.	 Nyakahita–Kamwenge
15.	 Mbale–Bungo–Magale
16.	 Kyenjojo–Hoima–Masindi
17.	 Gulu–Bibia
18.	 Arua–Koboko–Orapa
19.	 Masaka–Bukakata
20.	 Kampala–Mbarara

Let me also say a word about road maintenance. In order to improve road maintenance, government proposed a Road Fund in Financial Year 2007/08 to specifically earmark resources for road maintenance. The budget allocation for roads maintenance has been increased to a total of Shs 240 billion to eliminate the backlog on road maintenance at national, district and urban levels. The process of setting up the fund is advanced and once established, it will go a long way in providing a sustainable and predictable source of funding to the sector. An additional Shs 35 billion has been allocated to the existing budget to clear the road maintenance backlog.

In addition to the work to be co-ordinated by the government from the centre, the government will acquire road equipment for use in the districts to maintain district roads. There will be considerable recruitment of manpower to ensure continuous maintenance of roads throughout the country. I, therefore, wish to echo His Excellency the President’s assurance in his State of the Nation Address that the government is definitely addressing the problems of the roads. The sector ministry will announce the details of the administration and implementation of these programmes. 

Concerning the need for a new bridge across the River Nile, the Japanese Government has been approached and I am pleased to report that they have indicated a preliminary willingness to support us in the construction of a new bridge across the River Nile at Jinja. 

Concerning railway transport, in view of its importance in reducing transport costs, plans for the re-opening of the railway line between Tororo, Gulu and Pakwach and between Kampala and Kasese will be prepared during the coming financial year. Government will also develop a master plan for the further development of the national railway network and will, as a matter of urgency, provide resources for the development of an alternative route through the Port of Dar-es-Salaam by rehabilitating wagon ferries on Lake Victoria. 

An additional Shs 14 billion has been allocated for the purchase of a new ferry wagon to replace the MV Kabalega, which sank in 2004. 

Energy

Shortage of power remains one of the severe constraints to the economic growth of Uganda. In order to bridge the short-term power deficit in the country, the government has been implementing emergency thermal power projects. 

We have also been able to embark on our long-term plans, which entail the construction of big power generation projects. The construction of 250 Mega Watt Bujagali project commenced in July 2007 and is progressing very well. 

A critical concern in the electricity distribution sector is a high level of losses that we have observed. Thirty eight percent or over one-third of the expensive power generated is being lost as a result of the dilapidated distribution system and because of the theft of power by unscrupulous consumers with illegal connections. This power theft accounts for 25 percent of the losses while technical losses constitute the other 13 percent. Government is extremely concerned about this and is going to take measures to curb this theft. This will include the vigorous pursuit, prosecution and conviction of those caught stealing power. The faithful consumers who pay their bills are encouraged to volunteer information to help identify illegal consumers. 

In the next financial year, the main focus in the energy sector will be the commencement of construction of the Karuma Dam using the energy fund for which Shs 109 billion has been provided. This is in addition to the Shs 208 billion of the Energy Fund that has been carried forward from year 2007/08 for use in the development of the Karuma Project. 

In addition, Government through a public-private partnership will commence the development of the 100 Mega Watt Isimba project. The Kaisotonya-Nkendi transmission line to evacuate power generated from our own heavy fuel oil plant at Mputa will also be constructed. (Applause) 

Government is also embarking on the construction of the Opuyo-Moroto-Katikile transmission line.  The current budget allocation of Shs 92 billion for support to Thermal Power provision will be maintained in order to address the energy shortfalls. In addition, Shs 35 billion has been allocated for the resettlement action plan for the Kaiso-Tonya Transmission line

Petroleum Exploration

Mr Speaker, since 2006 there has been substantial activity in petroleum exploration and development. Under the early production scheme (EPS) we expect oil production to start in mid 2009. Additionally, we expect to start generating thermal power from Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) from the oil in 2010. This power will be evacuated to the national grid to ease the power shortages.

Government has made intensive and extensive consultations concerning the optimum policy to manage and to regulate the oil industry. We have also embarked on measures to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development through the establishment of a Midstream Petroleum Unit to specifically promote, monitor and regulate mid-stream petroleum activities like crude oil sales, transportation, refining and pricing.

Rural Development

Mr Speaker, the financial year 2008/09 budget will provide additional resources to increase employment and incomes of rural households. The financial year 2008/09 Budget will focus on interventions that address rural unemployment and underemployment in order to stimulate the agricultural sector. This will include the provision of seeds and seedlings, walking tractors with standard implements, irrigation and pesticides.  

Mr Speaker, honourable members, the review of the NAADS Programme that we embarked on a few months ago has now been completed. As explained by His Excellency the President in his State of the Nation Address, the strategy underlying the programme has been reviewed to emphasise enterprise selection, value addition, increased production and export orientation.  The financial year 2008/09 Budget will provide additional funds for the supply of improved varieties and inputs to farmers. Capacity building within the community will be linked to Savings and Credit Cooperative Organizations (SACCOs) as well as marketing cooperatives. 

The provision of technologically improved inputs will be linked to the production of specific commodities including coffee, tea, cotton, fish and fruits. NAADS will further support the primary processing of agricultural produce, so that agricultural surpluses beyond subsistence consumption can be packed and preserved for the market. An additional Shs 40 billion has been allocated to NAADS and an additional Shs 22 billion has been allocated to microfinance for these activities. 

Expanding Market Access

In addition to the above activities through NAADS and Microfinance, Government will make an effort to draw more farmers into commercial agriculture by improving marketing infrastructure. Government will refurbish a total of 173 commodity stores; construct at least 10 LCIII warehouses and extend support to the operations of the Uganda Commodity Exchange (UCE).

Human Development

Education

Implementation of the UPE and USE programmes to achieve the target of universal completion of secondary schooling by 2015 will remain the Government’s priorities for the education sector in financial year 2008/09. Government will improve the efficiency and the quality of Universal Primary Education and Secondary Education by strengthening the Education Standards Agency (ESA) to undertake the inspection function and remove wastage and misuse of resources. While enrolment numbers have grown significantly in primary education, completion rates are still low. Government will ensure that once children are enrolled, they complete primary education.  

Accordingly, Government will improve the efficiency and quality of Universal Primary Education and Secondary Education by strengthening the inspection function and removing wastage and misuse of resources at both the centre and local government levels. 

In financial year 2008/09, resources have been provided for science, technical and vocational education, in order to provide employable skills to the growing number of school leavers. Government is currently undertaking reforms in science and technical vocational education to meet the growing demand for technical skills in the labour market.  The establishment of the Uganda Vocational Qualifications Framework to standardise and rationalise vocational training as a basis for assessment of skills and competency levels will be completed in 2008. Government will also operationalise community polytechnics where they exist, and also establish more in counties that do not have them. An additional Shs. 59 billion has been provided to the education sector to support UPE, USE, Business Technical and Vocational Education and Training (BTVET) and to honour Presidential Pledges in that sector.						
Health

The health system in Uganda has continued to suffer from poor service delivery and inefficiency. The health centers continue to have drug stock-outs and attendance by many health workers at their duty stations is irregular. The inefficiency, corruption, poor service delivery and stock-outs in health centres must be dealt with decisively. The Health Sector must implement the age-old labelling of drugs meant for the public health system to prevent theft and sale in private clinics and on the open market. An inspection function under the health sector is also necessary to regulate and monitor adequacy of the health system in delivery of expected health outcomes.  This will also deal with the inefficiency, mismanagement and consequently poor service delivery in the sector.  

We have urged the Health Sector to urgently establish minimum service delivery standards in the health centres. Additional resources in this sector will focus on provision of basic health infrastructure, recruitment of health workers, provision of drugs and basic equipment.  An additional Shs 98.69 billion has been provided to the health sector of which Shs 60 billion will be for the provision of Anti-Retroviral Treatment to all who require them. The balance of Shs 38 billion will support Referral hospitals and health centres in sub-counties and parishes throughout the country. 

Water, Sanitation and Environment

Government plans to increase the storage of water for production from the current level of 48 percent to 52 percent of the projected national demand by the end of the coming financial year. Government will also complete the construction of bulk water schemes in the Karamoja region this year and build additional ones in Ssembabule and Mpigi and also build four control structures in Karamoja to mitigate flooding. 

Government will also provide an estimated 660,000 people with safe water by constructing 325 protected springs, 1000 shallow wells, 650 boreholes and 900 water tanks. Additionally, 18 piped water systems in rural growth centres will be built and 580 boreholes will be rehabilitated. Government will also continue with its stepped up monitoring of water quality including water sources in rural areas. 

As part of the effort to ensure that Uganda meets the MDG target of 72 percent latrine coverage, the Ministry of Water and Environment will carry out a National Sanitation Marketing Campaign in financial year 2008-2009 to reinforce the district efforts. 

Security and governance

Security 

Mr Speaker, in pursuit of its medium term focus of building a modern and professional national defence force, the Ministry of Defence and UPDF will focus on improving defence management systems of which the Integrated Resource Management System is a key pillar. This is aimed at improving human resource and logistics management in armed forces.

Governance 

With regard to the enforcement of the rule of law in the Justice, Law and Order Sector, future interventions will focus on addressing the high incidences of corruption in the sector. The effort to improve the capacity of the Office of the Inspector General of Government and Ministry of Ethics and Integrity and the Director of Public Prosecution using the funding from the Millennium Challenge Corporation Grant of $ 10.2 million is under way and will continue in the next financial year. I have provided UShs 1.5 billion as our local contribution to that effort to investigate crimes, improve professionalism and accountability and strengthen the enforcement of laws and decisions. 

In the medium term, the accountability sector will prioritise the fight against corruption and abuse of office. The Directorate of Ethics and Integrity will take a leading role in strengthening the framework and policy to fight corruption and in the monitoring and evaluation of observance of ethical standards and integrity. The other relevant agencies within government will also continue to play an active role. 

Public awareness programs will be conducted through workshops, seminars, radio and television programs and publications to enlist support in the fight against corruption. Strategic partnerships to fight corruption, abuse of office and administrative malpractices will be promoted and strengthened. 

Local government financing

 Mr Speaker, one of the main challenges facing the decentralisation strategy and the operation of local governments is inadequate revenue. In the budget speech of financial year 2007-2008, I announced local revenue measures to replace graduated tax. I am happy to report that Parliament passed the Bill establishing these measures in the form of a Local Service and Hotel Tax. These measures will take effect next financial year and should help supplement local government financing. As we wait for these measures to take effect, Government will continue to supplement local governments with Shs 45 billion per year. Accordingly, in financial year 2008-2009, government will reinstate the budget item for graduated tax compensation to local governments. Shs 25 billion has been provided for G.T compensation out of which Shs 33 billion will be maintained in unconditional grant item as was the case in the current year while Shs 12 billion has been allocated in the Graduated Tax compensation item for the district and urban authorities. 

Mr Speaker, another area of concern to local governments is the allocation formula that underlies Central Government transfers to local governments. Government has continued to transfer funds to local governments in form of conditional and equalisation grants as well as unconditional grants. 

A total of Shs 1.23 Trillion is earmarked for financial year 2008-2009, which represents 34 percent of the National Budget excluding donor projects. However, lack of a clear criterion for distribution of resources among local governments has been noted by Parliament and other stake holders as an area of concern. Accordingly, the Local Government Finance Commission through the Ministry of Local Government is in final consultations with the various sectors before preparing a Cabinet Paper on the new allocation formula.

Peace, Recovery and development of Northern Uganda

In mid-year 2007-2008, government launched the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) for Northern Uganda in order to eradicate poverty and improve the welfare of the population in Northern Uganda. Progress has been steady with a number of districts making progress towards return and resettlement of internally displaced persons in addition to rehabilitation of key government services in the region. Official implementation of PRDP is planned for financial Year 2008-2009 and there are sector plans to scale up activities in this respect. The costing of the strategy was based on identifying priority interventions based on 14 programmes under four key strategic objectives; consolidation of state authority, rebuilding and empowering of communities, revitalisation of the economy, peace building and reconciliation. 

Given that financial year 2008-2009 heralds the first year of PRDP implementation, the Government has committed an additional Shs 51.68 billion in financial year 2008-2009 to PRDP strategic objectives. This implies an additional 37.2 billion over and above the Shs 18.6 billion per annum that was provided for humanitarian assistance in the current fiscal year 2007/2008. 

Efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure

Mr Speaker, last year I called to the identification and implementation of efficiency gains in service delivery. I have already pointed out efficiency measures that need to be undertaken at various sector levels notably in Education and Health. 

Mr Speaker, improvement in procurement and public financial management are critical. PPDA’s priority will be to bring local government procurement and disposal systems onto the central procurement grid, as required by the Local Government Amendment Act. Further, the PPDA should play its core role of monitoring compliance with a law by all procurement entities.  

Additionally, the Auditor General will carry out value for money audits both centrally and at Local Government level, while the Public Accounts Committee will be given support to play its role more effectively and to clear its backlog of reports. 

Resource envelope for financial year 2008/2009

Mr Speaker, Budget expenditures much continue to remain within the resources available. Government is concerned about pressures to finance unplanned expenditure which often results in borrowing from the domestic banking system leading to excessive money creation, inflation and higher interest rates.

The resource envelope for the financial year 2008/2009 is based on the following important assumptions:

•	A project real growth of 8.1 percent,
•	A low and stable inflation,
•	A 5.8 percent appreciation off the exchange rate over the financial year 2007/2008 projected outturn,
•	A 20 percent increase in volumes of oil and non oil imports
•	In addition, the framework assumes that donor support remains forthcoming and will be disbursed as committed.

The overall deficit (excluding grants) for 2008/2009 is projected at 7.9 percent of GDP, compared to a projected outrun for the current year of 7.5 percent of GDP. This represents a slight fiscal expansion over the financial year 2007/2008 budget in order to accommodate additional investments in the Road Sector. To sustain the above projected growth of 8.1 percent, Government has to fully implement the investments identified and financed in the 2008/09 budget.

Mr Speaker, the Resource Envelope for financial year 2008/2009 amounts to Shs 6,142.9 billion or if you like 6.1429 trillion. This is composed of the following components: Shs 3,994.5 billion is financing from domestic revenues comprising tax revenues of Shs 3,850.7 billion, non-tax revenues for Shs. 103.9 billion and loan repayments from Government parastatals of Shs 39.9 billion.

Financing from the domestic banking system amounts to Shs. 269.8 billion. The difference of Shs 1,878.6 billion is support from external resources including both budget support and project aid.  In financial year 2008/2009 Domestic resources including financing from the banking system constitute approximately 70 percent of the financing needs of the budget –(Applause).

Domestic revenue

Domestic revenue in the next financial year is projected to increase by Shs 729.46 billion.  This will bring total domestic revenue as I have already indicated to 3,994.5 billion which constitutes 65 percent of the total budget.

Budget and project support

External resources inflows to support the Budget consists of:

(a)	Budget support loans (net of debt servicing)
(b)	Budget support grants
(c)	project loans (net of debt servicing)
(d)	and grants to support development projects.

Budget support project to increase to US$419.9 million which is equivalent to Shs 672.3 billion.  In total, Budget and project support from outside Uganda will finance 30 percent of the Budget for financial year 2008/09.

Constitutional self-accounting bodies

Mr Speaker, the budgetary proposals of the following self Accounting Bodies have been submitted in compliance with Article 155(2) of the Constitution.

(a)	Courts of Judicature
(b)	Electoral commission
(c)	Inspectorate of government
(d)	Parliamentary commission
(e)	Uganda Law Reform Commission 
(f)	Uganda Human rights Commission
(g)	Uganda Aids commission
(h)	National Planning Authority

In accordance with Article 155(3) of the Constitution, Government has made recommendations on these proposals.  I hereby lay both the budgetary proposals and the recommendations of government before this august House, as required by the Constitution –(Applause)

In order for me to submit a fully financed National Budget for your consideration in accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the budget provisions of these Self Accounting bodies are in accordance with a resource envelope conveyed to them in the course of budget preparation, including representation of the National Budget Framework Paper to Parliament, in accordance with the Budget Act 2001.

Revenue and tax measures for financial year 2008/09

Mr speaker, last year I informed this House that the theme of tax policy in the medium term to long term is simplicity, certainty, fairness and growth. These principles will continue to underline the tax principles for financial year 2008/2009. 

In the formulation of tax policy we recognise that business investments are long term and sudden changes in tax policy without adequate transition can cause significant disruption. Of equal importance is that complexity in the system should be avoided except where it is necessary to protect revenues. The tax proposals do not contain overwhelming revenue measures. Instead we shall rely on the growth of the economy, efficiency gains from URA and compliance by taxpayers to raise the necessary revenues for Financial Year 2008/09. Consequently, we have considered the following measures to raise the necessary revenues.

Income Tax

Educational institutions 

Mr Speaker, in order to encourage investments into the education sector, I am proposing to exempt -(Applause)- income derived from managing, operating and running schools and tertiary institutions from income tax- (Applause). It is expected that the tax foregone would be re-invested in the institutions to provide better facilities and improve curricula to better equip Ugandans- (Applause) The revenue loss is estimated at Shs 3 billion. The details will be contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill.

Support to hotels, hospitals, educational institutions  

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, Government has for the last two financial years been providing tax relief in form of payment of duty and taxes on construction materials for persons investing in hotels, hospitals, and to a limited extent, educational institutions. Construction has been the main engine of growth in the last two years, contributing 2.5 percent to the total GDP growth recorded in this Financial Year. With expansion of education and the need for investments in the health sector, it is proposed that the exemption of duty and tax payments on construction materials be extended for one more year. The intervention will be through the tax expenditure allocated in the Budget. The revenue loss is estimated at Shs. 12 billion.

Resident Airlines 

Mr Speaker, last year Parliament exempted the income derived by international airlines from the carriage of passengers and cargo in Uganda from tax. This was intended to buttress Uganda as an attractive destination for inbound airlines. The resident airlines were not considered. For purpose of equity, Mr Speaker, I am proposing to amend the Income Tax Act to exempt the income of resident airlines from income tax and withholding tax on payment of lease rentals. The details are contained in the Income Tax(Amendment) Bill.

Agro Processing  

Mr Speaker, Uganda is an agricultural country and we need to encourage production and processing of our agricultural products. In order to attract investments in this sector especially in rural areas, it is proposed that we create incentives for persons engaged in agro processing- (Applause)

Mr Speaker, in a bid to encourage value addition of our agricultural products I am proposing to exempt income arising out of new agro processing investments commencing 1st July 2008 from income tax. This incentive will, however, be limited to investments located 30 kilometres outside the district of Kampala and for processing of Uganda grown produce. The details will be contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill.

Amendment of the Income Tax Act to cater for Petroleum Transactions 

The income Tax Act was enacted in 1997 when no petroleum discoveries had been made. Subsequently a number of production-sharing agreements have been concluded. Last fiscal year we amended the Income Tax Act to provide for ring fencing of losses. I am proposing amendments to align the Income Tax Act with the production sharing agreements. The details are contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill.

Bank of Uganda Deposit Auction Fund

Mr Speaker, in the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank of Uganda is confronted with the challenge of maintaining low inflation. As a result they require instruments for this purpose. However, interest payments for entities investing in securities attract 15 percent Withholding Tax- which is only in Uganda; we found the other countries, Kenya and Tanzania do not have this tax. To support Bank of Uganda in the conduct of its liquidity management I am proposing that interest income derived out of deposit auctions issued by Bank of Uganda for purposes of liquidity management shall be exempt from Withholding Tax. The details will be contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill.

Deduction for Local Service Tax  

Mr Speaker, Parliament enacted the Local Service Tax Act. The Act imposes on, among others, persons with income to pay a local service tax. The local service tax is not allowed, as a deduction for income tax, as was the case with Graduated Tax. 

To mitigate paying tax upon tax

I am proposing that the Income Tax Act be amended to allow local service tax to be deducted from a person’s taxable income. The details are contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill.
 
Excise Duty 

Payment of duty by Government on diesel for manufacturers Mr Speaker, Government has paid excise duty on diesel for generators on behalf of manufacturers, since the power crisis in 2005/06. Since 2005/06, the government has been undertaking measures to improve the power crisis. It has introduced thermal power plants using diesel. It has also contracted a thermal plant to produce 50 MW using high fuel oils. 

With these interventions, this facility should now be terminated. The revenue gain of this measure is projected to be Shs 18 billion. 

Beer 

Mr Speaker, I am proposing to reduce the excise duty on beer – (Laughter) - made from local raw materials –(Applause)- from 30 to 20 percent. This will encourage local value addition, modernization of agriculture and eradication of poverty. The revenue loss is estimated at Shs 9 billion. The details are contained in the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill.
 
Cigarettes 

Mr Speaker, I am proposing to raise –(Applause)- the excise duty on cigarettes in order to raise revenue. The proposed adjustments will raise Shs 2.1 billion. The details are contained in the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill. 

Value Added Tax (VAT) 

Heavy Fuel Oil 

Mr Speaker, I am proposing to exempt heavy fuel oil from VAT. Heavy fuel oil is used in the thermal plants for power generation and for other industrial purposes. This is to reduce the pass through effect to the electricity tariff and to lower the cost of doing business in the country. The details are contained in the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill. 

Plant and Machinery 

Mr Speaker, as incentive to industrialists, VAT on plant and machinery is deferred at importation. I am proposing to extend the definition of plant and machinery to include essential industrial spare parts.
 
Salt 

Mr Speaker, table salt is one of the basic commodities for our people. I am proposing to exempt VAT on table salt to make it more affordable for the majority. The details are contained in the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill. 

Trucks 

In order to reduce the cost of transportation and its effect on the prices of food and other products, the VAT on trucks of the loading capacity of 3.5 tons and above will be exempted. Details are contained in the Value Added Tax (Amendment Bill).
 
Environmental Levy 

Mr Speaker, we introduced an environmental levy on used vehicles aged eight years and above, used goods and other imported used articles. The purpose of this measure was to discourage importation of obsolete items, which are hazardous to our people who consume these products and to save the environment. 

I also announced that this levy would be reviewed regularly in order to minimize importation of these items. I am therefore, proposing to increase the environmental levy on used cars that 8 years and above to 20 percent. (Applause) The necessary adjustment will also be made on the various rates on the other used items. The details are contained in the Finance Bill. 

First Motor Vehicle Registration Fees 

Mr Speaker, you will recall that last financial year, Government abolished road license fees. With the ever increasing budget pressures and the need to maintain our roads, I am proposing adjustments in the rates for first registration for motor vehicle excluding commercial vehicles. This measure is expected to raise revenue of Shs 25 billion. The details are contained in the Finance Bill. 

Tax treatment of petroleum exploration and production

Government has been paying tax for companies licensed to undertake petroleum exploration, development and production activities. This was government contribution during the early phase of the exploration and an acknowledgement of the risk involved as there was no certainty of oil discovery. The exploration activity has gone on for over 10 years and government has been supporting the industry. With the recent discoveries the companies can bear the total cost of their imports and other supplies because they are sure of recovery. The revenue gain is projected at Shs 8.0 billion! (Applause)

Write-off of tax arrears

Mr Speaker, Uganda Revenue Authority has a stock of tax arrears dating back more than seven years, which are evidently non-performing. It is evident that most of the debts cannot be recovered either because the taxpayers cannot be found or the supporting documents are missing. 

Mr Speaker, you recall that last fiscal year we extended an amnesty to the taxpayers on penalty arrears and the results of this policy have encouraged compliance. URA has reported that as result of this policy, they have been able to realize Shs 41 billion. In addition, the policy brought a number of new taxpayers on the tax register that URA would never have accessed. 

Mr Speaker, this move will help compliance and encourage entities to clean up their books and eventually be free to even float shares on the stock exchange. I am, therefore, proposing to write-off arrears of duty and tax relating to the principle, interest and penalty that has accrued up to June 30, 2002. The details are contained in the Finance Bill.

Ratification of the Uganda Belgium Double Taxation Agreement

Mr Speaker, in February 2008, we signed the Double Taxation Agreement between Belgium and Government of Uganda. The Double Taxation Agreement needs to be ratified to have effect. In accordance with the Ratification Treaties Act, I am laying before Parliament the Uganda Belgium Double Taxation Agreement to conclude the ratification process. In the coming year we shall be concluding Double Taxation Agreements with the United Arab Emirates, Peoples Republic of China, Egypt, Sudan, and Seychelles. (Applause)

East African Community

Mr Speaker, the implementation of the East African Custom’s Union protocol is on course. Together with the other partner states, Kenya and Tanzania, focus is now on consolidating the customs union as the bedrock for further integration of the community.  The partner states have commenced the negotiations of a protocol for the establishment of a common market. A common market entails the free movement of persons, labour, goods, services, capital and the right of establishment. 

The ability of the factors of production, capital and persons, to move freely across partner states of the East African Community will provide efficient and competitive production of goods and services for both regional and international markets. This means that the people of East Africa can maximize the talents and resources, leading to greater efficiency and increased profits.

By removing barriers to trade in goods and services and opening up new opportunities for over 120 million East Africans, the common market will stimulate growth and add to the international competitiveness of the East African partner states. 

Mr Speaker, at the pre-budget consultations of the EAC partner states ministers of finance on 2 June 2008 in Nairobi, the ministers of finance reviewed the import duty structure on a number of items:

a.	The import duty rate for palm steering fractions – (used to make soap and other things) - was revised from zero percent to 10 percent, but Uganda was allowed to stay application of the rate of 10 percent and apply zero percent for one year.
b.	Garbage trucks were exempt from import on condition that:

i.	They are specially designed for collection of garbage and
ii.	Imported or purchased by local authorities or persons contracted by the local authorities to collect garbage.
c.	The import duty on the following items was exempted: milk tankers, gym equipment for hotels, deep cycle batteries that are not sealed for use with solar equipment, computer printers and telecommunication equipment.
d.	I am happy to say that the import duty on cement was reduced from 40 percent to 25 percent.  

Mr Speaker, aware of the need to limit the danger posed by polythene bags and similar articles to our environment, the ministers also agreed to maintain the ban on plastic bags and articles for the conveyance of goods of less than 30 microns and the excise duty of 120 percent on the said items of 30 microns and above. The ministers directed the EAC secretariat to coordinate consultations with stakeholders with a view to developing a harmonized regional policy.

Non Tax Revenues

Mr Speaker, in our continued effort to widen the tax base and improve domestic revenue mobilisation, Non Tax Revenue (NTR) is one of the areas with great potential. Current collections are still dismal at about 0.2 percent of GDP which compares very unfavourably with our neighbouring countries within the region with an average of about 4 percent.

Mr Speaker, I therefore propose to implement the following measures in the coming financial year to revamp non tax revenues: 

(a) During the Budget preparation process, sector working groups should prepare in-depth non tax revenue estimates in as much as they do for expenditure estimates. 

Mr Speaker, my ministry will not approve the sector estimates unless detailed non tax revenue estimates are part and parcel of the presentations. One of the major constraints towards the realisation of increased non tax revenues is the obsolete legislation and fees/user charges which do not reflect the current market value of services rendered. My ministry will spearhead the review of legislation in conjunction with the relevant sectors and the Attorney-General to update the relevant non tax revenue legislation, fees and user charges and to streamline their administration and accountability. The new rates should come into effect on 1 January 2009. 

Report of tax expenditure for the financial year 2007/08

Mr Speaker, Article 152(2) of the Constitution obliges me to report to Parliament periodically on the exercise of powers conferred upon me by any law to waive or vary a tax imposed by that law. I wish to report that this fiscal year, I have exercised powers conferred by the Income Tax Act and the Value Added Tax Act and waived Shs 4.7 billion.

However, Government has paid Shs 21 billion for NGOs and private enterprises involved in the hotel sub-sectors.

Schedule of indebtedness

Mr Speaker, in accordance with the provision of Section 13 (1) and (2) of the Budget Act 2001, I hereby lay before the House the statement on government’s total external indebtedness as at 31 March 2008; and the grants that government received during the financial year 2007/08.

Mr Speaker, with respect to Section 13 (3) of the Budget Act, I wish to report that government has not provided any guarantees in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

The details for the utilisation of each loan and grant will be provided in the respective ministerial and government agencies policy statements. The institutions that received and utilised the funds should be able to provide the financial utilisation, the actual implementation on the ground, and progress on the respective projects. Our poverty monitoring and assessment reports will provide additional information on the benefits of the funds which were disbursed directly through the Consolidated Fund.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, I have now come to the end of this year’s Budget speech. I have put on record Uganda’s rate of economic growth which averaged 8.9 percent in real terms in the last three years: 10.3 percent in the financial year 2005/06, 7.4 percent in the financial year 2006/07 and 8.9 percent in the current fiscal year. I am sure that you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, deserve to be congratulated that during your tenure of Office our country registered the highest rate of economic growth ever recorded in our history. (Applause)

It is of course true that Uganda is still very far from perfection. But I believe that we have cause to thank God that our country’s speed of economic progress is comparable to that of the fastest growing economies of the world such as the Peoples Republic of China and India. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, the world has marvelled for a long time at the achievements of the Asian tigers. I hope you will permit me to express the hope that the world will soon recognise that there are also African tigers -(Laughter)- and Uganda is certainly one of them. (Applause)

It is most reassuring that despite the continuing steep rise in oil prices, the shortage of electricity and the interruption of our supply routes to Mombasa, the economy has shown so much resilience, exceptional adaptation and relative stability.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in today’s Budget, I have increased resources for NAADS by 62 percent so that the people in rural areas can get the agricultural inputs and machinery they need to increase production. (Applause)

I have also tripled the resources for microfinance from Shs 10 billion this year to Shs 32 billion next year. (Applause)

I have increased resources for road infrastructure from Shs 625 billion this year to Shs 1.1 trillion next financial year -(Applause)- in a determined assault to dislodge the obstacles that are afflicting road transportation in Uganda. (Laughter)

I have provided for an additional Shs 20 billion for capital injection for small and medium enterprises in Uganda Development Bank. 

I have also provided Shs 50 billion as credit guarantees for banks that lend for agriculture.

Mr Speaker, I have provided tax exemptions to encourage enterprises to go into agricultural processing in rural areas and to encourage investment in the construction of hotels, hospitals and educational institutions. 

Mr Speaker, I have increased the energy fund to Shs 316 billion so that the power shortages can be decisively resolved through Uganda’s own funding for dam construction. (Applause) 

I have also reduced taxation on the lorries and trucks that carry our goods and services and I have removed the tax on salt. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I have substantially increased expenditure on both education and health in the bid to increase our people’s access to quality education, to life saving drugs and other health services.

And for all the other sectors and ministries, I have tried to ensure that the majority of them will have at least the same levels of domestic funding in the coming year as they had in this year or slightly more.

Mr Speaker, I would have wished to do better. Indeed, during the past several months I have had to bear and absorb attacks and angry protests of many Members of Parliament, ministers and heads of departments who wanted and deserved more money than they got. I am sure we all recognize and understand that this is not a personal matter. (Laughter) These are the real sacrifices we must collectively bear to transform Uganda from poverty to prosperity. I, therefore, want to ask for forgiveness and understanding from so many people whose requests I have not been able to address adequately in this Budget. I ask you to be patient and remember that even in our homes we cannot provide for every single need and desire that our families may want. 

Mr Speaker, nine days ago was Martyrs Day. I returned from a long trip to find that my wife had arranged for Clemencia, a truly destitute widow from my village, to come to Kampala for the first time in her life to participate in Martyrs Day events at Namugongo. When I talked to Clemencia, she was truly excited by her first visit to Kampala and Namugongo. When I inquired about life in the village, she informed me that although she owns a house, she has no land of her own to cultivate on. 

She also informed me that the price of salt and soap had doubled -(Laughter)- and that the road to our village was virtually impassable. She also mentioned that she has some close relatives whom she believes are sure to die of HIV/AIDS. When I asked about progress on Kabale – Kisoro road, which is being upgraded, she said it was as smooth as glass and the journey, which used to take one hour now takes 20 minutes. She was happy about that.

Mr Speaker, when I first met this lady, Clemencia, 15 years ago, I had then not yet personally experienced the pain and anguish of looking after an HIV/AIDS patient as she had. Later on, when I had to care for my late brother, Dr Livingstone Byarugaba, who was a Member of the Sixth Parliament, is when I discovered that I needed God to give me the courage to go on. Although this year was Clemencia’s first physical trip to Namugongo, I believe that in her spirit, she has visited it many times before. 

Mr Speaker, I dedicate this Budget to the millions -(Laughter)- of Ugandans, who like Clemencia, sacrifice their time, their love and their soul to help others and to somehow build a better future for all our children. Their work, their struggle, their courage and their life’s journey are in the footsteps of the Uganda Martyrs. Uganda is marching on and with the help of God we have the courage to go on and to be triumphant. (Applause) I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I beg to move. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my background professionally demands that I act on evidence. The evidence that I have collected since the minister started presenting his motion is that you have well received it. [Hon. Members: “Yeah”]  Therefore, on your behalf, it is my duty to thank you, honourable minister, for presenting apparently a balanced Budget. (Applause)

I had said that after the presentation of the Budget, we shall move to a motion that had earlier been moved but as I said in my communication, constitutionally, it is the duty of the President to present what the minister has done and has done it in as far as I am concerned. But present here, we have His Excellency, the Vice President. It is perfectly in order to invite His Excellency, the Vice President, to put a final seal to what the minister has presented to us and then we shall move to the next item on the Order Paper.

5.10
THE VICE PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Mr Speaker, Your Lordship the Chief Justice, the Deputy Speaker, the Prime Minister and your deputies, the Vice Chairman of NRM, your excellencies the ambassadors and the high commissioners, honourable ministers, and my colleagues, Members of Parliament; let me begin by commending the Budget as presented by the Minister of Finance. 

This Budget is pro-people -(Applause)- and pro-rural development and it is a focused Budget. It is very clear now that the Uganda economy has grown, is growing and it will grow better. The real GDP growth of 8.9 percent must have been achieved by financial discipline and I want to thank the minister for the discipline in the economic sector.

This year’s Budget, 70 percent of the budget is being financed from domestic revenue. (Applause) There is no wonder we may become an African tiger. Thank you, Mr Minister of Finance.

Allow me now to read a message from His Excellency, the President, who is right now in the USA but he wanted this particular message to be read and I will read it:

“I greet you all. Unfortunately, I could not be with you today because of the Commonwealth meeting that took place on the 9th and 10th June 2008 in London and an engagement in the USA thereafter. However, I have discussed with the Minister of Finance about all the issues, including the prioritised use of resources as captured in my State of the Nation Address on the 5 June 2008. 

According to our rich experience in peace and in war, it is always better to focus rather than scattering resources all over the place. It is not a good strategy to be everywhere but have no impact anywhere. As Mao Tse-tung said, it is better to cut off one finger of the enemy completely than to merely injure all the ten. The ten injured fingers will heal and the enemy will remain with all his fingers to your detriment. However, if you cut one off completely, he will never recover it. 

In this case, the enemies are the challenges of our development we face. By decisively dealing with one challenge or cluster them, we shall be better off than, as already said, scattering our resources over all sectors but having no impact anywhere. 

By decisively dealing with the defence in 2002, when we deducted 23 percent from all sectors and added the resources so mastered to defence, we now have peace. As a consequence of that peace, tourism is growing, investments are increasing, IDPs are going home, etcetera. 

By focusing resources on CHOGM, not only did we expand infrastructure in Kampala but we also dealt a death blow to the bad image of Uganda’s past. Those who did not know Uganda then now know it well. That knowledge has got positive implications for the inward flow of investment. The principal therefore of focusing which has served us well in the past is again the cornerstone of this Budget. 

Emphasis is on energy, Karuma Hydro Electricity Dam, and electricity transmission, roads - Katuna, Malaba, Busia and the manifesto roads, defence, some aspects of Police, industrialisation in the form of industrial parks in many towns of Uganda and the scientific innovation in the form of banana flour project, the juice processing project, etcetera. And the last one is the human resource development through education and health.

All the other sectors are attended to but emphasis is given to the above six areas. 

It is, therefore, my wish that you also support this focused orientation in the resource distribution. Later, we shall deal with other pressing priorities like the human resource within our public sector which we should be dealing with later after we have increased out tax base. I thank you and wish you a good time for the Budget.” (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Your Excellency. Before we proceed with the other item on the Order Paper, it has been drawn to my attention, the tragic news of the demise of two ministers from the Republic of Kenya who perished in a crash. I think it is appropriate to observe a moment of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember we said the motion which was moved by hon. Dombo should come after the Budget has been presented. The Budget has now been completed. I believe the motion was clear. Is there anybody against the motion? Maybe we get a reaction from the Prime Minister.

5.20
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, having carried out consultations, Government accepts setting up this select committee. (Applause) It will be a basis for defining the problem correctly and therefore prescribing the right cure. I thank you. (Applause)

5.21
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I stand to acknowledge and thank the Leader of Government Business for coming in to soothe the feelings and emotions of Members of Parliament. We are lucky in this country that the Police leadership is one of the smartest since independence. 

Mr Speaker, we would have expected the conduct of the same, under the same leadership to flow down to the bottom at the practical level. Nonetheless, the events that were witnessed by all of us -(Interjections)- were shocking to all the dignified Members and indeed it is my prayer and I really hope the Members that are making their concerns known and their emotions, will one day not be affronted by the most undignified manner, not only to an individual, but also an attack to the institution of Parliament. 

And that is why I want this to go down as a pointer that we do expect a lot as Parliament, that we look forward not only to the abuse of individual Members but to restore the sanity of Parliament, to restore the sanity of the institutions of this country. Short of that, honourable members, this country will not proceed, shall not do well when the arms of Government are undermining one another by overzealous activities that deserve no credit at all, that are undignified. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to end by thanking the Leader of Government Business once again and I do look forward to an effective select committee to investigate in depth so that the shame that has been poured on this institution can never happen again. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question on the motion moved by hon. Dombo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. With this we come to the end of today’s business, but as I said on 5 June 2008 when the President made a State of the Nation address, this kind of ceremony has three corners. We started in the parade yard, we are here, now we are going to the gardens. Think about it. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

NATIONAL ANTHEM (One verse)

(The House rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 June 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)



