Wednesday, 14 June 2006

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I hope you had very successful programmes for the Heroes’ Day and for the State of the Nation Address day.  

As I indicated earlier, you will be scrutinising the accountability that His Excellency the President gave in the State of the Nation Address some time after the induction week, which will be next week. 

On your behalf, I received this flag from ABETO. It advocates tolerance, peace, respect, appreciation and co-existence. I thought this was the appropriate time to receive it. It is not the colour of the flag but what is there that is important. In the new system, which we are determined to ensure succeeds, it will be necessary for you to follow those pillars. I think that following those pillars we shall be able to have peace in Northern Uganda. 

Those of you who were Members of the Seventh Parliament very well know that we enacted the Amnesty law. The Amnesty Act was intended to attract those who are causing problems to come home, but if it was to succeed, people among whom these people are going to live must be tolerant and forgiving. Otherwise, if you do not forgive – it is not easy to forgive because you find somebody who cut somebody’s nose or ear coming back - but if you have to establish peace I think we have to follow these four pillars, which are exhibited on the flag that I received on your behalf this morning. 

We shall arrange to place it in a prominent place so that we are always reminded of the intention. [Hon. Members: “Put it in the Chamber.”] Maybe outside. I do not think we shall put it in here. It will be prominently placed to enable you look at these four pillars so that you remember that we need tolerance. I am sure if we tolerate each other despite our different views, we shall be able to succeed. Thank you very much.  

2.38
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I seek your permission to make a statement on an issue of national importance. I wish to state to the House that for the last three weeks the security situation in Usuk County, which I represent, as well as the neighbouring counties of Teso, have experienced an increasing wave of insecurity. Our neighbours from Bokora County have worsened this insecurity. The nature of the problem has now become very complicated. This is because it is now a question of daily cattle thefts to the extent that the population is absolutely in utter panic. 

Despite the above, the response on the ground by government has not been adequate. Just for purposes of statistics, during last week alone the people of Usuk County lost up to about 78 head of cattle. You might wonder why that number should concern us; I want this House to remember that the people of Usuk County are majorly living in IDP camps. This means that the mere theft of one or two cows is totally devastating to the efforts of the people whom we represent.

I think the reason we as government exist is that we must uphold at all times the welfare of our people, especially the suffering people. It is therefore on this note that I feel this is a very important matter of concern on the Floor of the House. As a representative of the people, duty calls. When an issue of this nature happens, it should be taken seriously. 

We know that it is the interest of every government to address the question of welfare as I have already said. However, we as Members of Parliament occupy a very privileged position in that we use delegated power from our people. We should, therefore, as a House be seen to take decisions that ultimately support the welfare of our people. It is now known that the Government is very much interested in resettling the people who live in IDP camps.  

It is my conviction that if the question of security is not addressed not just in Usuk County but also in similar counties where such cases are happening, then the whole process of resettling our people will be put in jeopardy. Yet we know that government is going to spend not less than Shs 19 billion if the resettlement exercise is to succeed. I have already told this House that whereas the question of insecurity is not uniformly experienced in this country, other places of course have benefited by and large from government programmes. Unfortunately, these people we represent have not been able to benefit as much as they should. In this regard I want also to note that -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the problem in Usuk is increased raids from Karamoja. You want government to take immediate action. Is that not the point you are raising?

MR OLENY: Yes, Mr Speaker. I agree that is the position but I thought I should give more meat to the entire question of insecurity.  

In conclusion, therefore, I would like to state that Parliament should regulate the use of possession of firearms and ammunition. I acknowledge the Sixth Parliament, which passed a resolution on the disarmament of Karamoja. However, the disarmament has not been pushed to its logical conclusion. Therefore, that is the reason we have these lapses are happening now. 

I think we as government need to do more to bring this issue to a complete halt. His Excellency the President in his State of the Nation Address clearly brought this out. He said that for a very long time the use of illegal arms has been experienced in many parts of the country and more especially in the North and northeast. He emphasised that it must come to an end. Therefore, we should as Parliament be seen to enhance that position. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, I hope –(Interruption)

2.47
MS JESSICA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I start by appreciating the fact that government is on the ground in Karamoja region and it is executing the disarmament programme. However, there are some loopholes that have created a security situation in Teso in the districts of Katakwi and Amuria. For the last two weeks the situation has almost been explosive such that we do not even sleep at night due to the endless calls we receive about the Karimojong raids that have intensified in Katakwi and Amuria.  

I want to agree with my honourable colleague that government needs to put in place some other measures, in addition to those already being used. This is especially in as far as guarding the borders is concerned. We could deploy around the borders in order to facilitate the commanders on the ground. When I was there over the weekend I found out that the commanders are very demoralized. They were complaining that the soldiers, the ARROW boys, have not been paid for the last seven months. 

Mr Speaker, I am a representative of the people, and I have a weakness of speaking the truth. (Applause) If you went to Katakwi, which I represent, I tell the people about security for all even though the NRM manifesto talks of prosperity for all. I am also looking forward to a time when I will start telling my people about prosperity for all. The lawlessness in Karamoja has taken a very long time and yet the state is a very powerful institution. Being the security expert that I am, I know that the state can control the Karimojong warriors. I am not very proud to come and talk here about the Karimojong warriors. I should be talking about some other development things and fighting for better things. 

Mr Speaker, the most important thing is to know that the Government should work harder in the region of Teso IDP camps, which have been created by Karimojong warriors. When you talk about IDPs, you should not talk about IDPs of Northern Uganda only. We also have IDPs in Teso. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, this was not meant to be a general debate. It was for the Member to report what is happening in his area so that the Minister concerned takes action. This was not an item on the Order Paper. It was simply a matter of importance that a Member wanted to put on record so that steps are taken. I will ask the Leader of Government Business to say something about what has been reported.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of government I thank the honourable members for raising these concerns. I think it is legitimate that these concerns are raised on the Floor of this House. I would like to note that government has of course, as Members know, taken serious measures about insecurity in Teso and Karamoja. I pledge on behalf of government that the Minister responsible will make a statement on the measures government has put in place to curb insecurity in Teso and Karamoja and elsewhere in Uganda. The Minister will also brief Parliament on the measures government intends to use to control the problems that the honourable members from Teso have raised. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, but normally we expect that you give us a time frame. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, in two weeks.  

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas I appreciate the response that the honourable minister has offered to this House, I would like you to note that the matter raised by my colleagues from Katakwi District is a grave one. It has spilled over to Amuria District as well and we have received reports - by the way I am also the Chairperson of the Teso Parliamentary Group and I am well informed - of cattle theft in Kapelebyong and Obalang. As I speak now, people are trickling into Kumi. This is going to negate government plans to resettle the people of Teso.  

The two weeks that you have given the honourable minister mean that you do not recognise how urgent this matter is. I would like government to show this country and to demonstrate to the people of Teso that it cares for them. We have spoken and spoken, motions upon motions have been passed in this House, but we are still talking about Karamoja harassing Teso and other parts of this country that neighbour with it.  

MR ABURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a pity that raiding has resumed in Teso. However, I would like to inform the House and my honourable colleague that the Government has done something. The deployment of the UPDF on the border of Karamoja is really great. If you took an aircraft, you would realise that it is only a few Karimojong who sneak into Teso. Even these few only come on the market day when people are going for business, and they drive these cows stealthily inside Teso. They later make a U-turn to Karamoja. 

I would like my colleagues from Teso to know that the disarmament programme, which was passed here and became operationalised in the Seventh Parliament, is still going on. It has even become very rough this time in Karamoja. It is no longer disarmament; it is now operational. In other words, most of the Karimojong are escaping from their homes because the recovery of the firearms has become rough. These are the few elements that are coming to distabilise your people.

Therefore, we should appreciate what the Government is doing. We appeal to you Members who are affected to contribute some ideas to us. Supposing you were an MP for Karamoja, what would you do? We want some wisdom also. Let us cooperate and work together.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I informed you, this was a mere report, which was being given for record so that the appropriate agencies of government take action. The Leader of Government Business has undertaken that a comprehensive response on this issue, including Kumi and that region as it is, will be given within two weeks. Let us not generate another debate over this.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I would like to offer simple advice to government. Even as we wait for the report, we have people suffering on the ground. Disarmament is taking place not in Teso but in Karamoja. The business that is going on in Karamoja should, therefore, not affect the people of Teso. 

I think government needs to revisit their strategy. It looks like the strategy that is being implemented at the moment is not correct. Teso needs protection. Otherwise, you will realise light weapons crossing into Teso and this could cause a bigger problem for the region. My advice is that as we wait for these two weeks or two months, something needs to be done on the ground for us to take government seriously. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

1. Gen. Aronda Nyakairima

THE SPEAKER: You are welcome. You are free to sit where you want to sit.  

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

3.03
THE CHAIRPERSON,COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Omwony Ojwok): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we were last here which was only last week, we had to the best of my recollection covered most of the issues contained in the report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. However, there was one particular issue that you, Mr Speaker, announced that we be given time as Parliament to consult so that we could try to harmonise the various positions and that was Rule 132, which is in the blue book.  This particular rule was dealing with the position of chairperson, the designation or election of the chairpersons of the oversight committees. That is the specific issue that we stood over. 

I am happy to report now that some consultations have taken place and as a result a proposal has come to the committee from the party in government.  But because the committee did not have sufficient time to consider this particular proposal, I feel it appropriate that the matter be proposed by the side that has actually brought this, and we can consider it. 

In other words, I am not at this stage in position to commit the entire Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline although the spirit of the proposals may not actually run counter to what the committee had earlier on considered. So, I am requesting that we allow the NRM side to make the necessary proposals for consideration of this House.

3.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP, (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. After consultations with the various stakeholders, there are some amendments we would like to move as government. But I would like to seek your guidance, because there are some consequential amendments, on whether I should move them now or it will be later. I have something on Rule 123 yet we are considering.

THE SPEAKER: You mean there will be consequential amendments with the amendments you are trying to propose?

MRS KABAKUMBA: Yes.  

THE SPEAKER: If they are there, you first start with the amendments you want to effect then you say there is a consequential amendment on this and the other.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On rule 132, we propose that we substitute sub-rule 6 and 7 in the committee report with the following: “(6) The party organisation in government shall designate the chairperson and deputy chairperson of each standing committee of Parliament.
(7) Without prejudice to sub-rule 6, standing committees on Public Accounts, Local Government Accounts, Government Assurances and Commissions, Statutory Authorities and state enterprises shall be chaired and deputised by members designated by the official opposition party or organisation.”

Two, we want to add a new sub-rule 8 as follows:
“(8) Members designated under this rule shall be announced by the Speaker in Parliament and accordingly assume their respective membership or offices.”  I beg to move, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Leader of Opposition, do you have anything to say?

MRS KABAKUMBA: The justification is to put into effect implications of the multiparty politics dispensation.

3.08
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When Rule 132 was stayed over, it was for the reason that there was disagreement as to the exact wording of sub-rule 7.  Our primary objection was an attempt by our colleagues on the government side to provide to members our responsibility. During the course of this dialogue there seemed to have been confusion on the side of the opposition. We have had time to dialogue within the opposition on this matter. We are happy to report that the opposition side has accepted the responsibilities as provided for in the law.  

Accordingly, therefore, the proposal in (7) that the chairperson and deputy chairperson shall be designated by the official opposition is accepted by all our members who sit on the opposition side. As we said at that time when there was anxiety, we are responsible for all our members on the opposition side and accordingly the responsibility of assigning duties to members of the opposition, whether belonging to parties or as independents, is entirely ours. When the names come, you will find that we have exercised that responsibility with utmost prudence and a sense of duty to this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I put the question to the proposed amendments by hon. Kabakumba.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, before I can proceed with other amendments, there is another member I understand who had not taken his oath but who wants to participate in the proceedings of the House and is entitled to. Let him take the oath so that he joins us and we benefit from his wisdom. Let him access the Chambers.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

 The Oaths were administered to:
 
1. Mr Eriya Kategaya.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kategaya, you are most welcome to the Eighth Parliament.  

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The last time we met, the Rt.hon. Prime Minister was sworn in. I stood on behalf of my honourable colleagues to welcome into this House the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and all the ministers. There was an exception to the list of those who should have been here and this exception was the Rt. hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, my good friend, Eriya Kategaya. I would like to start by welcoming him to the House. (Applause)  

There has been a lot of politics around the appointment of the Rt. hon. Eriya Kategaya with whom we had worked very closely on many matters -(Laughter)- since he has assumed new responsibilities, I would like on behalf of my colleagues, generally the opposition and particularly FDC to wish him well in his new assignment -(Applause)- I sent a small team to escort the Rt. hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and to formerly hand him over to Government- (Laughter)- that mission has been accomplished and I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of Opposition. You have used words “working closely with him”. I expect all members on both sides to work closely and with this we shall succeed. 

MRS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, on Rule 158 as proposed in the draft rules in the blue book and in the committee report, we would like to replace it as follows: 
i) 	“158(1) each Sessional committee shall consist of 20 members selected from among Members of Parliament. 
ii) 	In the selection of Members of sessional committees, the parties or organisations represented in Parliament shall designate through the whips membership to the committee on the basis of the party or organisation representation in the House.
iii) 	Unless otherwise provided in these rules and so far as reasonably practicable, the overall membership of the committees shall reflect proportional membership in the House taking into consideration the numeric strength of the parties or organisations and the interest of the Independent Members.
iv) 	Independent Members shall apply to the Clerk to join committees of their choice and the Speaker shall accordingly ensure that the members join the committees of their choice. 
v) 	Parties or organisations shall have powers to withdraw and locate members from individual committees.
vi) 	The party or organisation in government shall designate the chairperson and the deputy chairperson of each Sessional committee provided that no active Member of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces shall be designated Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.
vii)	 Members designated under this rule shall be announced by the Speaker in Parliament and accordingly assume their respective membership or offices.” I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from the honourable Leader of Opposition.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I pointed out earlier on the critical bone of contention was what we agreed upon. The consequential amendments in our view do not change the practice. We had a debate within ourselves and people were saying that designating chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of various positions undermines democracy. But I had opportunity to listen to my colleagues when they presented and we know that for democracy to work in a multiparty system, internal party cohesion is critical. 

Therefore, this provision if used stupidly by any party, the party pays. But if used objectively, everybody benefits. But it is critical that the party must have mechanisms to ensure that there is internal cohesion. In that regard, inspite of individual objections by members on this side, I would like to state that we support the amendments as proposed -(Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am not here in any way to contradict my boss, the Leader of Opposition, but I want to seek your legal guidance in relation to two provisions of our Constitution. 

The first concerns the democratic principles under the national objectives on page 22. Democratic principles (i) and (ii) if I may read verbatim, (i) says, “The state shall be based on democratic principles which empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own governance.” 

The most important one is (ii) which states that: “All people of Uganda shall have access to leadership positions at all levels, subject to this Constitution.” Unfortunately, I have not carried the Political Organisations Act.

Mr Speaker, this culture of designating - of having a few people sit and come to read to the whole Parliament that this is the person we want to chair this committee, I do not know how it would go on in relation to the provisions of the Constitution I have read. I do not see designation by saying, Odonga Otto should be Chairman of Committee of Defence and Internal affairs. I do not see that being democratic. I seek your guidance.

Secondly, I do not know if you have reached that stage. I heard the Chief Whip of the government saying Members of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces should chair the committees of defence and internal affairs.

HON. MEMBERS: No, no.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am glad you have rejected -(Interruption)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Rt. honourable Speaker, for the records, I will repeat number six for clarity. “The party organisation in Parliament shall designate the chairperson and deputy chairperson of each sessional committee provided that no active Member of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces shall be designated chairperson or deputy chairperson of the committee on defence and internal affairs.”

THE SPEAKER: On your point of inquiry, hon. Otto, we should realise that this Parliament and last Parliament are not the same. The last Parliament was under the Movement political system and people were here on merit. 

In the last Parliament, we did not have an institution called the whip; people decided issues on their merit. You may say you were more free then than you are now. Now, it is under a multiparty system and you are expected to be disciplined- I am not saying you as an individual, but all of us here -(Laughter)- in the way we conduct our business, we have to be disciplined. 

There may be a time when the whip or leadership of the party say, “free vote” that is when you will be freed to vote as you want. Otherwise you will be subjected to a party discipline. Now that there is a party discipline, the party machinery will work on this section. 

When in their house, I do not go in their house and find out whether they have practiced democracy or not, I just assume that they have practiced democracy. And therefore, if the party structures have agreed democratically, who are we to say no when we are encouraging a multiparty system of governance. (Applause) 

Therefore, if this was decided democratically and there are no queries - maybe there are queries on your side because as I see, the Leader of Opposition has spoken on your behalf and, therefore, there should not be something that would indicate a dissent from what he has said. That is the discipline –(Applause)- and therefore (Interruption)

MR KAWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to get clarification from the Chief Whip about independents on their committees. The language used suggests that they apply to the Speaker to be put on a certain committee and the Speaker instructs that they go to the committee of their choice. It sounds like the Speaker has to put them on a committee of their choice. I just wanted to be clarified.

THE SPEAKER: Where practical –(Interruption)

MR KAWANGA: I think so. Something like that -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Where practical because you see -(Interruption)

MR KAWANGA: Yes, otherwise –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We may say this when the committee is full. That is why I had suggested that in indicating the committee you want to serve on, you do not indicate only one and say I am interested in this one because you may find that that is over subscribed to. You indicate the preference, say about four and the Speaker will be able to place you in one of the four. 

It is important that independents also are taken care of. Because, first of all, they are 37; they are duly representatives of the people, so we shall ensure that although each is here on his own, still we will take care of their interest. I put a question on – did I put the question?

MRS KABAKUMBA: Not yet. For the records, I concede to the suggestion by hon. Kawanga that “where possible you may ensure they go to the committees of their choice”.

THE SPEAKER: So, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Rt hon. Speaker, Rule 165, we suggest that sub-rule (1) be deleted. This one is in the existing rules as a consequential amendment. The justification for this and really for Rule158 is that the designation is the indication of the final results from the functioning of the parties or organisations. It is a process. It is not intended to negate the democratic practices, which I expected from the internal arrangements of the respective parties or organisations. 

The amendments are therefore intended to broaden the scope of the participation of the parties or organisations’ stakeholders. Further more, this will also enable respective parties or organisations to carefully consider all their interests in electing or choosing their leadership to the committees. I beg to move, Rt. hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.

3.17
The Opposition Chief whip (Mr Kassiano Wadri, FDC):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank you for the advice you have given. The truth of the matter is that we are in a multi-party Parliament and the parties have to be in charge and therefore, this provision was in contradiction to what we had already agreed on and I concur with the suggestion to delete the consequential amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.18
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Rule 190, we suggest in the blue book, to substitute sub rules (1) and (2) as follows: Rule 190: (1) Every committee except committees where specific assignments are made, to which a matter is referred shall report to the House within 45 days. If a committee finds itself unable to complete any investigations, inquiry or other matter referred to it within the period provided in sub rule (1), the Committee may seek extra time from Parliament.

We insert a new sub rule (3) to read as follows, and renumber sub rule 3 and 4, as sub rule 4 and 5: “Where extra time is not granted or upon expiry of extra time granted under sub rule (2), the House shall proceed to deal with the matter in question without any further delay.” 

The justification is that this is intended to create flexibility in handling the business of the House by committees and also to have the leadership of the committees fully accountable to the work of their committees. I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, one of the problems that really led to a delay in passing and agreeing on the accountability committees and how they should be led - because a complaint kept coming informally that during the last Parliament, certain Bills or certain issues that went before committees were deliberately delayed. 

If I stood up here and said that this rule is not good, anybody would stand up and suggest that we intend to use our rights and presence in Parliament to delay anything.  In the committees that we are responsible for, we shall expedite our activities, justify where we think the time we had was inadequate, and I believe that Parliament will in its wisdom appreciate our reasons and give extra time. 

So from our perspective, this amendment does not impinge on our rights and responsibilities and we have no grounds to object to it and we therefore, support it. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I have a similar amendment, but slightly different, because Rule 190 is referring to the general business. But we would like a consequential amendment for Bills that are referred to committees. That is, Rule 123 in the blue book. Substitute and recast sub rule (2) with the following: (i)“If a committee finds itself unable to complete consideration of any Bill referred to it within the period approved in sub rule (1), the committee may seek extra time from Parliament.

We would like to add sub rule (3) as follows: “Where extra time is not granted or upon expiry of the extra time granted under sub rule (2), the House shall proceed to deal with the Bill without any further delay.”  The justification, Mr Speaker, is the same.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  I think the principle is the same. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER:  Does this dispose off the business we have? Now, what is the motion?

3.24
MR OMWONY OJWOK (NRM, Labwor County, Kotido): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Rules of Procedure of Parliament be adopted as amended.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Now, we have been referring to a blue book and the other book; is it not easier to say that the Rules as drafted subject to the amendment as passed be adopted as our rules, so that there is a point of reference? The reference is in the blue book.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr. Speaker, I fully adopt the formulation -(Laughter)- I can repeat it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the summary is this, I think when you are sworn in, you are given a blue book, which had existing Rules of Procedure and which had amendments. We set up a committee, which looked at this blue book, and they proposed certain other amendments, which amendments we have now passed. 

So now, the point of reference to our rules is in that blue book subject to the amendments, which we have passed. Therefore, you will be reading the amendments, which we have passed in that blue book and then they will be the rules.  Of course they will be printed; we shall have fair copies, but for our purposes, we adopt them as the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I now put the question.

(Question put and greed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have now adopted the Rules of Procedure- (Applause)

Now, there was an item on the Order Paper about constituting the committees as provided in these rules, but I do not know whether its practically on how to constitute these rules or we constitute them later, because tomorrow we are having the budget and on Monday to Friday we shall have induction course for members. I think that will be sufficient time for the concerned officials of both sides to bring out the names for secretarial work, so that the next time we come, the names will be ready. But I do not know whether it is possible – what do you think Leader Opposition?

PROF LATIGO: Well, Mr Speaker, I entirely concur with you, because the rules have just been made. What we expect of Parliament is that the clerk will write to us indicating to us the committees that are under our responsibility and the membership that we must provide to various committees. 

On the basis of that we will put in place a list of our members participating in the various committees and therefore, we obviously need that time. Although I have seen our colleagues on the other side jump the gun and we have seen in the papers; they have already published membership. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Are there contrary views?

MR EKANYA: I need some guidance, Mr Speaker. I am not speaking on this matter, but I am seeking guidance from your Chair. The principle of multi-party democracy in the commonwealth informs us that there should be internal democracies within the parties so that there is consensus and discipline and this requires time. So, if that requires time, we need to find out from you that if the opposition side needed two or three days to consult on a matter, will Parliament not sit, just to enable us consult? For example, yesterday some of us came here thinking that Parliament was supposed to sit but we learnt that we could not proceed just because our brothers of the NRM side were having caucus consults. 

So, I would like to find out from you –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think I will explain this.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, this is pertinent because an issue may rise on the Floor of the House and the Members of one side may need to consult. So, we need to avoid questions of indiscipline and disagreement with our leader, and this is for both sides, even on the NRM side, a critical issue may come up. I hope that the principle and practice of multi-party democracy will prevail where parties are allowed to sit in a caucus to resolve their matters, and this is my prayer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the facts are not related to the circumstances. I think you are talking about yesterday. Yes, we had planned to have a sitting in the afternoon to consider this matter. From the papers, I understand there was a caucus of one of the parties in this House but that was not the cause of Parliament not sitting in the afternoon. 

As you know, our Constitution requires the President to present the Budget estimates to Parliament latest 15th of June and the practice is that, there are consultations among the partner states of the East African Community so that their budgets are read on the same day. But there was a shift in the dates of reading the Budget, and you know that the Executive produces the Budget. But I was notified yesterday after I had issued the Order Paper that the Executive needed to sit and polish the Budget, which they are going to read to you tomorrow. 

If they did not polish the Budget, they would have difficulties of complying with the time provided in the Constitution, and I agreed with the Executive to polish up the Budget. So, it was not the caucus of the party, it was the meeting of the frontbench, which we required to transact business that compelled us not to proceed with the business. So, the question that the party is consulting or making caucuses is an internal matter and will not prevent me from going on with my work, that I promise. 
 
3.45
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Sometime back, the finance department in Parliament requested Members to furnish them with email address to ease other communication matters. But Members have kept checking the email addresses –(Laughter)-and there is no communication yet the weather patterns in the House are becoming very unpredictable. We wonder whether you could shed some light on that matter?

THE SPEAKER: I am going to investigate with my technical staff to see what has been the problem not to send the emails to you. But something will definitely be done soon because if you are expecting an email and it does not come, you get embarrassment. So please, be assured, something is being done. I am going to consult with them and I will let you know tomorrow.

3.47
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before we wound up the Seventh Parliament, the issue was raised regarding power supply in the parliamentary building. We had requested that this should be one of the strategic places where there should be constant power supply to enable us conduct business and I remember, hon. Hilary Onek, together with hon. John Byabagambi, as professional engineers, had proposed that it would be possible to tap from the direct line to plot 1 Nakasero to join Parliament so that our work is not tampered with and government had promised to get back to Parliament –(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: If we look for a permanent line in this House, then we are not going to appreciate the problem of power. Let us go through the problem to be able to appreciate this problem on behalf of our voters.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that should not be the reason because Members of parliament do not sleep here, their families are not here. So, you cannot fail to appreciate the problem simply because we have light here. There could be another reason but that should not be the reason. Anyway, I know that was raised sometime ago. There was an attack in the papers about you people thinking about that scheme, that you are selfish and this and the other. 

However, attempts have been made to give us power whenever we appeal to them. I have made appeals and those people of Umeme have complied; that is why we have been sitting in the morning hours. Let us continue doing this until we get a permanent solution not only to us but also to everybody else. We shall find a better way of operating, honourable members.

3.49
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification and guidance from your Chair while drawing my authority from Rule 54(1) of the Rules of Procedure that we have just adopted and passed as the Eighth Parliament. There has been a silent but ongoing concern, and this is also coupled with an article that appeared in The New Vision with a headline: “Speaker Cannot Make MPs Speak.” 

There has been an ongoing concern, most especially from Members of Parliament who are here for the first time like me and other colleagues, about the way business in this House is being conducted. Despite the fact that we are practising multi-party politics, to some extent the mighty eyes seem to be catching those who have been around and those who are new and are acquainted. 

Mr Speaker, it is my humble appeal, on behalf of Members of Parliament representing the youth, we are five but we represent over six million –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is proceeding to inform this august House that the eye of the Speaker does not catch either him, the youths or others but he is on the Floor talking already. Is the Member in order to continue asserting that the eye of the Speaker does not catch any Member –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable Member for the Youth, records in the Gazette indicate that the female Member of the youth is the only independent Member of Parliament. According to the Gazette your representation is through NRM. As I indicated to you before, you will have to work within the structures of NRM.  

3.52
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  With your indulgence, I would like to take this opportunity to inform you and the House, in particular the Minister of Education and Sports, that there is a very serious national problem in Lira. In the exercise of resettlement, all the learning centres in Lira have been closed and a total of about 10,000 pupils are not going to school. I wonder whether the Minister of Education is aware about this exercise. I do not know how this exercise has been carried out because I understand all the teachers who were in these nine learning centres in Lira were ordered not to go to classrooms so that the parents could go to their respective homes.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, these people we are talking about have no homes at the moment. These pupils who are not going to school in future will be a very serious problem. So, it is now a matter of national importance and I would like it to be addressed immediately. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the Minister of Education is here. I do not know whether she is in position to answer. 

3.53
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Member for bringing up that issue. On Monday, last week, I was in the Northern region trying to get the information on the ground about what requires to be done. 

For the issue he has raised, I beg permission to take some time to find out exactly what is going on. We have got district education officers and inspectors in each district and their role is to give information on the ground. If there is any intervention required from the centre, they should communicate. I will find out the details and report accordingly. We can meet with the Member and get further details on the issue. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition to what the honourable Minister of Education has said, I would like to add the following. The working of a multi-party system is based on trust. It is not the basis of a multi-party system for an opposition all the time to embarrass or to ambush the government. We are looking for services for the people. If there is a crisis like the honourable member has talked about, I think you do not wait to raise it at the end of a session like we have had. You get in touch with the minister so that action can be taken and then you can inform the House. Before coming here the minister could have sent a message to the relevant officials in the district for action. But when you come here and you are looking for a platform, I think it is not the way we can serve our people. We may serve parties but we will not serve the people.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Mr Speaker, there was a very serious matter on security which was raised by a Member belonging to the government side. As much as the matter could have been publicized politically, and you could hear our Members supporting, the honourable minister did not help the House while standing up to castigate that process. I would like the House to know that hon. Angiro, following procedures of the multi-party Parliament, discussed the matter with me and I gave him consent to raise it on the Floor. He did not breach any rules of the House.

THE SPEAKER: It is okay that the Minister of Education has now taken up the matter. At the same time, if you have a problem and maybe Parliament is not sitting, there is no reason why you do not contact the minister responsible to help. Without prejudice to you raising it here, you can always go to the ministers. The offices of ministers must be open and, therefore, you should report this and then see what can happen.  

As we conclude, I have the following announcement. Hon. Kabushenga invites Members of Parliament who are assisting and are interested in shareholders of East African University to come for a meeting today after the plenary in the Members’ Lounge. So, you are invited for a meeting on this subject –now I am advised that the meeting is put off because there is another meeting of Buganda caucus. So, I cancel the earlier announcement.  

With this we come to the end of today’s business, the House is adjourned until tomorrow. I think you have the programme for tomorrow; we shall convene to the venue earlier than normally we do so that we receive the Budget for 2006/07. Thank you very much, honourable members. The time is in your programme, which you have received. 

(The House rose at 4.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 June 2006 at 12.00 p.m.) 








