Thursday, 11 June 2009 

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Serena Conference Center, Kampala.

PRAYERS  

The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.

(The House was called to order.) 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the First Lady, hon. Janet Museveni, Your Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the traditional leaders, the Vice-Chairman of the National Resistance Movement, former leaders, leaders of political parties, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, hon. Ministers, the Judges and Justices of the Courts of Judicature, Your excellencies High Commissioners, Ambassadors and members of the diplomatic corps, Members of Parliament, Member for Mukono County North inclusive, religious leaders, heads of the Public Service, members of the Constitutional Commission, Permanent Secretaries, the Chief-of–Defence Forces, the Inspector-General of Police, the Commissioner-General of Prisons, the Governor Bank of Uganda, the Chairmen LC V, distinguished invited guests, patriotic members of the business community, ladies and gentlemen.(Applause)

PROCLAMATION

WHEREAS under Article 155(1) of the Constitution, His Excellency the President is required to cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year not later that the fifth day before the commencement of the financial year estimates of revenue and expenditure of government for the next financial year;

AND WHEREAS at the commencement of this session, on the 4th day of June 2009, the Speaker proclaimed that the second sitting of Parliament shall take place on 11th June 2009;

AND WHEREAS it is expedient that Parliament sits at the premises of Kampala Serena Conference Center to enable the delivery of the Budget;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, in exercise of powers conferred upon me by the Constitution, the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Act, and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, hereby proclaim the said Kampala Serena Conference Center, including its fore courtyard and gardens –(Applause)– to be the precincts of Parliament for purposes of enabling the President to deliver the said estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2009/10 to Parliament on  the 11th day of June 2009, at 2.00 p.m.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala;
11th June 2009.”

I now wish to invite the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who the President has assigned this responsibility to make her presentation to Parliament. Hon. Minister! (Applause)

2.30
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): In the name of God, the most gracious and most merciful.

Mweshemewa Raisi, Mweshemewa Maama Janet Museveni, Mweshemewa Speaker wa Bunge –(Applause)– Justice Wazili, Weshemewa wa Bunge, wa biibi na wa bwana. (Applause) Mweshemewa Speaker wa Bunge, I wish to move that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of:

a)	The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Financial Year 2008/2009; and
b) 	Proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for Financial Year 2009/2010.

Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the President is required to lay before Parliament, estimates of revenue and expenditure for the ensuing financial year. I am accordingly performing this duty, with pleasure, on behalf of His Excellency, the President, to whom I am grateful for giving me the opportunity to do so. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, the overall performance I am reporting today shows the robustness of our economy, and proof that the NRM Government’s policy and priority interventions have continued to be sound. Uganda’s economy in the Financial Year 2008/09 registered a robust real growth of 7.0 percent, compared to the average sub-Saharan growth rate of 2.4 percent. This is remarkable performance in spite of the global financial and economic crises that have adversely affected several economies both in the developed and developing world. The performance shows that Uganda’s economy remains resilient, and confirms the benefits of sound economic management.

Therefore the theme for this year’s budget is: “Enhancing Strategic Interventions to Improve Business Climate and Revitalize Production to Achieve Prosperity for all.” 

Accordingly, government will scale up investments in physical infrastructure including transport and communications, and will enhance access and availability of reliable and affordable energy. This will provide the private sector with enabling climate to increase production and seize opportunities in the domestic and regional markets.

Uganda has a comparative advantage in food production and has the potential of becoming the food basket of the region. It is also well placed as a trading hub. While demand for Ugandan exports might reduce among industrialized countries, this will be compensated for by high demand from the region. Government will address constraints to accessing regional markets and supply constraints in the domestic economy. Increasing production and promoting regional trade will therefore be our focus both in the short and long term.

Mr Speaker, the thrust of the Financial Year 2009/10 Budget is, therefore, based on the following policy initiatives:

i. 	Increasing agricultural productivity and production;
ii. 	Increasing agro-processing and value addition;
iii. Increasing investment in infrastructure and human resource development to facilitate regional trade and economic growth.

This is the essence of government’s stimulus that will lead to increased production, and stimulate regional trade while making the private sector more competitive to take advantage of regional demand. These measures will consequently result in the creation of jobs to address the high unemployment in the country.

STRUCTURE OF THE BUDGET STATEMENT

Mr Speaker, allow me to briefly outline the structure of the budget statement I am presenting today. I will:

i.	First, highlight the Economic and Fiscal Performance in the Financial Year 2008/09 and present the economic outlook for the Financial Year 2009/10.

ii.	 Second, outline some of the emerging trends in the domestic, regional and international economy.

iii.	Third, focus on the Budget Strategy and Priorities that underpin the Financial Year 2009/10; and

iv.	Finally, announce the Proposed Taxation Measures and the way forward.

ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE AND FORECAST

Sir, domestic and regional demand for our goods and services remains buoyant following the relative peace and security countrywide and in the region.

Agricultural Sector Performance

In the agricultural sector, national output from cash and food crops, livestock, forestry and fishing activities grew by 2.6 percent in the Financial Year 2008/09 compared to an increase of 1.3 percent in the previous year. This was mainly due to the improved performance of food crops which grew by 2.9 percent. 

Agricultural sector output though positive, was affected by floods, and continued prevalence of pests and disease, in various parts of the country.

Improved performance of the food crop sub-sector during the year is attributed largely to adequate rainfall in the country, and the return of peace to Northern Uganda. The high market prices of food crops and increased demand also influenced increased production of food crops during the first crop season of 2009. The share contribution of agriculture, forestry and fishing to the total real GDP was 15.1 percent in Financial Year 2008/09. This represents a structural transformation of the economy as the relative share of agriculture to GDP has reduced as GDP has continued to increase.

Industrial Sector Performance

Mr Speaker, the industrial sector comprises of the manufacturing and the construction sub-sectors. The sector is estimated to have grown by 3.8 percent in the Financial Year 2008/09, as compared to 9.1 percent growth registered in the previous year. The reduction in the growth rate arose mainly due to slower growth of the construction sub-sector.

Services Sector Performance

Sir, the share of the services sector in real GDP increased to 51.2 percent in Financial Year 2008/09 from 50.0 percent in the previous year. The sector registered real growth of 9.4 percent in Financial Year 2008/09 compared to 10.2 percent growth in the previous financial year. Growth was recorded in the wholesale and retail trade sub-sector at 7.6 percent compared to 14.7 percent last financial; transport and communications, which grew at 20.0 percent compared 21.3 percent last financial year and real estate development grew by 7.0 percent. Details can be found in the Background to the Budget.

Economic Growth Outlook

Mr Speaker, the economy is projected to grow by about 6.0 percent in the coming financial year. Although this growth is lower than the average growth in the last five years, it remains impressive when compared to other economies in the region and beyond.

This is a clear indication of the strength of the NRM Government’s economic management and the confidence it has created among local and foreign investors. Uganda’s economy was consequently rated B+ by the Standard and Poor’s rating agency, which represents an improvement from the B rating in 2007 recorded by the Fitch rating agency.

Developments in the Monetary and External Sectors

Inflation

With respect to inflation, recent global economic developments, events in the region and increased regional demand for food, have led to high inflation. Some inflation is imported from our major trading partners in the region and beyond. Consequently we have experienced prolonged increases in domestic prices since mid-2008. However, inflationary pressures have begun to subside and we expect this trend to continue in the medium term. Domestic prices have declined from 14.8 percent in February 2009 to 12.4 percent in May 2009. It is expected that falling global commodity prices will contribute to a decline in import prices, which will consequently lead to decrease in inflation. In the medium term, domestic prices are expected to decline as government’s interventions to address supply-side constraints in agriculture and infrastructure take root.

Exchange Rate

The Uganda shilling vis-à-vis the US Dollar has depreciated from a monthly average of Shs 1,645 per US dollar in September 2008 to Shs 2,216 per US Dollar as at May 2009, representing a 34.7 percent decline in the shillings value. This is because our terms of trade which reflect the relative price of our imports with respect to our exports, have deteriorated. At the same time foreign investors in government securities have withdrawn from the economy.

There has also been marked decline in remittances from Ugandans working abroad and transfers to Non-Governmental Organisations. The depreciation of the exchange rate has not been restricted to the Uganda Shilling alone, as the United States dollar has strengthened vis-à-vis other currencies, including major ones, as well.

Despite the depreciation of the Uganda Shilling, the NRM Government remains committed to a market determined exchange rate policy and liberalized current account and capital account. Government will maintain prudent monetary and fiscal policies to ensure overall macroeconomic stability.

Balance of Payments

Sir, the overall balance of payments position at the end of December 2008 deteriorated due to reasons I have already mentioned. The decline would have been worse if it had not been for the increase in both international and regional exports. I am happy to report that 70 percent of the exports recorded from Uganda to the region are manufactured goods. Details of this can be found in the Background to the Budget. Government will continue to encourage regional exports as a way of improving the balance of payments.

Financial Sector Developments

Interest Rate Developments

Mr Speaker, in the financial year ending, there was an increase in nominal average lending interest rates which peaked at 23.2 percent in August 2008, but declined subsequently to 18.9 percent in January 2009. Nominal average lending rates have since increased to 20.9 percent during March 2009, as corporate demand for locally available loanable funds increased following a switch by companies which were previously borrowing from abroad to the domestic banking system. This is due to difficulties in accessing credit in the developed countries. This switch to the domestic banking system is further evidence that the Uganda Banking system is sound and robust.

Banking Sector Developments

While the high cost of capital as a result of high interest rates remains a challenge, we have held discussions with the banks and we will continue with this dialogue to see how best interest rates can be brought down. In spite of the ongoing global financial crisis, we have observed continued improvement in deposit mobilisation of the banking system. Over the first three quarters of the Financial Year 2008/09, time and savings deposits grew by 24.6 percent and demand deposits grew by 17.5 percent.

The expansion of the banking sector is expected to create competition in the market and result in lower interest rates. To address some of the risks which contribute to the cost of borrowing, government put in place the Credit Reference Bureau to enable the banks identify their customers for tracking and easy credit rating.

Sir, to further strengthen the integrity of the financial sector, I wish to report that the Anti-money Laundering draft Bill has been finalized and will soon be presented to Parliament for consideration.

Development in Capital Markets and Retirement Benefits

Capital markets have expanded since the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) was put in place. There are currently five firms licensed to carry out the functions of broker/dealer and investment advisor and eight firms or individuals licensed as investment advisors. Six (6) local equities are currently listed on the Uganda Securities Exchange (USE) and four (4) are cross-border listings. In addition, there are two listed and approved corporate bonds.

Sir, in February 2008 the pensions’ regulatory framework was approved by Cabinet. The Retirement Benefit Regulatory Authority Bill was finalized recently and will be presented to Parliament for consideration in the next fiscal year.

A diversified institutional investor base will be partly realized through the liberalization of the pension sector which will come in the next phase of the pension reform. The introduction of the central depository system will help fortify Uganda’s capital markets.

Fiscal Performance and Domestic Revenue Outlook

Mr Speaker, the Financial Year 2008/09 Budget was Shs 6.16 trillion, which was financed by domestic revenue amounting to Shs 4.29 trillion and external support of Shs 1.87 trillion. The budget expenditures performed at 99.8 percent.

The performance of resources that financed the budget was attributed to higher than programmed donor inflows. Domestic revenue performed well, even though at a lower level than targeted recording a shortfall of Shs. 151 billion against a target of Shs 3.85 trillion. This is attributed mainly to the underperformance of indirect taxes and VAT on local goods and services. Non-tax revenues showed significant improvement compared to the previous year by 42 percent.

This year, government held its first mid-term budget review with the objective of assessing the linkage between resources availed to spending agencies and the targeted outputs. This review established some of the problems related to the implementation of government programmes. To address this challenge, in preparation for the Financial Year 2009/10 Budget, emphasis has been put on having in place work plans, including procurement and recruitment plans, which will now form the basis for the disbursement of funds.

The Medium Term Development Framework

Sir, the Five Year National Development Plan (NDP) is being prepared within the framework of the National Vision, which was endorsed by Cabinet in July 2007. It sets out the priority policies and investments for government for the next five years for achieving growth, employment and prosperity. This plan identifies key linkages between sectors and points out key areas where synergies between sectors can be maximized to support social and economic development. The plan will be ready by end September 2009, in time to feed into the Financial Year 2010/11 Budget preparation process, which starts in October 2009.

THE BUDGET STRATEGY AND PRIORITIES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/10

Mr Speaker, the strategic objective of the Financial Year 2009/10 Budget is enhancing growth, development and social transformation, in an environment of macro-economic stability.

This strategy also consolidates the NRM Government’s socio-economic development goals envisioned in the NRM Manifesto of the 2006 elections.

The NRM Government views the current global economic challenges as an opportunity for Uganda. This will require clarity of where Uganda’s competitive advantage lies, developing innovative ways of harnessing these opportunities by applying the most effective interventions to achieve those aspirations. This will involve concerted effort at removing the constraints to growth and socio-economic development at all levels.

Sir, it is clear that Uganda’s immediate comparative advantage lies in developing agriculture into a modern, efficient and highly productive sector. Modernising agriculture is crucial for structural transformation of the economy due to its contribution to employment, food security, foreign exchange earnings, agro-processing and tax revenue. 

In the medium to long term, the development of efficient industrial capacity that meets both domestic regional and international needs will be promoted. The development of a highly productive agricultural sector will require efficient infrastructure including all-weather feeder roads, national trunk roads, rail and waterways, together with the provision of reliable and affordable energy, and a skilled and healthy workforce.

Mr Speaker, arising from the development vision I have alluded to, an important facet of the budget strategy pertains to the respective roles of the private and public sectors in the Uganda economy. While it is an agreed principle that government will continue to allow prices to be market determined, the main focus of the public sector will be the provision of high quality public goods that facilitate the private sector.

Given the limited resources, government must allocate its resources to those priorities that will enable it to produce public goods that will stimulate economic growth and development. In accordance with the 2006 Manifesto, the NRM Government will therefore increase investment in infrastructure, scale up interventions in agriculture and ensure that quality public services, which are responsive to the needs of the business community, including good governance and the development of the human resource, are delivered.

BUDGET PRIORITIES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/10

Mr Speaker, let me reiterate that the Financial Year 2009/10 budget strategy places emphasis on aligning our expenditures to the priorities, which best support the Vision of the NRM Government. I would now like to highlight the major priorities of the Financial Year 2009/10 Budget. 

This year’s Background to the Budget, which has already been distributed to honourable members, contains extensive review of the performance of different sectors during the Financial Year 2008/09. I will therefore restrict my statement to the major priorities for the forthcoming financial year.

The priority areas in Financial Year 2009/10 Budget are therefore the following:

i)	Agricultural Production and Value Addition;
ii)	Transport Infrastructure;
iii)	Energy Infrastructure;
iv)	Human Development; and
v)	Peace, Security and Good Governance.

Agricultural Production and Value Addition
Sir, according to the recent National Service Delivery Survey, approximately four out of every five households in Uganda are involved in agricultural activities.

The majority of the subsistence farmers lack the requisite skills and knowledge, including suitable inputs, and consequently realize low yields. The development of the agricultural sector is, therefore, key for poverty reduction, economic growth and social transformation. The biggest constraints to agricultural production include crop pests and livestock diseases, lack of suitable inputs, appropriate technologies to increase productivity, the vagaries of weather and limited access to financial and extension services.

The sector priorities for next financial year will consist of:

i)	Measures to improve agricultural production and productivity;
ii)	Focus on addressing crop pests and livestock diseases;
iii)	The provision of high yielding seeds and drought resistant planting materials and improved breeding stock;
iv)	Support to agricultural mechanization, irrigation, and agro-processing; and
v)	Enforcement of quarantines and other regulatory measure to curb the spread of disease.

To this effect, over 600,000 heads of cattle will be vaccinated against Foot and Mouth Disease, and over 500,000 against Lumpy Skin Disease. Twenty million doses for vaccination against Newcastle Disease in poultry will also be procured. 

In addition, 25 new disease resistant crop varieties that increase agricultural productivity, value addition, food and environmental safety, will be generated though the National Agricultural Research System.

Multiplication of 20 million disease resistant coffee seedlings for distribution to farmers will be undertaken and cotton farmers in 46 districts will be provided with 4,000 metric tonnes of high quality cotton planting seed.

In order to increase the availability of water for production, the construction of the following bulk water facilities will be provided:

i)	Kawomeri dam in Abim; Leye, Olelpec and Olamia dams in Apac; Kagango dam in Isingiro; Mayikalo dam in Sembabule; Obwongyerero and Kagamba Valley Tanks in Isingiro.

ii)	Extension of a piped water supply system in Sembabule District and construction of 10,000 m3 Valley Tank in Sembabule District will be completed.

The above interventions will create an additional 4.4 Million Cubic Metres (MCM) storage capacity of water for production bringing the national storage capacity to total of 35 Million Cubic Metres (MCM) representing 55 percent of the projected national demand for Water for Production.

In addition, emphasis will be placed on consolidation of the agricultural extension service through the restructured National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS), integrating it with the provision of inputs to farmers. Government will provide integrated support to six farmers per parish, a total of 30,000 farmers annually, whose farms will serve as demonstration sites to others and support them to graduate into commercial farmers. 

In addition, government will continue to provide improved technologies and inputs to farmers who are organized into farmer groups currently engaged in subsistence or semi-commercial agriculture. I am providing an additional Shs 36 billion to NAADS to undertake this initiative.

Sir, government will also make deliberate efforts to support medium to large scale commercial farmers, as well as institute measures to enhance the capacity for value addition of agro-processors. A critical constraint to this category of farmers and agro-processors is the low level of mechanization, which consequently limits their productivity. I am therefore, proposing to establish an agricultural credit facility to be accessed by eligible farmers and agro-processors through commercial banks and the Uganda Development Bank, for financing the acquisition of agricultural and agro-processing machinery and equipment.

The agricultural credit facility, amounting to Shs 30 billion in the Financial Year 2009/10, will be matched by an equivalent amount by participating financial and credit institutions, and will be lent to borrowers at interest rates not exceeding 10 percent per annum for a maximum period of eight years. This will create a revolving pool of loanable funds amounting to Shs 60 billion in the first year, to support agricultural mechanization and machinery and equipment for agro-processing. At this juncture, I would like to thank the commercial banks for their positive response to the proposal.

A further US $7 million has been mobilized through the Uganda Development Bank to support agricultural lending. I will be also be seeking for a further US $100 million loan from the Islamic Development Bank to finance provision of Water for Production.

Mr Speaker, increased agricultural production is essential for economic transformation and prosperity for all and has strong multiplier effects because of its linkage with other sectors. It also has a number of positive effects. First, an increase in production addresses high food prices by increasing supply. 

Secondly, increased production would result in increased exports mainly to the region, where Uganda has a niche. 

Third, increased production addresses food security. Uganda, therefore, has an opportunity to be the bread basket of East Africa and take a share of world food export. Its geographical location, lower cost of labour, favourable soils and weather conditions all equate to massive opportunity for increased revenues and job creation. I commend this programme to the honourable members for your un-fledging support.

Communications Infrastructure

Road Transport

Mr Speaker, in the Financial Year 2008/09, government embarked on an ambitious programme to scale up interventions in the road sector. An additional US $600 million was earmarked over three financial years to develop the Northern Transport Corridor from the Malaba/Busia border post to Katuna. This programme will be maintained in the medium term in order to remove the constraints to transportation, thereby lowering the costs of doing business and generating higher economic growth.

As stated by His Excellency the President in the State of Nation Address, government will continue its emphasis on development and maintenance of the transport infrastructure. I wish to highlight the road projects that will be undertaken which include the following:

i)	Continuation of the upgrading to tarmac of a total of 322 kilometres of the national road network. These include Soroti-Dokolo-Lira, Kabale-Kisoro-Kyanika and Kampala-Gayaza-Zirobwe highways.

ii)	The rehabilitation of a total of 395 kilometres of national roads network has also commenced. These include Mbarara-Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna; Kampala–Mukono and Lira-Kamdini highways.

iii)	Upgrading to tarmac of a further 1,061 kilometres of the national road network in the Financial Year 2009/10. These include Fort-Portal–Bundibugyo-Lamia; Kapchorwa-Suam; Muyembe-Namalu-Moroto; Kafu-Karuma-Gulu; Jinja-Kamuli; Tororo-Mbale-Soroti and Gulu-Atiak-Bibia highways.

iv)	The design for upgrading to tarmac, of a further 2,050 kilometres of the national road network will also be undertaken in Financial Year 2009/10. These roads include Mbale-Mwagale-Lwakhakha; Olwiyo-Gulu-Kitgum; Hoima-Kaiso-Tonya; Musita-Lumino-Busia; and Moroto-Kotido roads.

Mr Speaker, this ambitious road development programme will ease communication and promote economic growth and development in the short to medium term. I am allocating an additional Shs 80 billion next financial year to undertake this programme, on top of the Shs 1.1 trillion allocated in this financial year.

Substantial resources will also be committed to road maintenance through the operationalisation of the Road Fund, whose board has recently been inaugurated. A total of Shs 268 billion will be allocated to the Fund from which districts, urban authorities and the Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) will seek funding, to undertake road maintenance, upon presentation of acceptable work plans to the Secretariat.

Rail and Water Transport

Mr Speaker, Uganda being a land-locked country, it requires the development of an efficient railway system. This will not only ensure cheaper access to the sea but also relieve the pressure on the existing road network. During Financial Year 2009/10, government will prioritize investment in this critical sub-sector.

Government will work together with the Private Sector to develop the Southern Route. In addition ferries will be procured for Bukungu-Agwara; Kumi-Katakwi, Lwampanga-Namasale; and Obongi-Maji-Larok.

Information and Communication Technology

The main priority, in the Financial Year 2009/10, will be the completion of the inter-connectivity of the entire country. This project involves laying of over 1500 km of optical fibre to link most major towns in the country including Luwero, Nakasongola, Masindi, Hoima, Kyenjojo, Fort Portal, Mbale, Tororo, Busia, Kumi, Soroti, Kaberamaido, Lira, Apac and Gulu. It will also provide connectivity to the national backbone of Kenya for linkage to the East African sub-marine cable. This will enhance the efficiency in transfer of information, and consequently lower the cost of doing business.

Energy Infrastructure

In the Energy sector, emphasis will be placed on the completion of the Bujagali Power Project with the first generation unit of 50 megawatts, planned by December 2010 and embark on the construction of the 700 megawatts Karuma Power Project as soon as the design is completed. 

Using the Energy Fund, government will fund the Karuma Power Project through a Public-Private Partnership arrangement. I am providing and additional Shs 85 billion to the Energy Fund, which was first established in Financial Year 2006/07.

In the intervening period before Bujagali Hydropower project is on-stream, government will continue to mitigate the power shortfall through support to thermal power generation. Construction of the Ishasha (6 megawatts) and Buseruka (10 megawatts) mini-hydropower projects will continue, while Bugoye (13 megawatts), Mpanga (8 megawatts) and Nyagak (3.3 megawatts) will be completed.

With respect to electricity transmission infrastructure, in the Financial Year 2008/09 government embarked on construction of the 100 kilometer 220 KV Bujagali-Kawanda Interconnection project; the Mbarara–Nkenda 132 KV line; Kaiso Tonya–Fort-Portal–Nkenda 132 KV line; Opuyo–Moroto 132 KV line; Karuma–Kawanda 400 KV line; Karuma–Oluiyo 132 KV line; Tororo–Opuyo–Lira 132 KV line; and Mutundwe–Entebbe 132 KV line. A 33 KV distribution line will be constructed from Mbale–Nakapiripirit-Moroto.

Other interconnection projects to be undertaken in the Financial Year 2009/10 include the Bujagali–Tororo–Lessos (Kenya) 220 KV line; Mbarara–Mirama–Birembo (in Rwanda) 220 KV line; Masaka–Mwanza (Tanzania) 220 KV line; Nkenda–Beni–Rutshuru and Beni–Bunia 220 KV (DRC). These projects will have a lasting impact in addressing the energy supply needs in the country, while at the same time addressing energy pricing issues.

Rural Electrification

Sir, government will also intensify the implementation of the Rural electrification programme by implementing the second phase of Energy for Rural Transformation (ERT). An additional Shs 5 billion is being allocated to augment the Shs 2 billion for this project to complete the ongoing grid extensions. Construction of additional power lines will be completed in the districts of Kasese (Bwera area), Bushenyi (Kyambura–Katerera), Pader, Abim, Kaberamaido, Kyenjojo, Bundibugyo, Isingiro, Ntungamo, Rakai, Masaka, Rukungiri, Hoima, Kibaale, Iganga, Bugiri, Kamuli, Tororo, Gulu, Oyam and the important rural industries like, Muzizi, and Buhweju Tea Factories, Bukakata and Kasensero Fish Factories. Furthermore, new projects covering the districts of Ibanda, Kiruhura, Soroti, Katakwi, Amuria, Oyam, Isingiro, Gulu, Mukono, Kitgum, Masindi, Buliisa, Sembabule, Nebbi, Zombo, Koboko, Terego–Maracha, and Yumbe, will be implemented in the Financial Year 2009/10.

Petroleum Development

Mr Speaker, estimates of the country’s petroleum reserves have grown from 300 million barrels of oil in 2006 when the first discovery was made, to 2 billion barrels of oil at the end of 2008/09. 

Additional wells are expected to be drilled during 2009/2010 in the entire Albertine Graben and exploration drilling is planned to commence in Arua, Nebbi and Kanungu districts.

Other Measures to Improve the Business Climate

Sir, in June 2008 government started the first phase of infrastructure development of the Kampala Industrial and Business Park at Namanve. To date, a portion of the Business Park road network has been opened and this phase will be completed by August 2009. The next phase of the major works, including construction of the power sub-station and, the flyover across Jinja Road, is expected to be completed by 2011.

In FY 2009/10, government will continue to improve the business environment by enacting the following critical commercial laws:

a) 	The Counterfeit law,
b) 	The Mortgage law,
c) 	The Free Zones law,
d) 	The Company law,
e) 	The Insolvency law,
f) 	The Capital Markets Amendments law; and
g) 	Amendment of the Investment Code.

In next financial year government will enhance support to the Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) to become a centre of excellence in value addition, business incubation, innovation, product and process design, and technology transfer. The focus on the industrial development strategy continues to call for the creation of agro-processing facilities which will form foundation for the industrialization of Uganda.

The government has continued the reform of the Land Registry by enhancing computerization of its operation. The preparation for computerization of the Mailo Land Registry for Kampala, Mpigi and Wakiso districts totaling to almost 160,000 titles has been completed. Further, computerization in the Kampala Mailo Office, which has led to improvements in service delivery that have been observed so far, will be speeded up and rolled out to more districts in the Financial Year 2009/10.

Nationwide Land Registry rehabilitation and computerization will be implemented under the Land Information System (LIS) commencing in the first quarter of the Financial Year 2009/10. This will follow the completion of the renovation and construction of 13 District Land Offices in July 2009, with another 8 District Land Offices being completed in the course of financial year. The comprehensive review and revision of all land related laws to support efficient and effective delivery of land services will be completed by October 2009.

Tourism is one of the fastest growing service sectors of the economy and one of the main foreign exchange earners for the country. A five year national strategic plan for positioning Uganda as a competitive tourist destination is under preparation to take advantage of Uganda’s diverse rich flora and fauna. I have provided an additional Shs 2 billion for tourism promotion and development.

Human Resource Development

Education

Mr Speaker, in the education sector, the Financial Year 2009/10 Budget will consolidate the achievements so far gained under Universal Primary and Secondary Education programmes.

The major focus under the education sector next financial year will be to improve the quality of schooling through the construction, provision of instructional materials and improving inspection. Sanitation in primary schools has been identified as one of the most urgent needs that require replacement of latrines. Over 90 percent of the Shs 21.7 billion School Facilities Grant allocation will be spent on latrine construction next financial year in needy primary schools and the balance on teachers’ houses. 

Government will also intensify school inspection to check on teacher absenteeism and school fires, and continue monitoring the number of children in schools, among others. To consolidate the gains of UPE, the Education Act 2008, which makes primary education compulsory, will be vigorously enforced.

As part of monitoring the implementation of these programmes, a census of children under these programmes will be undertaken.

With respect to secondary education, the USE programme will roll-out to cover senior four and complete the cycle for lower secondary education. Government will provide sufficient resources to cover the anticipated increase in USE enrollment. In addition, construction of seed secondary schools and construction of additional classrooms in over enrolled schools will be undertaken.

To increase access and enhance the quality of secondary education, government has secured US $80 million and US $150 million from the Africa Development Bank and the World Bank respectively, for continuation of the school construction programme and the provision of instructional materials, over the medium term.

The above funding will support the construction of 6,200 new classrooms in over 500 schools which are over-enrolled; 2,300 five stance latrines; 405 multi-purpose science rooms and 144 libraries. The projects will also support completion of 1,900 half-built classrooms in another 400 schools, and purchase 1.7 million textbooks and 6,300 science kits for both government and private schools. 

The funding from the African Development Bank will also be used for the expansion of 12 schools, construction of 15 new ones and rehabilitation of 42 traditional secondary schools and two Business Technical Vocational Education Training (BTVET) institutions, turning them into centers of excellence.

Mr Speaker, to address the problems of youth unemployment in addition to other efforts, the Financial Year 2009/10 Budget will commence a medium term programme to provide skills that will make Ugandan youth more employable. This will be done through provision of vocational skills to the youth who are trainable. For a start, I am allocating an additional Shs 3 billion to the Directorate of Industrial Training to implement the programme.

Health

Malaria is still responsible for more illness and death than any other single disease. The focus for the Financial Year 2009/10 Budget will, therefore, be on improving the health infrastructure and provision of drugs especially for HIV/AIDS and Malaria. The targets of Malaria control will be:
i. To increase in the proportion of households having at least one insecticide treated mosquito nets from the current 15 to 85 percent by 2010;
ii. To achieve 100 percent coverage of Indoor Residual spraying in districts which are prone to Malaria;
iii. Improve the proportion of children under 5 years receiving correct treatment for malaria from 71 percent to 80 percent; and
iv. Increase the proportion of expectant mothers receiving the second dose of Intermittent Preventive treatment to 85 percent, for those attending ante-natal care services.

Other areas of focus will include the improvement of human resource management and preventive measures for non-communicable diseases. To improve the management of the Mulago National Referral Hospital we are proposing to develop a public-private partnership.

Water

With respect to safe water supply, government will provide new safe water, including deep wells (boreholes), rainwater harvesting units, protected springs, piped water and gravity flow schemes, to an additional 880,000 people in rural areas. This will raise coverage to 65 percent by the end of the Financial Year 2009/10.

Rural water supply targets to be achieved in the Financial Year 2009/10 include:
i. 	Construction of nine water supply schemes in rural growth centres namely: Kikandwa, Bugade, Zirobwe, Ntwetwe, Ongino, Bukholi, Iki-Iki, Karenga and Kanyampanga.

ii. 	Construction of Bukwo Large Gravity Flow Scheme
iii. 	Design of five rural piped water supply schemes in Rakai, Ntoroko, Isingiro, Bwambara and Bugangari.

Mr Speaker, using the Conditional Grant mechanism a further 325 springs will be protected; 1,054 shallow wells and 654 deep wells will be fitted with hand pumps; 883 rain water harvesting tanks will be provided; 312 tap stands will be installed; 18 Valley Tanks will be constructed and 580 water facilities will be rehabilitated.

With respect to urban water supply, an additional 600,000 people in the urban areas (including small towns) will be provided with new facilities by the end of the Financial Year 2009/10 through the following actions:

i)	Completing construction works in the fourteen (14) towns namely: Kibiito, Rwimi, Nyakigumba, Kasunganyanja, Rubona, Hima, Omungyenyi, Rweinamura/Kakukuru, Rugendabara, Kabale/Kicuucu, Ibanda, Bugoye, Kabira and Mutara.

ii)	Preparing and embarking on construction of 22 small towns water supply schemes namely: Kinuuka, Kasagama, Buyamba, Lwebitakuli, Kikagati, Nyarubungo, Kabula, Kaija, Kyabi, Kahunge, Lwemiyaga, Rwere, Kyempene, Nyeihanga, Nyakashaka, Rwenkobwa, Butare/Mashonga, Mabona, Gaziga, Kashenyi/Nyanama, Kyeirumba and Kinoni.

iii)	Completing the construction of water supply schemes in Magale, Masafu, Sipi, Namutumba, Nakaseke, Kagadi, Butaleja, Tirinyi and Kisoko.

iv)	Installing 20,000 new water connections and construction of 143 kilometers of water mains in Gulu Municipality by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC).

v)	Completing the water supply systems in Koboko, Oyam, Amolatar, Amuria and expansion of Moroto Municipality and Bukedea water supply systems.

vi)	Expanding piped water supply schemes in Kachumbala, Wakiso, Luwero, Wobulenzi, Kalisizo and Rukungiri.

Peace, Security and Good Governance

Reconstruction of Conflict Ravaged Areas

Sir, with the return to peace nationwide, I am proposing to institute special programmes for the Rwenzori Region and Luwero Triangle, in addition to the Peace, Recovery and Development Programme (PRDP) for Northern Uganda.

Northern Uganda Reconstruction

The government designed the Northern Uganda Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) as an affirmative action for consolidation of peace and the reconstruction of Northern Uganda at an estimated cost of Shs 1.1 trillion over three years.

The plan is to be financed by both government and donors and its full-scale implementation is programmed to start next financial year. The priority activities under the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) such as roads, schools, health, water, Police and local administration facilities will receive additional resources next financial year. I have directly allocated Shs 100 billion for the PRDP. In addition, we are providing funds for establishing a fruit processing plant in Soroti and for new universities and raods in the North.

Luwero Triangle and Rwenzori Rehabilitation

In order to ensure that all war torn areas throughout the country are assisted in the process of economic and social development, preparatory support for reconstruction and development of war ravaged areas will be provided to the Luwero Triangle and Rwenzori areas. I have allocated Shs 10 billion for commencement of the reconstruction and rehabilitation of these two regions.

Security

Uganda’s peace and security has been upheld with the security sector providing the necessary defence of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda. This has been done through building adequate and credible defence capability to address both internal and external threats. Government has also ensured the furtherance of our African and International obligations. The Uganda Peoples Defence Force (UPDF) has continued its pursuit to build a modern and professional force particularly in the area of defence management. In the Financial Year 2009/10, the Uganda Peoples Defence Force (UPDF), as a people’s army, will continue to balance its core mission of delivering national security and contributing to national development. For instance the Engineering Brigade, will effectively engage in construction work.

Justice, Law and Order

Mr Speaker, the government continues to emphasise the rule of law, and the maintenance of law and order. Government has now established the Anti-Corruption and War Crime Courts in the Judiciary, and is working on the transitional justice system to cater for the post conflict, including a law to match the International Criminal Court. I have provided an additional Shs 10.7 billion for recruitment of judges.

General Elections

Sir, government has formulated a Roadmap for the 2010/11 general elections commencing in the financial year ending. This will minimize the burden of financing the elections in one year and allow the Electoral Commission adequate time to effectively and efficiently implement all planned activities in time.

There is now need to finalise the appropriate legislation to enable the smooth running of the elections. I have provided an additional Shs 31 billion to the Electoral Commission to embark on implementation of the Roadmap for successful conduct of the 2011 general elections.

Public Sector Management

As a measure to enhance the performance of the public sector, the following measures are critical to achieve value for money in the public sector:

i)	Work Plans and Reporting: with effect from Financial Year 2009/10, each government department will have to prepare comprehensive work plans specifying the location of activities and outputs by sub-county. In addition, accounting officers, particularly those in the health and education sectors and service commissions, will have to ensure that all recruitment of staff is concluded during the first quarter of the financial year. This is to ensure that staff are in position to implement government programmes in time and utilize resources that have been allocated to the agencies.

ii)	Accountability: next financial year we will hold quarterly presidential public sector round table meetings to review progress in implementation of departmental activities, including the verification of output by geographical location by the various stakeholders.

iii)	Integrated Financial Management System: In furtherance of the objective to have an improved public financial management, government will continue the roll-out of the computerized Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) to an additional 50 sites. In addition, government has implemented the Straight Through Processing (STP) of salaries, ensuring the direct transfer of salaries to bank accounts of public servants, thereby reducing delays previously experienced. This system will be extended to all payments from government institutions by July 2010. This system will eliminate fraudulent behaviour that has been cited in the payment of pensions; and also improve liquidity management, eliminate unpaid cheques, fraud and reduce business transaction costs.

iv)	Pay and Pension Reform: I have provided a modest pay increase amounting to 5 percent, for public servants to mitigate against the increase in the cost of living.

Public–Private Sector Partnerships

Mr Speaker, the government in its pursuit to achieve high and sustainable rates of economic growth and prosperity for all Ugandans, has the responsibility to create conducive environment for investment and growth. In recognition of the importance of providing infrastructure and other public services through public private partnerships (PPPs), in the 2007/08 Budget Speech, government committed itself to implementing several projects using the PPP modality.

Accordingly, next financial year we will finalise the PPP framework and transform the Privatisation Unit into a PPP Unit to co-ordinate the implementation of the PPP framework. Thereafter, I will present the relevant bill to Parliament.

Resource Envelope for Financial Year 2009/10

Mr Speaker, the resource envelope for Financial Year 2009/10 amounts to Shs 7,333.7 billion. This is composed of the following components: Shs 4,800.2 billion is financing from domestic revenues comprising tax revenues of Shs 4,474 billion, non-tax revenue of Shs 72.4 billion and loan repayments from government parastatals of Shs 39 billion. Financing from the domestic banking system amounts to Shs 213.9 billion.

The difference of Shs 2,533.5 billion is support from external sources including both budget support and project aid.

In Financial Year 2009/10 domestic resources including financing from the banking system constitute approximately 67 percent of the financing needs of the budget, while donor support comprises 32.6 percent.

Constitutional, Self-Accounting Bodies

The budgetary proposals of the following self accounting bodies have been submitted in compliance with Article 155(2) of the Constitution.

i)	Courts of Judicature
ii)	Electoral Commission
iii)	Inspectorate of Government
iv)	Parliamentary Commission
v)	Uganda Law Reform Commission
vi)	Uganda Human Rights Commission
vii)	Uganda Aids Commission
viii)	National Planning Authority
ix)	Office of the Auditor General

In accordance with Article 155(3) of the Constitution, government has made recommendations on these proposals. I hereby lay both the budgetary proposals and the recommendations of government before this august House, as required by the Constitution.

In order for me to submit a fully financed national Budget for your consideration in accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the budget provisions of these self-accounting bodies are in accordance with the resource envelope conveyed to them in the course of budget preparation, including the presentation of the National Budget Framework Paper to Parliament, in accordance with the Budget Act 2001.

Revenue and Tax Measures for the Financial Year 2009/10

Mr Speaker, taxation is a critical element in the financing of fundamental economic and social programmes necessary for economic transformation of the country. Much of the growth in revenue in the past has been on account of increases in duty and tax rates. However, in Financial Year 2009/10 there will be no increases in duty and tax rates, as a measure to stimulate the economy. Therefore, raising revenue/GDP ratio in FY 2009/10 will require big improvements in URA administration. Reforms at the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) are continuing with emphasis on strengthening management, developing better internal controls and introducing more integrated information systems. The fiscal year 2009/10 budget includes substantial additional funding to cater for systems development. 

Compliance remains a challenge, as we undertake reforms in tax administration. I urge all Ugandans to comply with their tax obligations. I commend those taxpayers who have regularly complied with their tax obligations.

Mr Speaker, I shall however, make adjustments in the tax system to stimulate the economy and to address environmental concerns. In addition, I will be making amendments to realign the Production Sharing Agreements in the Petroleum industry with the Income Tax Act. I will also highlight decisions reached with my Colleagues, the East African Community Finance Ministers in the context of the Customs Union.

VAT Act Amendments

I am proposing that donor-funded projects in agriculture, education and health sectors be VAT exempt and arrears written off. This is to ease the challenges associated with counterpart funding.

I am proposing to abolish the five percent rate applied on sale of houses and make house sales VAT exempt. I am also proposing to extend the policy of import duty and VAT exemption on construction materials for hotels, health and educational institutions for another one year. 

I am proposing that all lease transactions be VAT exempt for items that are VAT exempt. The details are contained in the VAT (Amendment) Bill.

Excise Duties

Currently Uganda imports malted barley equivalent to 25,000 metric tonnes at a cost of about US $50 million. Government has promoted growing of sorghum for beer production in Eastern Uganda through excise duty scheme and we see benefits out of this scheme. To further encourage value addition and barley growing in Kapchorwa, Kabale Kabarole and other parts of Uganda, I am proposing to reduce excise duty on beer produced, grown and malted in Uganda from 60 percent to 40 percent. There is no revenue loss out of this measure. The details are contained in the Excise Duty Tariff (Amendment) Bill.

Income Taxes

Agro-Processing

Sir, in the fiscal year now ending, government announced that to encourage production and processing of our agricultural products and to attract investments in this sector especially in rural areas incentives for persons engaged in agro-processing were provided.

In a bid to encourage value addition of our agricultural products I am proposing to extend this exemption to income arising out of new agro -processing investments, which commenced on 1st July 2008, from income tax. This incentive will be open to new investments throughout the country engaged in the processing of Uganda grown produce. The estimated cost of this stimulus is about Shs 15 billion. The details will be contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill.

Amendment of the Income Tax Act to cater for Petroleum Transactions

The amendments are of a technical nature intended to align the Income Tax Act and the Petroleum Production Sharing Agreements. The income Tax Act was enacted in 1997 when no petroleum discoveries had been made. Subsequently a number of Production Sharing Agreements have been concluded. Last fiscal year we amended the Income Tax Act to provide for oil taxation and is being expanded to further provide for taxation of this sector. There is no revenue loss out of these amendments. The details are contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill.

East Africa Community Pre-Budget Ministers of Finance Decisions

Mr Speaker, I wish to bring to your attention the decisions I reached with my colleagues during the EAC Pre-Budget Finance Ministers’ Meeting. These decisions touch on the full implementation of the Customs Union, entry of Burundi and Rwanda into the Customs Union and environment protection and measures to support the economy.

Customs Union

Sir, given that the fully fledged Customs Union will come into force in 2010, we decided to undertake comprehensive review on all key aspects of Customs Union, inter alia, administrative and legal framework of the Customs Union, the Common External Tariff (CET) and customs collection and elimination of tariff on intra-EAC trade. This review will be completed before December 2009.

Business Climate

Mr Speaker, in order to promote tourism in the region, import duty on specially designed tourist vehicles imported by licensed tour operators will be remitted. The details will be contained in the EAC Gazette.

Industrial Spare Parts

Sir, import duty on essential Industrial spare parts imported as replacement parts for use exclusively on industrial machinery classified in Chapters 84 and 85 of the EAC CET imported by registered manufacturers and not for resale or any other commercial purpose other than for replacement of worn out and obsolete parts of industrial machines will be remitted. The details will be contained in the EAC Gazette.

Machinery, Spares & Inputs for direct use in Oil, Gas and Geothermal Exploration

Duty on equipment and inputs excluding motor vehicles imported by a licensed company for direct and exclusive use in oil, gas or geothermal exploration and development upon recommendation by a competent authority of a partner state is being remitted. The details are contained in the EAC Gazette.

Dairy Sub-sector

Mr Speaker, in order to promote the dairy industry in the region, heat insulated milk tanks for dairy industry will be duty exempt under the 5th Schedule of the EAC Customs Act.

Television cameras, digital cameras and video camera recorders

To support the development of film industry I have decided that the import duty on film equipment be remitted to 0 percent. This will give incentives to the filming industry and also create employment for the youth in the region.

Transport of Goods

Sir, because of the importance transport plays in the value chain for business and in the current times of economic downturn the EAC Ministers further decided to grant remission of import duty from 25 percent and apply 10 percent for trucks of carrying capacity of 5 tonnes and above, for one year for Uganda, Tanzania and Rwanda.

EAC Ministers also agreed to grant remission of import duty on trucks of carrying capacity of over 20 tonnes from 25 percent and apply 0 percent for Uganda, Tanzania and Rwanda for one year.

These interventions will be reviewed at the next pre-budget meeting. Mr Speaker, I pray that the Business Community will take advantage of this relief to restock their fleet.

Tax Harmonisation Programme

As the EAC integration deepens through establishment of the common market, tax harmonisation becomes critical. In this regard, we decided that a study on tax harmonisation be undertaken. The study will include, inter alia, harmonisation of indirect taxes and incentives; finalisation of a code of conduct to avoid harmful tax competition; and development of convergence criteria.

Double Tax Agreement for EAC
Sir, the hitherto stalled EAC Double Taxation will be renegotiated and finalized taking into account withholding tax rates as an incentive to promote cross-border investments and entry of Burundi and Rwanda before December 2009.

Rwanda and Burundi Entry into Customs Union
Mr Speaker, Burundi and Rwanda are to join the Customs Union from 1st July 2009. In addition Rwanda has aligned her fiscal year to the EAC fiscal year with effect from 1st July 2009.

Colleagues, I would like you to note that Uganda’s goods will enter Rwanda and Burundi duty free with effect from 1st of July 2009, and vice versa.

Environmental Protection

Plastic bags

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, a total ban on plastic bags for conveyance of goods and liquid is being imposed in order to protect our environment. In addition excise duty of 120 percent will apply on other plastics. A moratorium of six months will be given to the general public as transition period during which persons will make arrange to find alternative packing materials that are environmental friendly.

A ban is being imposed on old computers, freezers and refrigerators. However, I am extending a three month moratorium to enable goods in transit and in bonded warehouses be cleared. We owe protection of our environment a duty and we cannot relax on this front. I seek your understanding that together, we safeguard our environment or else we shall pay an immense price in the future. The details are contained in the Finance Amendment Bill.

Report of Tax Expenditure for Financial Year 2007/08

Mr Speaker, Article 152(2) of the Constitution requires me to periodically report to Parliament on the exercise of powers conferred upon me by any law to waive or vary a tax imposed by that law. This is to report that this fiscal year, I have exercised powers conferred by the Income Tax Act and Value Added Tax Act and waived Shs 2,339,357,175.

Government has also paid Shs 12,842,033,793 for Non-Governmental Organisations with tax exemption clauses in their agreements, and private enterprises involved in the hotel sub-sector.

The East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill

Mr Speaker, I am proposing to amend the East African Development Bank Act to create immunity from judicial proceedings in partner states. The details are contained in the EABD (Amendment) Bill.

Ratification of Africa Exim Bank

Uganda is a founder member of Exim Bank originally with headquarters in Cairo, Egypt but currently in Nigeria. Member states are required by the Charter to have it ratified. In accordance with the Ratification Treaties Act, Mr Speaker, I am laying on the Table the Africa Exim Bank Charter to conclude the ratification process.

SCHEDULE OF INDEBTEDNESS

Mr Speaker, in accordance with the provision of Section 13(1) and (2) of the Budget Act 2001, I hereby lay before the House the provisional information on:

i)	Government’s total external indebtedness as at 1st March 2009;
ii)	Grants that government has received during Financial Year 2008/09; and 
iii)	Guarantees of loans to individual companies and statutory bodies.

I wish to report that government has not provided any guarantees in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

The details for the utilization of each loan and grant will be provided in the respective ministerial and government agencies policy statements. The institutions that received and utilized the funds should be able to provide the financial utilization, the actual implementation on the ground, and progress on the respective projects. Our poverty monitoring and assessment reports will provide additional information on the benefits of the funds, which were disbursed directly through the Consolidated Fund.

External Debt

As at end of May 2009, Uganda’s total debt stock stood at US $4 billion. This includes US $1.9 billion as loans disbursed, US $1.6 billion in loans currently contracted but yet to be disbursed, and approximately half a billion dollars in loan guarantees.

Mr Speaker, because of the increase in the debt stock, government is to uphold the recommendations in the December 2007 Debt Strategy so that external debt is sustainable in both the medium and the long term. External borrowing, therefore, shall be strictly limited to the following priority sectors: roads, energy, water, agriculture, education and health infrastructure. In addition, government will provide guarantees to private sector investments in infrastructure, and in particular for the power sector and transport investment projects. Government will limit borrowing as the first option to concessional sources.

External debt financing will continue to constitute an important part of budget financing as long as domestic revenues fall significantly short of expenditures and donor grants alone cannot meet the shortfall.

Domestic Arrears

Over the last three years, government has prioritized the clearance of domestic arrears. The arrears were constraining private sector services to government and budget provisions of up to Shs 729 billion for the three financial years ending 2008/09 have been provided. These efforts will continue until the problem is fully resolved. For next fiscal year, Shs. 76.1 billion has been provided for arrears payments.

Annexes

i)	The Medium Term Fiscal Framework Financial Year 2009/10 to 2013/14;
ii)	Summary of Estimates of Revenue for Financial Year 2008/09 and 2009/10;
iii)	Medium Term Expenditure Framework Financial Year
iv)	2008/09 to 2013/14;
v)	Summary of Statutory Charges on the Consolidated Fund, Financial Year 2009/10 to 2013/14.

CONCLUSION

Mr Speaker, I appeal to honourable members for support in order to ensure that strategic interventions proposed in this budget improve the business climate, harness regional trade and revitalize production for us to achieve prosperity for all Ugandans.

I wish to remind Ugandans that we celebrated Heroes’ Day two days ago, and we remembered and recognized our heroes. Unfortunately, many more heroes perished in the course of the struggle to liberate this country and I am sure their wish was for the people of Uganda to live peaceful and prosperous lives. The benefits all of us enjoy today are a result of their noble sacrifice. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I dedicate this budget to the gallant martyrs of the Luwero Triangle who selflessly contributed to the struggle to liberate this country. 

Mweshimiwa Spika wa Bbunge. Weshemewa wa Bbunge, nawomba kutoka hoja. Asante sana. (Applause) 

For the benefit of those who are not familiar or acquainted with the regional language, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President and hon. Members present, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, what has happened is that the honourable minister has carried out the assignment, which was plenty, given to her by the President under Article 155 (1).

Before we heard what the honourable minister had, we did not know what she had. But acting on the evidence that I have received while listening to her, I can say that you have approved what she has said; I have heard many approvals for the hours that she was presenting. Therefore, I am justified to say thank you very much, hon. Minister, for this seemingly friendly budget. (Applause)

But since the authority that assigned you this function is here, I think it is proper to allow His Excellency the President to comment or make remarks on what has been presented to us. (Applause)

4.18
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, his Lordship, the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition, hon. Ministers, hon. Members of Parliament, distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen.

You heard the Budget presented by the Minister of Finance on my behalf according to Article 155 of the 1995 Constitution. This Budget is indeed a very long way from our starting point in 1986. You remember then, we were only able to raise Shs 5 billion in form of taxes. And since the honourable minister used Swahili – “billioni tano peke yake ndizi tulikusanya 1986.”

We are now able, as you heard the minister saying, to raise Shs 4,474 billion for the coming financial year. (Applause) You know people who do not know where they came from cannot know where they are going -(Interjections)- I do not know. They may be around here. (Laughter) Indeed, this financial year which is ending this month, the global crisis notwithstanding, we were able to actually raise Shs 3,700 billion from the internally generated taxes. We had targeted Shs 3,850 billion for this financial year that is ending but we collected Shs 3,700 billion, which was quite good. This was indeed commendable bearing in mind the international economic situation as the minister pointed it out to you.

This financial year, the economy grew by 7 percent of GDP, the global crisis notwithstanding as I told you in the State of the Nation Address last week.  The size of the economy is now Shs 29.8 trillion or US $15.2 billion if you use the exchange rate method but if you use the purchasing power parity method, it is US $38.8 billion. This is now 8.4 times compared to the size of the economy in 1986. (Applause) 

Some years ago, only the economy of Kenya in East Africa was at US $12 billion where Uganda now is. Kenya now has gone slightly ahead, I do not know what the size is; we shall find out but a few years ago, only the economy of Kenya was at US $12 billion in size. Uganda’s GDP per capita is now US $440 instead of US $264 in 1986.

The NRM had a clear vision right from the bush days. Point number five of the NRM Ten Points Programme stated that our aim was to build an integrated self sustaining independent national economy. This meant transforming Uganda from a pre industrial to an industrial society; transforming Uganda from a third world country to a first world country. Initially, we had three problems in implementing this vision.

Number one, different eruptions of terrorism executed by those who thought that the NRM could be defeated by military or other unconstitutional means as well as cattle rustling in Karamoja. 

Number two, some confusion in prioritising the use of the scarce resources in order to execute this vision. Quite a number of actors failing to grasp what is primary and what is secondary.

Number three, depending on external funding for some of the core foundational programmes such as energy. These three were handicaps, our vision notwithstanding.

As you have heard from the Budget that has just been read by the Minister, these implementation disorientations and challenges have totally been transcended. Terrorism and lawlessness have been defeated and will not re-occur. (Applause) This has finally liberated the whole of the North and the North East of our country and the Rwenzori region from the demented traitors acting on behalf of internal criminals and external oppressors of black people as well as the indisciplined and spoilt cattle rustlers in Karamoja, the Pokot of Kenya, the Dinka of the Sudan and the Topotha of the Sudan.

As a consequence of defeating these confused groups, tourism and other economic activities are already booming in these areas. 

The challenge of the prioritisation is also well handled now. Because one of the big problems facing young countries like these ones is that the political class does not know what to do. They try this and that and then the technocrats are also inexperienced and so you end up with all sorts of confusions.

The Cabinet - these ministers who are here - after intensive discussions is now unanimous that you cannot build a house without first building a foundation. They are unanimous that the foundation comes before the walls and the roof. The mistakes occur when people try to build walls before finishing the foundation. Such a house cannot take off. 

What are the foundation elements of a modern economy? They are the following:

1.	Peace and security.
2.	Roads and railways.
3.	 Electricity. 
4.	Piped water at least in towns. Even if it is not everywhere but you should have piped water in towns because water is not only for drinking by human beings but also for factories.  
5.	A population which is educated and skilled
6.	And a market to buy what you produce.

These are the absolute minimum for modernisation as far as the physical factors are concerned. There are other elements that are important such as health, telecommunications, safe water in rural areas et cetera. However, the former, the ones I read first, are primary. Without securing those, the economy cannot sustainably develop and eventually transition to a modern economy.

We for instance now have 9 million telephones from 28,000 which were found here in 1986. But what will be the purpose of ringing somebody in Kitgum on a mobile phone and you say, “Hullo, hullo. Kopango? Eriyo ma ber?” And then you say, “I cannot arrive there because the road is bad.” Yes the telecommunications network is very good but physically the roads must also be very good. (Applause)

That is why it is very crucial to really be firm in the prioritisation because I hear all sorts of pressures. Some people want to increase the salaries of public servants or -(Interjections)- yes. I have no nugu against public servants getting higher salaries but that cannot come before the roads or before the energy. This is the prioritisation that we are talking about.

Indeed this problem of not properly prioritising plans has been the problem of much of black Africa; it is not only here in Uganda. Except for South Africa which generates 36,000 megawatts of electricity, all the black African countries, even those that have been peaceful all the time, have embarrassingly very low levels of electricity generation.

What is amazing is to see that even the so-called experts seem not to be aware of these handicaps. This is really worrying because you find people who do not think it is a problem. You find people talking about some little plan here and some little plan there. They are not aware that that is not how a modern world is supposed to be run and hence the so-called plans are ridiculously limited in target. 

Even South Africa which is generating 36,000 megawatts had power shortages recently. You can imagine. What does this mean? It means that the 60 megawatts we inherited in 1986 was laughable. That is what we found here. That little station at Jinja which we call Nalubaale now, the one on the left, the old one, had been built by the British in 1954 and it had ten turbines of 15 megawatts each. All the ten were supposed to be producing a total of 150 megawatts but in 1986 when we arrived here, I went there and only 4 of them were working. They were producing a total of 60 megawatts and we were selling 30 to Kenya. There was a long term agreement of selling 30 megawatts to Kenya. The people were not aware that there was anything wrong with that. 

What we did was to repair that old station and upgrade it so that instead of producing 150 megawatts it produces 180 megawatts. In 1986 the power produced in Uganda was 60 megawatts and you can see that definitely this was laughable. 

It means that the installed hydropower capacity of 4,000 megawatts we had achieved by 2004 is not enough. What we did was that we repaired the old little station there and upgraded it so that it produces 180 megawatts and then we built the new one to the east which we call Kiira, which has got an installed capacity of 200 megawatts and the two of them were supposed to be producing 380 megawatts if the water was enough because there is also the problem of water. 

I can see some honourable members would like to transform me into a rainmaker. (Laughter) If you have got the necessary drugs I am willing to undertake that role. (Laughter)

So, with the 380 megawatts plus the other little stations which we built, Kilembe and others, we had installed capacity of 400 megawatts by 2004 but I am telling you that that is not enough. It means that the 560 megawatts capacity we have now, including the thermal plants we have installed since 2005, is not enough. It means that the 810 megawatts we shall be generating when Bujagali is finished by 2011 will not be enough. It means that the 1,700 megawatts we shall be producing when Karuma and other hydropower stations which will be ready by 2014 will not be enough.

The advantage, however, will be that the hydropower will be cheap for producers although not enough. Hydropower will be 7-8 American cents per kilowatt hour compared to American cents 24 per kilowatt hour for electricity generated from imported diesel. This will be the advantage. Once we finish Bujagali and Karuma, the power will be cheaper but not enough for the country. That is what you should all know: the political class, the permanent secretary, the under secretary, all those big people, Commissioner. There is somebody called “Commissioner” –(Laughter)- Commissioner of shortages. (Laughter) This should be the one planning. 

All these new dams in both short and medium terms will mean cheaper power for the few people, possibly 30 percent of the population that will be getting power by that time. Once we finish these, then maybe about 30 percent of the population will be getting power. Because now the figure is like 10 percent I think; it used to be 5 percent. That is why I have directed the Minister of Energy to plan for at least 17,000 megawatts by 2025 when the population will be about 54 million. When I say 2025, they think I will still be in the government. (Laughter) You see, this is the problem with some people, they cannot think of somebody planning for the country unless he is on the table eating. Some people have got bad thinking in their heads. 

This will mean kilowatt hour per capita of 3,330 because the kilowatt hour per capita for Uganda now is 60. But if we target 17,000 megawatts by this time, even if the population is 54 million, the kilowatt hour per capita will be 3,330. This is still not enough. It is the absolute minimum.

The advantage now is that the Cabinet and the Ministry of Energy officials seem to be agreed that there is nothing like too much electricity for Uganda for a long time. Because that was the problem I had some years ago when I was pushing for Bujagali, Karuma and Kalagala at the same time. I was told by some people that that would mean too much electricity for Uganda. But now we have agreed with the Cabinet and even the officials in the Ministry of Energy; they are now convinced that we cannot have that problem of too much energy in Uganda for a long time. This was the incredible position of those who were opposing my plans some years ago. I do not want to say who they are -(Laughter)- because after Namugongo the other day, I shook hands with everybody so, I am now for peace. I even shook hands with hon. Anywar, so we are very good friends now. (Laughter and Applause) 

I have been informed that even on the external front - I hear there was a meeting - I do not want to say who they were because I did not consult them before I came here this afternoon. But there was a big meeting somewhere outside the country with our foreign partners and the big debate was whether Africa needed big dams or not. I had of course made my position very clear to some of those people who were in that meeting that it did not matter whether they supported us or not, we are going to build these dams. (Applause) But I am told in that meeting, eventually it was agreed that Africa should be supported to build these dams. (Applause) And those who were not supporting also supported. That is good. The Banyankole say, “Owabona omugyenzi nowabona owishenkazi” meaning, if you are going on a long journey, there is no harm if your co-traveler is the son of your paternal aunt because he is a good companion on a journey. 

Apparently, there were those that needed to be convinced that Africa needed electricity. They are welcome on board. With our Energy Fund and other internal sources, we are moving on Karuma and other sites by our own means. We welcome external involvement in the energy sector as long as they do not slow down our speed and as long as the interest rates do not unreasonably distort the final price of electricity for the user.

The advantage of using government funding in power projects is that there is no bank interest charged that will affect the price of electricity. You know, when we build the dam with our own money, there is no interest. So we need to review this question of using private funding because all private funding has got interest. And that interest will have to be recovered through the price charged. So I do not mind but I am no longer very interested in this money with interest to be used to build something foundational like energy. 

The NRM through prioritisation focusing, assisted by God who enabled us to discover the petroleum and the gas, is now set to cause an energy revolution, just like we caused the armed political revolution. (Applause) We are going to develop all the sites on the Nile; develop other smaller sites on the smaller rivers; build gas operated power stations in the Mwitanzige area in Lake Albert. When we start refining our oil, we shall use heavy fuel oil to generate electricity. It is cheaper than that generated by diesel. We shall use sugarcane, if I am supported by all people, to generate electricity as well as looking at all other sources because we need a lot of power. 

The same single-mindedness we are putting forward on energy will be used in respect of roads and railways. The British built a railway line from Mombasa to Kampala using kalayi and kitiyo, bucket and shovel; how can the NRM fail to build and repair the railway using the earth moving equipment of today? We built the short Nalukolongo-Port Bell line some years ago, and some of the honourable members could go and see it, it is still there. We can build longer lines. We welcome external funding if available. It is obviously good business for anybody with eyes to see. However, “Egabo ya kyeri togihera mwana mubazi,” it is a proverb in one of these groups which means, you cannot give a laxative to a child and only pin your hopes on your neighbour to give you hydrants to restore the fluids in the child. Your neighbour may not have the hydrants and the child will die. So, the message is, before you give a laxative to a child, you must make sure that you have got tea in the house so that in case he needs rehydration, you provide it. Because when you give a laxative to a child when you do not have rehydration fluids in the house, and you say, “My neighbour will give it to me.” Supposing the neighbour does not have it, what will happen to the child? So, in planning you can depend on others but in the final analysis you should be able to depend on yourself. If necessary, we shall depend on ourselves even in this area of building the railway. 

The Road Fund is doing miracles in the roads sector. (Applause) The gloom that had descended on the country is beginning to lift. We have begun enjoying driving on good roads again: Busunju-Hoima, Kawempe-Kafu, Jinja-Bugiri, Fort Portal-Katungulu, Kikolongo-Bwera, Karuma-Arua, and very soon on Soroti-Dokolo-Lira. The roads are part of the foundation and they will be built. We welcomed our external partners in this area in a timely fashion. With this focus by the NRM and the education we have given our children since some twelve years ago, and given the regional and international markets we have negotiated since some years ago, Uganda’s economy is set to roar. (Applause)

There is however one problem: corruption. We are going to crush the corrupt. They are trapped by the NRM; NRM trapped them long ago! How did the NRM trap the corrupt and the thieves? The NRM revived the economy from zero. The revived economy generated money, including taxes. The money was distributed through a good formula of decentralization to give authority to all Ugandans. In this financial year alone – 2009/2010 – we are sending Shs 1231.9 billion to local governments. The money is there and you heard the minister read it. You can calculate the percentage since the minister has read the whole budget. You should also do some mental work.

UPE and USE are using Shs 495.1 billion and Shs 210 billion respectively in the Financial Year 2009/2010. That is a total of Shs 700 billion for UPE and USE. I am however getting information that some of this money is being stolen by the officials. There is some information for instance that the numbers in UPE schools are being exaggerated by inserting “air” in them. If that is true, it would be unfortunate but it still is good news for the NRM. First of all, the NRM delivered on its promises. We started UPE and we said we would send you the money for it and we sent it. In Buganda, they have a very good practice. When you visit a Muganda’s home and he gives you food, after you have finished eating, you thank him in two ways. First of all, you thank the head of the home. You say “Ssebo ogabudde” - thank you for providing - because the head of the home provided the resources, and then you thank the wife for cooking the food. If the head of the family provides the resources but the wife is a bad cook, those are two different issues. (Laughter) So the NRM has provided. If there are some bad cooks, then we are going to deal with them. 

First of all, the NRM delivered on its promises. Secondly, if it is true that this money is being sent but it is being stolen, it means that we have more money than we thought since we were able to fund both the actual UPE children and also the ghost children. That means we have got more money. I have decided, therefore, to set up a judicial commission of inquiry into the misuse of UPE and USE funds, which will help us to unearth the truth. (Applause) Do the honourable members remember the judicial commission of inquiry into the police some years ago? It would be beautiful to expose the rascals, and the money that has been stolen would now be used to build more roads and to pay well the teachers and the scientists. Either way, the NRM is the winner. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, allow me to thank His Excellency the President for having carried out this function under Article 151 on time, because the time limit is 15th June, before the commencement of a new financial year. It is good that the budget has now been read and presented to us before considering the State of the Nation Address, which we received last week. Last week I said that members should be attentive while listening to the budget to find out whether it is friendly to the State of the Nation Address especially the plans that have been set out for the next financial year. I believe you will now be able to effectively and meaningfully consider the State of the Nation Address. 

Because we have not set out the time when we will do it, the Business Committee of Parliament will meet on Monday, 15th June at 11.00 a.m. to consider the business we have and plot as when to handle it. The position is that the budget will definitely come after the State of the Nation Address because we except policy statements from the ministries, which I think will come towards the end of the month and by then we shall have finished considering the State of the Nation Address. So I am asking members of the Business Committee to turn up on time on Monday at 11.00 a.m. so that we chart out a plan for the business. 

With this, we come to the end but like last week when we had the State of the Nation Address, again today’s programme will be in two venues: here where we are and as you heard from the proclamation I made, I created other parliamentary gardens here. We are not going to the parliamentary gardens one mile away, but there are parliamentary gardens here at the Serena Hotel and that is where the second meeting to assess the impact of the budget will be held. (Laughter) With this, we are adjourning to Tuesday; because we shall decide on when to do this Monday. The House will resume on Tuesday, 16 June at 2.00 p.m. in the Parliamentary Building. The House is adjourned.

The National Anthem
(Two Verses)

(The House rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 June 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)


