Wednesday, 17 June 2009

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. We have a bit of urgent business to complete today. So I would like to ask Members to apply themselves diligently until we do the needful. Thank you.

2.56
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to rise on a matter of national importance. Since this morning I have received more than fifty SMS messages on my phone. I don’t know about the others, may be it is because I also speak for the great party. This is the import of the messages: “Ministry of Health warning; to avoid swine flue which is suspected to be already in Uganda, you are advised not to eat pork or be near pigs. The first case reported is in Ggaba and Nakulabye. Send this message to as many people as you wish and MTN will reward you with some very good airtime.”

I want to find out from the Minister of Health whether they have heard about these messages, whether this message is from his ministry or not? What is the truth? Because you know such messages can throw us into a stampede and panic and we know that in this world there is malice aforethought. Whereas we are aware that many of us eat swine, for instance my honourable colleague there, hon. Kyanjo doesn’t –(Interruption)- whatever, pork comes from swine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, some of us know what we eat. Swine is a living animal and pork is the product, which is consumed. Despite the fact that we have been correcting our colleague to use the right terminology, she has insisted and she is a linguist. Is she in order to insist on something that is not right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okurut, I think you address the real thing which they eat. (Laughter)

MRS OKURUT: Madam Speaker, I am not in a position to address the real thing they eat because we know that there are certain professionals who eat their patients. They treat the patients but they also eat them in terms of animals. But on a more serious note, the Ministry of Health should really tell us whether this SMS message is from them or whether it is concocted and next time if there is a serious message, let the Ministry of Health put its stamp on it. And we have said it on the Floor here before, that when there are messages for the common good, if you put it in the news print or whether you use radios, you don’t even have to pay. We should pass a policy that messages for the common good should not be paid for by the ministry but everybody should get to know about it. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Health. Let the Minister tell us about it.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is not true that there is an outbreak of – by the way, we are no longer calling it Swine Flu, we have modified it to a better name. It is now called Influenza AH1N. That sounds better than Swine Flu. So we don’t have any case reported in Uganda. In the whole of Africa, only two cases have been reported. One case was in Egypt and another one in Algeria. 

On top of that, in Uganda we are extremely prepared in case there is a case reported. The honourable members will notice that whenever you return from outside at Entebbe Airport, you will fill in a form in which you put the country where you have visited while you were away from Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from hon. Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I rise to give information to this honourable House. If the Minister of Health has stated that it is not true that they are sending that information, then I think the Minister of ICT should make a statement to that effect because these main telecommunications companies, especially MTN, have sub-contracted some small business units in town where for a number of SMS sent to Ugandans, they will be paid a percentage commission of that SMS. That is why we now have a culture of news vending. They can send that: “A house is burning in town. If you need this message, send your SMS to 198.”  So the SMS may cause about 150, I give this as an example. Out of that 150 about 70 shillings is given to these companies who are operating from around town. So I think that is the same spirit that this business of Swine Flu is spreading all over Uganda and the Minister of ICT should come before this Parliament and tell us clearly under what regulatory framework these major telephone companies are sub-contracting some laptop warriors around town who can mint money from people’s phones in terms of SMS. Otherwise, I was also worried because I ate pork for lunch. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, I have not understood your complaint. We are complaining about unemployment. People are generating employment instead of stealing. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the information I was giving is that the Minister of Health is right. He is not aware of that. This is just a trend in the telecommunications companies. The Ministry of ICT should tell us under what arrangement, because they are now sending, like the other day I found on my phone, “The house is burning. Send a message to 198 to get the details.”

When you reply, because they know they are very many shop owners in Kampala. So when you reply instead of giving you one message, they can cut it into three and you end up parting with Shs 500. That is how the business is taking place.

Hon. Karooro has a very genuine concern and hon. Aggrey Awori should come to the Floor of the House and say something about that kind of behaviour.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the Minister of Health explain about the Swine Flu.

DR MALLINGA: As I was informing the honourable members, whenever you come from outside the country, you fill in a form in which you indicate the countries which you have visited while you were away from Uganda. If you have visited any of the countries where there has been an outbreak of swine flu, we follow you up; you leave a telephone number so that we can contact you quickly in case you develop the symptoms.

So far, if you land in Entebbe and you have flu or signs which suggest the flu, we shall admit you, observe you and take a blood test. We have a very good laboratory at Entebbe and we have made arrangements for admission at Entebbe Hospital and also at Mulago Hospital and there is a task force to follow up the suspicious cases.

So far we have suspected four people. They were admitted, observed and they had blood tests done. All of them tested negative. As far as Uganda is concerned we have not had any cases of Swine Flu and we are very prepared. We have about more that 40,000 doses of medicine for treatment in case there is an outbreak and yesterday we received more supplies, for the workers and more medication in case of any case which is reported.

It is not true that you can get Swine Flu by eating pork. So long as you cook your pork properly, to avoid getting other diseases - as pork is associated with so many other diseases. There is no danger of getting Influenza AH1N. It has not been reported in any of the pigs in this country. So, at the moment there is really no danger and we are extremely prepared with a task force to deal with any cases which may come up.

THE DEPUTY SEPAKER: Does the Minister of ICT wish to say something? (Mr Ekanya rose_) No, the question was about the messages coming in, whether they belonged to Ministry of Health. No, please sit down.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mobile phones are a free highway. Any kind of message can pass through. But my honourable colleague should be aware that about two months ago, we tabled two cyber laws, which will enable us to filter or hinder such messages that are not good for society.

For the time being we can monitor but the capacity to filter them still lies with you when you pass that law.

3.08
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise another issue which should be of real concern to Members of Parliament here.

It is a case of defilement of our swamps. You know the swamp along Masaka road, after the roundabout of Busega, which is one of those swamps that filter the water we use in our domestic chores and of course the water that goes to L. Victoria. Of recent, unscrupulous people have started ferrying huge amounts of murram from that road going to Nakawuka and filling up that swamp.

The rate at which they are dumping this murram, within something like one year it will entirely disappear and the consequences are going to be great.

Desalination of that water or improving on the water we consume is going to be very expensive. Recently the Ministry of Water, I read it in the papers, had to shift the pumps further into Lake Victoria because of pollution from the industries and other things, but now the few remaining swamps are being invaded.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we should take this issues seriously and the minister concerned should go and pay a visit right now –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is that what my colleague is alluding to is not only happening in one area especially in the city centre. Three weeks ago, I contacted NEMA over a blockage of the wetland as you are going towards Kawanda. On my way to Kitgum I pass that route - and I found there was heaping of soil and making of a road towards the road joining the main road to Bombo and I raised this with NEMA and the same thing I found when you are going to Seeta, that famous swamp, they sued to make bricks which has been continuing, even the construction was on and I raised this issue with NEMA. I am only happy to report that they came up and they have written the report that after reporting to them, they have gone there and found that it was done wrongfully and therefore they have put it on halt.

Therefore my colleague, we should also let NEMA know about your concern because I think they are incapacitated and if we report this, they can handle it. However, my colleague the minister I do not see her here, but I think the minister will get the message. But I think the first thing to do is to contact NEMA, they have acted on such and I am sure they will solve this.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you for that information. I hope the message will reach the concerned ministry because we are in this budget process, if the money is not there, I think we should budget for it. But the law must be brought to bear. I am telling you our children are not going to get anything fresh if we continue at this rate. Water is going to become very expensive and scarce.

I was reading in the papers today, in America in a certain area, already water is becoming scarce. The water level is going down and this is the filter of everything that makes Uganda one of the best in terms of fresh water.

Meanwhile, the Minister of Internal Affairs should help us. Insecurity is a problem. In Kawempe they are killing people, young girls - you read in the papers how a girl’s nipples and her private parts were cut off; we have had so far five ladies in Kawempe alone, and the RDC is trying to put a curfew that girls should  not move beyond 8 p.m. So the minister should update us - even in Kyanamukaka where the Speaker comes from, they killed so many people. We do not know what is taking place. The minister should come up with a statement and tell us about the security situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Internal Affairs wish to say something about this? There was also the story of a girl who was cut and put in a box.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I am aware of that incident in Kawempe but I am not aware of the one in Masaka. We have moved and swung into action –(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, let me give apologies that I did not inform the Minister of Internal Affairs about the case in Masaka but it has been in the papers and I thought that the minister has got his agents to report to him. I would like to tell the House that today in Kyanamukaka there is a security meeting. The RDC and the local leaders are there talking about this case and I would like to beg the minister to link up with all his stations so that he can get the information concerning violence. Masaka’s situation in terms of violence has reached the highest peak in the country and I do not want us to discuss it piecemeal. We should come up with a full report on violence not only in Masaka but the entire country.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you for that information. But I was saying that as far as Kawempe is concerned, we have swung into action and as I speak two people have been arrested. And I promise my sister from Masaka – I am sure my agents must be doing something and maybe information has just not got through but I want to promise this House that we are determined to get rid of this menace of child sacrifice. My senior minister about two weeks ago did present a statement here and we are following up all these cases very closely. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like you to join me in welcoming the delegation from Voluntary Action for Development, they are in the gallery. We have Katharina Schaidt, Brigitte Maier and Henry Ssewannyana. You are welcome. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE BILL, 2009

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Domestic Violence Bill, 2009 be read for the first time. (Applause) The accompanying Certificate of Financial Implications to the Bill is hereby laid on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the committee which I am going to name shortly for perusal and report back.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we should celebrate because this is historical and something we have been waiting for. However, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has got a lot of business. I was wondering - can’t the Committee on Gender handle this Bill so that it is moved expeditiously or together they handle it as two committees because Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee has got many Bills – about 80 percent. I suggest that the two committees share this Bill.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. You categorically stated that the Bill was going to be committed to the relevant committee and that was all. Now what is the Member arguing about? Is it procedurally right that she stands up again to advise you on what the relevant committee is?

MR OKUPA: Yesterday when we adjourned, the Minister of Finance had made an undertaking on the issues that hon. Ekanya raised regarding the Malaba strike and URA and he promised he was going to give a report this afternoon on what has been done because this is going to affect the revenue collection as we end the financial year. May we hear from the Executive about what has happened?

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I thank the Member for raising this issue. I am reliably informed that while the undertaking was given that this explanation would be given to this House, it was not the undertaking that this would be given today but at a future date. That is my understanding.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, hon. Aston Kajara is my historical friend – we were with him in the Sixth Parliament, the Seventh and we are here now. The point is that it was agreed that the statement be given today although the good news is that after raising this matter and you directed, the clearing agents in Malaba decided to suspend the strike pending the position that government will come up with. They are cooperating awaiting government position and they are ready for dialogue. I would like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table a letter they wrote to the Minister of Finance so that the House understands that this matter is serious and that is why the clearing agents decided to strike because government was not responding. But when you gave the assurance that the matter would be responded to, they decided to lay down their tools pending the position that the House would take. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The letter is on a headed paper of the Uganda Clearing Industries and Forwarding Agents Association, Malaba, dated 9th June 2009, addressed to the Minister of Finance.

The reference is UCIFA/MF/09/09 addressed to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Kampala and signed by Musisi Ibrahim, Chairman UCIFA Malaba. Thank you. I beg to lay on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, I have not understood. Are you saying there is no longer a problem?

MR EKANYA: No, they decided to suspend the strike after the House ordered that the minister make a statement because they want to co-operate with government to find an amicable solution to this issue and, therefore, it is pertinent that the Minister of Finance makes the statement and not take people for granted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, we now need to constitute the sessional committees. 

CONSTITUTION OF SESSIONAL COMMITTEES

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

The following members are for the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries:

Ms Oliver Wonekha, Chairperson.
Mr Lastus Katende, Vice-Chairperson
Mr William Nsubuga 
Mr Margaret Alepar 
Ms Jalia Bintu 
Ms Juliet Kabonesa 
Mrs Margaret Kiboijana  
Mrs Magoola Zirabamuzaale
Ms Mary Mugyenyi 
Ms Florence Nayiga 
Mr Ssalabaya Haruuna
Ms Nalugo Sekiziyivu
Mr Steven Kagwera 
Mr George Wopuwa 
Mr Tress Bucyanayandi 
Mr John Odit 
Ms Christine Bako Abia 
Mr Kassiano Wadri
Mr Ojok B’leo
Ms Cecilia Atim Ogwal 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that those members named do constitute the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries for the fourth session. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

Mr Mathias Kasamba, Chairperson
Mr Abura Pirir, Vice-Chairperson
Mr Silver Bahane 
Ms Rose Namayanja 
Mr Saleh Kamba 
Mr Badhul Katongole
Mr Tom Kazibwe Musisi 
Mr Kibedi Zaake Wanume
Mr Mukose Mutabaali
Mr Theodore Ssekikubo 
Mr Pius Mujuzi 
Mr Milton Muwuma
Mr Ali Ndawula Sekyanzi
Mr Latif Seakale
Mr Hussein Kyanjo 
Ms Judith Akello Franca
Mr Yokasi Bihande
Mr Angiro Gutomoi
Ms Florene Ibi Ekwau

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that those members named do constitute the sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Mr Lule Mawiya, Chairperson
Mr Steven Kaliba, Vice-Chairperson
Mr Onyango Kakoba
Ms Kasule Lumumba 
Mr Hood Katuramu 
Mr Toskin Bartille   
Mr Peter Looki 
Col Phinehas Katirima 
Mr Iddi Lubyayi Kisiki
Mr Norman Muwulize 
Ms Huda Oleru
Mr Reagan Okumu 
Mr Michael Mabikke
Ms Agnes Akiror 
Mr Francis Kiyonga 
Ms Betty Amongi 
Mr Odonga-Otto
Mr Benson Obua Ogwal 
Ms Winfred Kiiza

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that all those members named do constitute the sessional committee on foreign affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Mr Tindamanyire Kabondo, Chairperson
Mr Charles Oleny, Vice-Chairperson
Ms Rose Akol 
Mr Frank Tumwebaze 
Mr Julius Balyejjusa 
Mr Henry Banyenzaki 
Mr Kaddunabbi Lubega
Mr Robert Kasule Sebunya
Ms Janet Okori-Moe 
Mr Barnabas Tinkasimire 
Ms Ruth Tuma 
Col Guma Gumisiriza
Ms Grace Kyomugisha  
Mr Isaac Ssejjoba 
Mr William Okecho 
Mr Nandala-Mafabi
Mr Oduman Okello
Mr Simon Oyet 
Mr Geoffrey Ekanya 
Mr Issa Kikungwe 
Mr Simon Ross Euku 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that those members named do constitute the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for this fourth session. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

Ms Beatrice Amongi Lagada, Chairperson
Ms Sabano Kabanda, Vice-Chairperson
Ms Marion Tunde 
Ms Nulu Byamukama 
Ms Sarah Mwebaza 
Ms Omwony Adong
Ms Christine Tubo 
Gen. Aronda Nyakairima 
Ms Nalwanga Lukwago
Mr Francis Okello 
Ms Susan Nampijja 
Ms Rhoda Acen 
Ms Concy Aciro 
Mr John Ogwang 
Ms Nakawuki Suzan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that those members named do constitute the committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for the fourth session of this Parliament. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY

Mr Igeme Nabeta, Chairperson
Ms Paula Turyahikayo, Vice-Chairperson 
Mr David Bahati 
Mr Katende Sematiko
Mr Jowali Kyeyago 
Mr Edward Baliddawa  
Mr William Nokrach  
Gen. Elly Tumwine
Ms Nagudi Wangwa 
Ms Grace Tubwita 
Mr Ndawula Kaweesi
Ms Joyce Kwebiiha 
Mr Elioda Tumwesigye 
Mr Magulumaali Mugumya
Mr Louis Opange 
Mr Alex Oceng Penytoo
Mr Ishaa Amiza Otto
Mr Moses Apiliga 
Mr Sebuliba Mutumba
Mr Muhamed Kawuma 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that those members named do constitute the committee on Information Communications Technology of the fourth session of this Parliament. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

Mr Abraham Byandala, Chairperson 
Ms Margaret Baba Diri, Vice-Chairperson 
Ms Grace Byarugaba 
Mr Sam Byanagwa 
Mr Cosmas Busima  
Mr Joseph Matte 
Mr Nathan Byanyima 
Ms Margaret Kisira 
Ms Eudia Kwizera  
Ms Nansubuga Nyombi
Ms Jim Muhwezi
Mr Owori Otada 
Mr Emmanuel Dombo 
Mr Henry Balikoowa 
Mr Piro Santos
Mr Amuriat Oboi
Mr Elijah Okupa 
Mr Peter Omolo 
Mr Mathias Nsubuga 
Mr Moses Kabuusu 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that all those members named do constitute the Committee on Physical Infrastructure of the fourth session of this Parliament. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

Mr Stephen Tashobya, Chairperson 
Mr Herbert Sabila, Vice-Chairperson
Mr Remigio Achia 
Mr Meddie Mulumba 
Mr Alex Ndeezi 
Mr Wilfred Nuwagaba 
Maj. Sarah Mpabwa 
Gen. David Tinyefunza 
Ms Sarah Netalisire 
Col. Ramadhan Kyamulesire 
Mr Stephen Bakka Mugabi 
Ms Karooro Okurut
Mr Ben Wacha 
Mr Erias Lukwago
Mr Peter Nyombi 
Mr Sam Njuba 
Mr Joseph Balikuddembe  
Mr Abdu Katuntu 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members I put the question that all those people named do constitute the sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the fourth session of this Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

Mrs Winifred Masiko, Chairman
Mr Peter Ochieng, Vice-Chairperson
Ms Rose Munyira
Mr Gyabi Bukeni 
Mr Wamakuyu Mudini
Mr Tomson Kyahurwenda 
Ms Kawooya Bangirana
Mr Elijah Kyetunda 
Mr Charles Ngabirano 
Ms Margaret Mugisha Muhanga 
Mr Deusdedit Bikwasizehi 
Ms Kasasa Najjuma 
Ms Rose Najjemba 
Mr Stephen Mukitale 
Mr Yekko Arapkissa
Ms Beatrice Anywar 
Ms Nabilah Sempala
Mr Harry Kasigwa 
Mr Jimmy Akena 
Mr David Ebong 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that all those Members named do constitute the sessional Committee on Natural Resources for the fourth session of this Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS

Mr Gerald Menhya, Chairperson
Ms Grace Oburu, Vice-Chairperson
Mr Fred Badda 
Mr Robert Kashaija 
Mr Joseph Kasozi 
Ms Loy Kiryapawo 
Mr Erisa Kaahwa 
Mr Ashraf Olega 
Mr Tom Butime 
Mr Abdul Kitatta 
Ms Stella Namoe
Mr Bakulaba Mukasa
Ms Hashaka Kabahweza 
Ms Barumba Rusaniya 
Ms Margaret Angufiru 
Mr Christopher Kibanzanga 
Mr Livingstone Okello-Okello
Mr Wilfred Kajeke 
Mr Kaps Fungaroo 
Ms Betty Ochan Aol 
Mr Loote Sammy

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that all those Members named do constitute the sessional Committee on Presidential Affairs for the fourth session of this Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

Mr Anthony Yiga, Chairperson
Ms Boona Emma, Vice-Chairperson
Ms Mavenjina Akumu 
Ms Mabel Bakeine 
Mr Alex Byarugaba 
Ms Nyakaisiki Byenkya 
MS Lydia Nyago 
Mr Terrence Achia 
Mr Brian Asiimwe 
Mr Beatrice Mpairwe 
Dr Sam Lyomoki
Ms Grace Namara 
Capt. John Otekat 
Ms Rebecca Amuge 
Mr David Ringe Chan 
Mr Ssozi Kaddumukasa
Mr Michael Ocula 
Mr Johnson Malinga 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members I put the question that all those Members named do constitute the sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government for the fourth session of this Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY

Mr Rwebembera Kiiza, Chairperson
Mr John Sseguya, Vice-Chairperson  
Mr Peter Mutuluuza 
Mr Joseph Mugambe 
Mr Felix Okot 
Mr Julius Oketta 
Ms Tete Chelangat 
Mr Bruno Pajobo 
Dr James Makumbi 
Ms Sauda Mugerwa
Mr Sanjay Tanna 
Ms Ann Auru 
Ms Iriama Rose
Ms Charles Ekemu 
Mr John Baptist Kawanga 
Ms Caroline Okao 
Mr Simon Toolit 
Mr Akbar Godi 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yes, hon. Mutuluuza!

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My name has been read although I had already consulted the Government Chief Whip requesting him to place me on an alternative committee. He had assured me that he was going to do it but I am surprised to hear my name. I think I decline to belong to that committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I received these names from the whips. So, maybe your whip can explain to us.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that I consulted with hon. Mutuluuza and I did indicate to him that as a leadership we would study the matter further. Thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: With due respect to the Government Chief Whip, I do not think I will sit on that committee. I better get another one. I gave him two reasons which he is aware of. A third one is that two Members from Mawokota North are on that committee. Hon. Lubyayi is the vice-chairperson of that committee and we come from the same constituency. I think for us to cater for other interests one of us should sit on a different committee, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Lubyayi are you talking about? Sseguya? Ok. 

MR MUTULUUZA: We come from the same county. I beg for that consideration.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He says they are both from Mawokota and they do not want to work together apparently.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, hon. Mutuluuza has requested that we find him another committee. He clearly indicated his preferences but at the time we could not take care of his preferences. I have indicated that I will take up this matter. I cannot, at this stage, say that I am shifting him to this committee or that committee because I need to sit down and study this matter, carry out the consultations and tomorrow morning I will be in a position to give you the decision of NRM. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members I put the question that all those Members named, except hon. Mutuluuza, constitute the sessional Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry for the fourth session of this Parliament. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES

Mrs Rosemary Seninde, Chairperson
Dr Chris Baryomunsi, Vice-Chairperson
Mr Fred Mbagadhi 
Ms Jane Babiha Alisemera 
Ms Beatrice Rwakimari 
Mr Gudoi Yahaya
Mr James Kubeketerya 
Mr Lwanga Kasole
Ms Safia Nalule 
Mr Dennis Obua 
Ms Sylivia Ssinabulya 
Mr Kigyagi Arimpa 
Ms Ruth Nvumetta 
Ms Theopista Ssentongo 
Ms Jacqueline Kyatuheire 
Dr Willy Anokbonggo 
Mr Julius Emiku 
Dr Francis Epetait 
Ms Alice Alaso 
Dr Lulume Bayigga

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that all those Members named do constitute the sessional Committee on Social Services for the fourth session of this Parliament. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I note that there are some committees whose membership is below 20. So in case there are Members who remain unallocated, and in particular the independents, you know you are care of the Office of the Speaker, please let the Speaker know so that we can find you somewhere to go.   

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I move a motion that Parliament do hereby resolve itself into the Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of the supplementary schedule No. 2. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, the supplementary schedule No.2 has arisen due to supplementary expenditure that was incurred in the course of implementation of the 2008/2009 budget. This arose due to different factors. First of all, it was due to insufficient budgetary provisions to the sectors. It was also due to unforeseen expenditure at the time of the budgeting, but also to access appropriation of the amounts that were originally appropriated.

The House did approve supplementary schedule No. 1 before it went on recess. So, supplementary schedule No. 2 is the only subject of debate in this motion. The Chairperson of the Committee on Budget will give the details in her report to the House. I beg to move.

3.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I present this report, I have some two points to make. One is that as we concluded the third session of the Eighth Parliament, we had just gone through a very rigorous exercise. The exercise was to review the National Budget Framework Paper. I would like to thank Members of Parliament for having concluded this exercise in time and in accordance with the provisions of the law despite the delay in the presentation that National Budget Framework Paper to Parliament.

Two, I would like to thank the Parliamentary Budget Office for having ably given the necessary technical advice to the committees to enable them perform their duties rightly. But I would like to request that as Members of Parliament, we should now prepare ourselves for another exercise, which is the review of the policy documents that are supposed to be here by 30 June, latest. And on that note, I would like to request all those concerned to make sure policy documents are brought to Parliament by 30 June. This will enable us start our work in time. 

This is a report of the Budget Committee on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2008/2009.

Introduction

Madam Speaker, on the 14 May 2009, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to Parliament the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2008/2009. The schedule was referred to the Budget Committee for detailed scrutiny and consequently to report its findings and recommendations to the House. The committee hereby reports its findings.

Methodology

The Budget Committee, which is enjoined under the Budget Act to consider the National Budget, had jointly scrutinised Supplementary Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2008/2009 with chairpersons of sessional committees whose votes had been affected by the supplementary requests.

Rule 161(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament also require sessional committees to critically examine Government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House. 

But because of the urgency with which these funds were required, and taking into account that we only had a few days before Parliament would be prorogued, the Budget Committee held one joint meeting with the sessional committee chairpersons on 20 May 2009 in attempt to report before the prorogation of Parliament.

During the said meeting, the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Develop; Internal Affairs; Relief and Disaster Preparedness and Refugees; and Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries together with their permanent secretaries and other technical officials, attended.

Framework for scrutiny of the supplementary Expenditure

A total of Shs 137.125 billion is being applied for as supplementary expenditure. From the analysis of the Supplementary Schedule No.2, recurrent expenditure attracts Shs 115.693 billion, while development expenditure is Shs 21.433billion.

During the scrutiny of the supplementary expenditure, the committee addressed, but did not limit itself to the following critical issues:

1.	Whether the supplementary expenditure request was in conformity with the legal provisions, that is, whether it was within the statutory limit of 3 percent and the percentage of the approved budget that it constitutes;
2.	To establish the sources of funding for the supplementary expenditure;
3.	Whether the supplementary expenditure was occasioned by the unforeseeable emergencies that the relevant sectors could not capture in the normal budgeting process;
4.	Whether all the deserving emergencies were covered under the supplementary expenditure; and 
5.	The impact of the supplementary expenditure on the original financing arrangement and sector performance.

Observations and recommendations

Composition of the supplementary expenditure”
The committee observed that the non-wage recurrent expenditure was attracting the highest proportion of – make a correction, honourable colleagues – it should be Shs 93.94 billion and not 91 billion, of the total supplementary. 

The wage recurrent expenditure amounted to Shs 21.753 billion while the development supplementary expenditure amounted to Shs 21.433 billion.

Statutory limit of 3 percent

In accordance with Article 156(2) of the Constitution, Section 12 of the Budget Act and Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Government can, when need arises, incur supplementary expenditure in any financial year. However, the supplementary expenditure incurred should not exceed 3 percent of the total approved budget for the financial year without prior approval of Parliament. That is the position of the Budget Act under Section 12(1).

The total approved budget for the Financial Year 2008/2009 including statutory budgets was Shs 6.663.82 billion. In the month of April 2009, Parliament approved Supplementary Expenditure schedule No.1 for the Financial Year 2008/2009 amounting to Shs 125.287 billion. The total supplementary expenditure under schedule No.1 constituted 1.88 percent of the total approved budget for the Financial Year 2008/2009.

Of the Shs 137.125 billion being requested for under Schedule No.2, Shs 74.624 billion had already been authorised by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which in addition to Shs 125.287 billion approved under Supplementary Schedule No.1, amounts to Shs 199.91 billion. This measures up to 3 percent of the approved budget for Financial Year 2008/2009.

The balance of Shs 62.501 billion is above the 3 percent limit for which Parliamentary approval is being sought before the money is spent. The composition and proportion of supplementary categories is detailed in the table indicated in the report.

The total approved budget for Financial Year 2008/2009 is Shs 6,663,822,848,000. The provision under the Budget Act for 3 percent is Shs 199.914 billion while Supplementary Schedule No.1 was 125.286 billion, which weighed 1.88 percent. 

Supplementary Schedule No.2 is Shs137.125 billion, which is 2.06 percent and this gives a total of Shs 262.412 billion, which is 3.94 percent of the total Budget for the Financial Year 2008/2009.

Sources of funding for the Supplementary Schedule No. 2 for FY 2008/09: 

The committee was informed that a total supplementary expenditure amounting to Shs 137.125 billion will be funded through the following means: 

1.	Draw down on Bank of Uganda amounting to Shs 111.610 billion
2.	Utilisation of non-tax revenue, Shs 2.287 billion
3.	Reallocations within the budget, Shs 23.338 billion

Unforeseeable Emergencies or Unfunded Priorities

The committee appreciated that some of the activities presented for supplementary funding were unforeseeable emergencies such as relief food for the famine stricken in Karamoja, Garamba operation against LRA, loss in poundage arising from the depreciation of the Uganda Shilling among others.  

The committee noted that there are activities that should have been ordinarily projected and prioritised during the budget formulations period. For example, wages purchase of interceptor boats and a helicopter for police and purchase of a vehicle and furniture for the manifesto implementation unit. 

There is also the persistent problem of some ministries or spending agencies presenting less important priorities during the budget process leaving out key activities. The activities remain unfunded thus crippling the performance of these sectors. For example, how could government leave out the operational costs for the police officers in Northern Uganda and welfare in general and instead submit the purchase of a helicopter as a priority?

The committee also found that under budgeting was another cause for supplementary cost requirement. This practice has been common among most ministries and departments. 

The committee therefore recommends that efforts be taken to minimise the supplementary expenditure in future by ensuring that spending agencies comprehensively project and prioritise the various expenditures during the budget formulation period. The budgeting process should be more prudent to ensure that items that can be planned do not attract supplementary funding. 

The committee also recommends that the Auditor-General institutes a special audit into the expenditures incurred by Ministry of Defence during the Garamba operations against the Lord’s Resistance Army.

Supplementary Expenditure and other Sector Performance

Madam Speaker, the committee reiterates its previous recommendation that whenever the Minister of Finance brings to the House a request for supplementary expenditure, in accordance with the law, and that is the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Section 16(2) the impact of the supplementary expenditure on the prior program outputs and outcomes of the affected votes should be indicated. The impact was not shown under the Supplementary Schedule No.1 and it was still not indicated under this schedule No.2.

In future, the Budget Committee will be constrained to recommend supplementary expenditure for approval without a statement from the minister on the impact of the supplementary expenditure on the original programmed outputs and outcomes of the affected votes. 

Draw Down on Bank of Uganda

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee has established that government will make a draw down from the Consolidated Reserve Funds amounting to Shs 175.048 billion; that is the total of Shs 111.61 billion accessed under schedule No.2 and Shs 63.438 billion under schedule No.1 to fund FY 89 supplementary expenditure.

The committee is concerned about using draw down on Bank of Uganda to fund the supplementary expenditure. There is also the issue of drawing down from Bank of Uganda Consolidated Fund Account without the express approval of Parliament as per Article 154(1) and (2) of the Constitution. 

The committee has previously requested the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to avail Parliament with a statement of balance of the Consolidated Fund Account at the end of every financial year but to no avail. The committee recommends that this should be honoured. 

Sector analysis

The Uganda Police Force
 
During the committee meeting, it was established that the Uganda Police required Shs 3.3 billion to cater for their operations in Northern Uganda and for operations of the Anti Stock Unit in Karamoja. This emergency requirement had not been included in the initial supplementary expenditure No.2.

On 21 May 2009, the Minister of Finance, on recommendation of the Budget Committee addendum No.1 to supplementary expenditure schedule No.2 wherein Shs 3.3 billion request for the Police operational costs in Northern Uganda and the Anti-Stock Unit in Karamoja region was included as part of the supplementary. 

The committee recommends the approval of this supplementary expenditure to enable the continued operations of police in Northern Uganda and Karamoja sub-region. 

State House Promotion of Agriculture through Kingdoms

The committee observed that State House Headquarters had requested for additional resources of Shs 1 billion for the facilitation of the model villages under poverty alleviation program and Shs 1 billion for promotions of agriculture in the kingdoms of Bunyoro, Buganda and Busoga. 

While the committee appreciates the efforts by State House to promote agriculture in the country, it was not able to get the selection criteria used to get Buganda, Bunyoro and Busoga kingdoms among others. The committee could not ascertain when other kingdoms would be brought on board.

Loss in Poundage

The committee noted that Shs 11.231 billion was required for missions abroad and Ministry of East African Affairs as supplementary expenditure to cater for the loss in poundage arising from the depreciation of the Uganda Shilling. 

The committee noted that this was the first time in recent years when government had to incur supplementary expenditure on the said magnitude on loss in poundage due to the depreciation of the Shilling. 

The committee recommends that government devices measures to minimise further depreciation of the Shilling. 

Emergency Relief for Food in Karamoja Sub-Region

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, whereas the committee appreciates government’s efforts to address the famine crisis in Karamoja sub region, it is import to take note of other equally affected parts of the country especially in the Acholi and Teso sub-regions. 

The available limited resources should be equitably utilised to cater for other equally affected parts of the country. 

The committee noted that despite the various interventions by government and other development partners aimed at improving productivity, environmental management and the general welfare of the Karamoja people, this sub-region has continued to witness perennial food shortages sometimes degenerating into famine. 

The committee recommends that government repackages its affirmative action for Karamoja by adopting a multi-sectoral approach that will suitably address the issues of perennial food shortages among others. 

The committee recommends approval of supplementary expenditure of Shs 10.374 billion to procure emergence relief food for Karamoja sub-region and other equally affected parts of the country. 

Uganda Revenue Authority

Madam Speaker, the committee received addendum No.2 to supplementary expenditure schedule No.2 for FY 08/09 on 29 May 2009 indicating supplementary expenditure of Shs 8.975 billion in favour of URA. 

The committee was informed that the supplementary expenditure was meant to cater for the short fall in the URA operational budget mainly towards computer supplies and IT services, allowances, utilities et cetera. 

The committee recommends the approval of Shs 8.975 billion to enable URA build its capacity and competence to collect more revenue. 

Conclusion

Inclusion, the committee has made the following recommendations:

1.	That effort be undertaken to minimise the supplementary expenditure in future by ensuring that spending agencies comprehensively project and prioritise the various expenditures during the budget formulation period. The budgeting process should be more prudent to ensure that items which can be planned do not attract supplementary funding. 
2.	That the Auditor-General institutes a special audit into the expenditure incurred by Ministry of Defence during the Garamba operations against the Lord’s Resistance Army.
3.	That government repackages its affirmative action for Karamoja by adopting a multi-sectoral approach that will sustainably address the issues of perennial food shortages in the sub-region. 
4.	Finally, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the supplementary expenditure schedule No.2 for FY 08/09 amounting to Shs 137,125,313,000 whose breakdown is as follows:
i)	Recurrent Supplementary Expenditure of Shs 115,692,719,00
ii)	Development Supplementary Expenditure of Shs 21,432,594,000

I beg to move. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your committee. Hon. Members, before we proceed to the debate I want to make an adjustment on the Order Paper to create item No.10 that is the interim report from the Minister of Finance on the situation at Marabe. The report is here, so we will create time for it. But let us deal with this issue first. 

4.05
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity to this motion. I would like also to thank the chairperson and the entire committee for the report that has been presented today. 

I would like some help from the chairperson and probably from the Minister of Finance. On page 5 of the report, the committee reveals the sources of funding of this supplementary request. Under item 3, they talk about reallocation within the budget of Shs 23.228 billion. 

I am wondering why this particular amount should find its way to a supplementary request, given the fact that initially, it was actually covered under the budget. Why does it now have to be presented in the form of a supplementary request when it was initially in the main body of the budget?

My second comment is the fact that the committee laments and makes recommendations to government ministries on particularly the budget process and the need to budget carefully during the budget process. 

I have been here for sometime now –(Interjections)- no, I am not tired; I am certainly growing stronger and wiser. Every time the Budget Committee comes here to give a supplementary schedule, they give caution to government ministries, but they continue to make the same mistakes. I do not know whether we are learning anything from this attitude. I wonder if there is something this House needs to do to help Cabinet, because it seems they are inadequate on that side. Something needs to be done to prompt them to improve on their budgeting process. The recommendations are here; the same thing was said six years ago, but Cabinet does not seem to heed the advice of this House. 

I would like to comment on the matter regarding the money for agriculture given to kingdoms. It is true that we have three strong kingdoms in the country. There is also a kingdom that was denied its status; that is the Ankole Kingdom. But there are cultural institutions in this country which have continuously supported government programs. I am surprised that the Iteso Cultural Union, the unions of the Lango, the Japadhola and the people of Nebbi have deliberately been ignored as far as financing activities is concerned. 

I would like to know from government why they have engaged in this selective approach. Is this a case of divide and rule or is it a case of vote seeking? We are all equal in the eyes of the Constitution; and we need to be treated equally. There are needs for agriculture in the region that I come from, and in other regions. 

So, on behalf of my colleagues who come from the other cultural institutions that have been deliberately ignored, I would like to demand that we be provided for as far as funding for agriculture is concerned. 

In conclusion, I realise that the committee has lamented the perennial problems associated with food shortages or famine in the Karamoja sub-region. Actually, I would like to inform this House that these problems are catching up with the other regions. What is happening now and causing food shortage is our inability to predict the weather pattern as well the inability of government to offer alternative sources of water for production. Temporary rivers actually flow from Karamoja to Teso and eventually find their way into the Nile and Egypt where irrigation is utilised in the desert as a way of substituting the natural source of water. 

I want to challenge the government in power. When are we going to see these irrigation schemes coming into place so  that we stop kneeling to pray for rain and so that the people of Karamoja are able to produce unhindered and so that the people of Teso and the other parts of the country -(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the government and political leadership in Karamoja encouraged people to cultivate. Although the place is completely dry now, farmers are still in the gardens hoping that God will give them water. During the little rain that came, the population went to rain corridors and cleared the bush. 

It is very dry now yet there were two research projects that were carried out in Karamoja; one by the Israelites in 1969-1970. They wanted to make Karamoja green by pulling water from the nearest lake in Teso. The second one was by the North Koreans who wanted to establish an artificial lake at Lobesh for irrigations. This was based on water harvesting. I think that is most appropriate because during perennial rains, there is plenty of water and that is why you find that it is currently dry in Teso because there is no water from Karamoja. That is the information that I wanted to give you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up; you have taken a lot of time.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, as we continue to grapple with food shortage, my appeal to government is that if the dream of the President and government for this region to become a food basket is to come true, we need to take irrigation very seriously. The people of Teso, Karamoja and the Northern part of the country are hard working people but they are under threat of extermination if government does not support them, first of all to –(Member timed out_)

4.15
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the chairperson. On page 5, the way the report is presented seems as if we are carrying out a post-mortem as this money has already been spent when in actual sense I would think that when government wants to spend, this institution has to approve. Like hon. Amuriat has been saying, I think it is common practice that these documents are brought here for post-mortem. So I would like to appeal to the Leader of Government Business to ensure that when expenditure is supposed to be made, they come to Parliament and we do it.

On the re-allocation within the budget, she talks of Shs 23 billion. May I inquire from either the ministry or the chairperson which votes were affected in the re-allocation? This is because you are telling us that you raised Shs 23.228 billion.

On the other issue of food shortage especially in famine areas, I would like to mention that famine has not only affected one region but it has always been that whenever they talk of famine, several regions complain and when it comes to action, I have heard that most of the beneficiaries end up in Amuria District, which is not very fair. This is something that I have no apologies over. When we talk of famine –(Mr Johnson Malinga rose) Hon. Malinga, is it because I have talked about Amuria?

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: I am just giving information. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving that vital information. I come from Amuria district and Kapelebyong County is one of the famine stricken counties in the country. The information I have is that the food ends up in Amuria County and not in Amuria district as a whole. The stores for the food are situated where hon. Ecweru comes from; his home area so it is not the whole of Amuria district but restricted areas that have food.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you, I think that is clear evidence. Madam Speaker, let me continue because I don’t want to open Pandora’s Box. There is another line on page 5 where the chairperson goes ahead to say that the committee noted that there are activities that should have ordinarily been projected and prioritised during the budget formulation period for example wages, et cetera. According to her, certain ministries did not project what would be spent in wages. I thought these ministries had competent people so which ministry under-projected the wages because I know of some places where some civil servants were not paid for some time. So can we know the ministries that did not project what they would spend in wages?

The other matter was that some ministries budgeted for less priority areas in that line. Which are these ministries because I thought that ministries have priorities? It would be good for this House to know so that the sessional committees put these ministries in order. Which ministries gave us less priorities and caused you to come here for supplementaries?

Lastly, the report says that the committee found that under budgeting as another cause. I thought that the budget process takes almost the whole year so why must we have some people under budgeting and then they come here to disturb us and say they want a supplementary? Why should people under budget and yet we have fully fledged departments in several ministries? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

4.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Madam Speaker, arising from the contribution of my colleague, I had been grappling with my mind as to what we are exactly doing. And when hon. Kubeketerya mentioned what he just said, I then looked at this report, and I am wondering whether we as Parliament know what we are doing at the moment. Because on page 4, in the last statement before the table, the committee report says that, “The balance of Shs 62.501 billion is above the 3 percent limit for which parliamentary approval is being sought before the money is spent.” And yet what we are discussing is Supplementary Schedule No.2, which includes even money that does not require parliamentary approval. I am now at a loss as to whether this process is a process of approval of the Shs 62 billion, which is not presented to us to know exactly what that expenditure covers, as opposed to Supplementary Schedule No.2. It is my considered view that this report should be discussed after government presents a request for approval of the money which is above the 3 percent and when we have approved it then we can discuss Supplementary Schedule No. 2. 

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, it is not my habit to interrupt the Leader of the Opposition but I think it is very important for us when we are discussing to know that the Executive is not presenting this supplementary budget for fun. It is serious business. Is the hon. Leader of the Opposition in order to suggest that when the Executive side of the government is proposing a reallocation on top of other needs, it is wrong, yet you know very well that you cannot reallocate money which Parliament passed to another ministry, and that ministry did not use it, and therefore it has to be taken from one vote to another? So, is he in order to suggest that it is wrong for the Executive to present a supplementary with these adjustments? Is he really in order and yet there are actually a few days left, 30 days, to the expiry? 30th June is not far. Is he in order to delay this process any longer?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Leader of the Opposition wants to know whether we are delaying with money spent or with future requests. So he is saying that the future request has not come. Can the Minister of Finance explain this Shs 62 billion? Is it near or is it in the future?

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, the Committee Chairperson did mention that in the course of discussing this schedule No.2, the ministry of finance also presented the Shs 62 billion being money that was spent above the 3 percent. So, it was also considered together under this schedule.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Minister you read: “The Balance of Shs 62.501 billion is above the 3 percent limit for which parliamentary approval is being sought before the money is spent.”

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I want to make a clarification here. The provisions of the Budget Act are very clear. This Parliament passed the Budget Act and that was in 2001 and it was assented to by His Excellency. One of the provisions actually allows the Executive to spend up to 3 percent of the total budget and then later on, within a period of four months, come for parliamentary approval.

What I am trying to explain in this report is that the total request in Supplementary Schedule No.2 plus Supplementary Schedule No.1 is over and above the 3 percent by the Shs 62.501 billion for which now before they can spend, the Budget Act requires prior approval of Parliament. So that is what I had meant to state in the statement. Thank you.  

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, what the Chair of the Committee is saying is exactly what I am saying. It is being stated here and I quote, “The balance of Shs 62.501 billion is above the 3 percent limit for which parliamentary approval is being sought before the money is spent.” 

I am just asking a simple question because if you read the last part in the conclusion, the prayer of the Committee is, “Finally, the Committee recommends that Parliament approves the supplementary expenditure schedule No.2 for FY 2008/2009 amounting to Shs 137,125,313,000 whose breakdown is as follows: Recurrent … and development ….” That is why I got up on a procedural matter. 

My question is: are we procedurally right to just approve a supplementary without considering the amount over and above the 3 percent allowed by law in the Budget Act, of which I have a copy here? And honourable chair, I have been in Parliament for seven years. Are we, by what we are doing, doing to right thing? Because we had also had a serious debate before; if you look at what the Constitution provides, it makes reference to items and not the total budget. And what we have deliberately done is to take the 3 percent as the total budget, allowing for sectors to spend even 20 percent above what is budgeted. If we carefully look at what we are doing, I think we are making a mistake. I am not blocking as my brother, the engineer, was intervening; I am not blocking the approval of any expenditure which is in the best interest of the country but all I am saying is that are we doing it rightly? And if we are not, let us do it right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chair, if Shs 62 billion is only what is beyond the 3 percent, why are we asking for the whole when part of it does not require our approval?   

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I stressed the Shs 62 billion specifically to show Parliament that the total expenditure so far, schedule No.1 and No.2, is actually over and above the 3 percent and I had to state by what amount it is over and above the 3 percent. Otherwise, the Budget Act requires, and I want to read verbatim, Section 12: “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed 3 percent of the total approved Budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament.” So my stating the 62.501 percent is to give details of by how much they have exceeded the 3 percent for which we are now asking approval including – of course it is inclusive in the total amount which was requested for under Supplementary Schedules 1 and 2. So, it is in Supplementary Schedule No. 2 that we realize that the amount is over and above the 3 percent and I had to give details.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. Unfortunately we had the same debate last year over these issues; we had the very same debate; the same issues arose.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, you see why I got concerned is that some of the issues that are most recent in terms of Government expenditure; the most recent is the one on Karamoja; Shs 10 billion that must be over and above the 3 percent. Now the Shs 10 billion of Karamoja only yesterday the hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere told us that he was already purchasing food. When did we approve that? (Interjections)- Please, and therefore, if we were to flush out that amount over and above – and they came and said: “Look, we need to spend this money.” In terms of supplementary, they could consolidate in submitting their supplementaries but the approval of any amount of money under your 12 is required and we have never done this, Madam Speaker. That is the point I am making.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I can appreciate the problem of the Leader of the Opposition but if you turn to Article 156 of the Constitution and particularly 156(2)(b) which provides: “If in respect of any financial year it is found that any monies have been expended for any purposes in excess of the amount  appropriated for that  purpose of for a purpose for which no amount had been appropriated by that Act,  a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid  down before Parliament  and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.” So it is under that provision that we are laying this amount, which has been spent in excess before Parliament and seeking for its approval. (Applause) Thank you, Madam. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank you, hon. Minister for your information. But you immediately run into problems if you quote that provision and you quote the provisions in the Budget Act, which your honourable chair has just read. If we are to go by what you are saying, then this provision in 12 in the Budget Act becomes totally redundant. And if it is interpreted to me that it is redundant, then I do not have a problem. But if we have been going by it, then the point I am making is a very simple point that you as Minister of Finance, you have to appreciate even more than me.

CAPT. OTEKAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. We need to resolve these issues first.

CAPT. OTEKAT: Is it on this issue? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

CAPT. OTEKAT: On this one no, I wanted to make a substantive contribution. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us resolve this one first.

4.35
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister, Aston Kajara is reading the Constitution which authorizes the Executive to spend money and come here for retrospective approval; that is given and nobody is disputing that. But the Budget Act was made in pursuance of the provisions of the Constitution. And it is the one which provided for the statutory limit; the ceiling of 3 percent. So if you spend less than 3 percent, you do not need to come here. But the moment you go beyond 3 percent, you need the approval of Parliament before. And what you are doing here is bringing an omnibus expenditure; one which requires approval and another that does not require approval. That is where you are making a mistake. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the problem. 

MR LUKWAGO: This excess of 62 billion must be particularized so that we understand it. But as we talk right now, where are the particulars for this excess which goes beyond the 3 percent? Where are the particulars? And this is where the problem is. Unless we appreciate that, we are bound to make a mistake. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know we had this same debate last year. Hon. Okecho, I think you should help the House.

4.36
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, this debate has been on for some time and when we were considering this supplementary, we had that in mind and that is why many of us in the committee felt that it should be proper for us to state how much money is in excess of 3 percent and whether that money has already been spent. We were told that the money totalling to 62.501 billion has not been spent and, therefore, we have got to come here for approval of Parliament. And that is what we are doing as a Member of the committee.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, if we could look at the Hansard on the debate on the same subject last year, you will find that this matter was discussed at length and in fact Parliament rejected the report of the Budget Committee which at that time was chaired by hon. Okecho. He is trying to hide his head -(Laughter)- and Parliament discussed this matter at length. I am surprised that we are forgetting what we discussed but it was decided that this year or any other budget, being brought for Supplementary Schedule No.2 should never exceed 3 percent.

It was very clear and they were told not do it again. We were going to do this but it should have been the last approval. You can spend on excess but up to 3 percent -(Interjections)- you can check the Hansard. I am just giving you information of the decision which was taken last year and hon. Okecho should be able to help Parliament because this decision was taken when he was there. Parliament did resolve –(Interruption)

MR PIRO SANTOS: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I have seen the hon. Cecilia Ogwal Atim’s name and signature in this report as a member of this committee. Therefore, is she in order to criticize the report on the Floor when she signed and agreed fully in the committee? Is she in order? (Applause)

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, the interpretation of this Section 12 was clearly given last year when we met the same huddles and that report which had that expenditure over and above 3 percent was approved.

But the provisions of the law are very clear and I have laboured to explain that the Act is very clear, it says: “… prior approval of any amount over above 3 per cent is required”. 

It is the reason we also specifically stated that amount of Shs 65.501 billion so that Parliament is aware of the extent that first of all we have exceeded the 3 percent and the amount which is involved. So I really do not understand why we are going through what we went through last year.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am comfortable with the interpretation which has been given by the chairperson and hon. Okecho that it is over and above 3 percent that we need approval before spending. Today is the 17th of June. If this money has not been spent, I have also seen on the Order Paper here, the next thing is the Vote-on-Account for us to authorise government to spend. If this money is not spent and they are asking for approval, do we really need it, given that we even have this Vote-on-Account coming in tomorrow or the day after, even given the circumstances that we have not been given the details of how the Shs 62.5 billion is going to be spent?

Can we be given that? Because it can even be taken care of in the Vote-on-Account which is coming? I do not think the Executive is going to spend Shs 62.5 billion in 13 days. I do not think so. Can I be given that information first, on those details, and also given this issue on Vote-on-Account, I would be comfortable if I am availed that information.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, first of all to clarify on the conflict between the Budget Act and the Constitution. What I read in the Constitution, if we read it together with the Budget Act, certainly the provision of the Constitution will prevail over what is provided in the Budget Act. 

Article 156 of the Constitution provides that money spent shall be laid down before Parliament and in case of excess expenditure within four months after the money is spent. But to be clear, Madam Speaker, what we presented before the committee as being in excess under supplementary expenditure over and above the 3 percent provision, includes for example Ministry of Education and Sports’ shortfall in secondary capitation grant -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, is there any harm in sleeping over this matter and we determine it tomorrow? Is one night too much? What the minister is saying is now different.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, these schedules were given out and the committee took cognisance of these schedules and actually they scrutinised them and this information which they are including in the report is derived from these schedules that were given to the committee.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this issue was supposed to have been settled by Thursday 22 May, because the Budget Committee went through and this time we were a bit happy because the Minister of Finance had to say, “I have gone above 3 percent” while last financial year it was a haggle here for that professor to say, “I am sorry.” 

This time they were very clear, they said they had overshot and we all accepted. The committee went through the details and every Member has that piece of paper - and the moment - by the way we append our signatures as committee members, I think there should not be a lot of doubt -(Interjections)- No, we represent you in the committee. So on your behalf we all agreed that Shs 62.5 billion we could see the details, which we all have –(Interjections)- no, what I am saying is that this report that is coming, I remember before Parliament was prorogued, each of us had that piece of paper, and we went through it.

I believe that really there is nothing bad. I am happy that there is some bit of truth in the Ministry of Finance and we should support them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has the money been spent or it is meant for the future? Because the chairperson has said the balance of Shs 62.5 billion is above the 3 percent for which Parliamentary approval is being sought before the money is spent. Has it been spent or it will be spent? 

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I want to say that we called all the ministers including the Minister of Finance and the technical personnel from Finance and the accounting officers. What we learnt as a committee is that this money is not yet spent – the Shs 62.1 billion which is over and above the 3 percent. The other amount is already spent because the Budget Act allows the Executive to do that. Now this other one is not yet spent but total approval is required for the whole amount. That is the issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if there is no approval required for the 3 percent, why are you putting it together with the Shs 62 billion?

MS AKOL: It is supplementary expenditure which requires approval of Parliament. The 3 percent is spent because the Budget Act provides that they can spend and within a period of four months come and report. But now, the 3 percent plus the over and above is all presented here in this schedule No.2. Approval first of all before expenditure is required for the Shs 62 billion but also the other expenditure which was spent in the four months which is within the 3 percent requires parliamentary approval as provided for in the law. That is what I wanted to clarify. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know the procedure honourable; you cannot put up your hand. I do not see it. (Laughter)

MR KIYINGI: I just want to propose a way forward. This committee is quite big with 20 people and the people who have endorsed this report are significant. As a House, there are things we can do but I think we delegate much of the detailed work for scrutiny and examination to the committees and the committee I think has done a very good job. Of course the issues which the colleagues are raising are important. We can get clarifications and explanations. I want to move that we approve and we get some clarifications, if at all, later from the relevant ministry and the committee.

MR DENNIS OBUA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my opinion, Section 12 of the Budget Act is very clear as read. It empowers government to spend in excess of the approved budget except that it should not exceed 3 percent. Now in this case, if government wants to spend any other money beyond 3 percent, government should come to Parliament. And now government has come to Parliament.

It is also true that according to that report, the money which is over and above the 3 percent has not yet been utilised. What is the way forward? There is need for the committee to request the House to approve that sum, which is over and above the 3 percent that totals to Shs 62.5 billion and not Shs 137 billion. To me this is the position as provided for in the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But this is what I have been saying. Anyway, I think there is no harm if we look at this matter tomorrow. We had a very lengthy debate on this matter last year –(Interjections)- let us do it properly. What you want is the Shs 62 billion and not the Shs 137 billion. Can I ask the committee to sit again, review this matter and report back tomorrow? Please. 

MR KAJARA: With due respect to your ruling, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I rise on a point of order as a person who has been in this Parliament for coming to eight years now and a lawyer by profession. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear to the effect that the Speaker’s ruling on any matter in this House is final and the method of contesting it is clearly stipulated in our rules. Is the hon. Minister in order to stand up in front of this House to challenge the ruling of the Speaker and exhibit amateurism on the Floor of this House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member has been operating from a bit far away but we welcome you back to Kampala. The matter is simple; what is it you require the approval for? Is it the 3 percent for which the law says you can spend and just report or the additional? And what is the additional? That is what we want you to give us tomorrow; separate them. Say I am laying this which is the allowed 3 percent here and now this request is for additional. (Applause) Yes, separate them because now you are taking all of them. Why do you bring that which was under 3 percent here? It is for laying on the Table. You come back tomorrow.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION 
OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES 
ON THE FOREST RESERVES IN UGANDA

4.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mrs Winfred Masiko): Madam Speaker, we are ready with the report but it has delayed in the printery and the copies are not enough. I am of the opinion that it would be prudent that we distribute them early in the morning so that we debate the issue in the afternoon. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, yesterday hon. Ekanya raised a matter on the Floor of this House about a strike of clearing agents at Malaba Customs Post as a result of Uganda Revenue Authority introducing a one-stop clearance at the point of cargo destination, and you directed that I make a ministerial statement on the matter. That statement is ready and I want to confirm to the House that there was no such thing as a strike on the Malaba Customs Post and the situation, as I will give the details, is simply a response to improvement in the clearing and forwarding of goods intended for efficiency in the economy. 

There is demand globally that the cost of doing business should be reduced and that is indeed the theme of the budget. There is every effort to remove unnecessary interventions in the movement of goods and services. Consequently, Malaba Customs Post, which is Uganda’s main gateway, handles about 80 percent of the dry cargo and about 20 percent of the fuel imported in the country. It is also doing exactly the same to improve and reduce the cost of doing business in the country and as a result, the Uganda Revenue Authority after consultation with Kenya Revenue Authority and with our development partners, introduced a one-stop clearing processing for road cargo at Malaba. It is a very simple thing that cargo particularly destined for big towns like Kampala, Jinja and big companies like Transami instead of handling their cargo at Malaba can clear their cargo at their destination and as a result, it has immense benefits –(Interjection)- well, I am not reading it; I am summarising it. I am trying to save time. 

The benefit of this initiative is tremendous because a process which used to take three days can take only three hours and the overtime charges which business communities incur is virtually eliminated. The issue of fighting with goods because of the long stay at the border is also reduced. The chances or manipulation for documents leading to diversion of cargo and revenue loss is also eliminated by simply allowing clearance of cargo for the big towns to their point of destination. When that is done, there are challenges -(Interjections)– I am on page 3, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, can you please follow the statement?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes. The non stoppage of import cargo on the Kenya side has resulted into high arrivals of trucks into Uganda and with the limited paved parking space at Malaba, the final clearance involving verification of goods and payment of taxes for those goods destined to other inland destinations such as Jinja and Kampala has been temporarily moved to those destinations. This, however, excluded clearance of home bound fuel. This measure will be reviewed when the ongoing repairs of the Uganda Revenue Authority parking yard are completed. 

Challenge No. 2 is that first, clearance and the temporary movement of final clearance destinations have resulted into lower business for the local postulations. This is the point which members need to appreciate for hon. Ekanya’s concern –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The minister is reading a document that most of the members are not privy to. So, we do not know what he is reading since we do not have the documents. Is it procedurally right for him to continue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many members do not have the text?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, there were copies outside and some were distributed. So you can ask the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think his machine is not working well -(Laughter)- let us adjourn this to tomorrow. Make sure the machine is operational and distribute everything and make the statement tomorrow. Thank you very much. But I want to thank you for acting so quickly; I think we should appreciate that you really acted fast. Hon. Members, let us adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. in the afternoon.

(The House rose at 5.03 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 June 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

