Tuesday, 17 June 2008

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this first meeting of the third session of Parliament. I am happy to note that both sides are properly constituted. You are welcome. 

Honourable members, this morning the Business Committee sat to decide on how we are going to transact the business, which is before us. In the course of the day, I will give you the details of what has been worked out. 

On 13th this month, I received children from the Rwenzori region. This was part of the programme of the day of the African Child, which was celebrated the other day. These children were from the districts of Kyenjojo, Kasese, Kamwenge, Kabarole and Bundibugyo. They presented to me a statement and requested me to read it to you because we could not accommodate the entire Parliament where we were. They, therefore, requested me to read this statement during the next sitting. It reads as follows:

“Hon. Speaker of Parliament, hon. Members of Parliament, foreign and international observers, ladies and gentlemen and fellow children in the House, allow me to give the theme of this year’s day of the African Child: Child Participation, Children to be Heard and Seen. 

According to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, a child is any person who is below the age of 18. In the House today are children representing the Rwenzori region, which covers the districts of Kyenjojo, Kasese, Kamwenge, Kabarole and Bundibugyo. As children from the region, we have brought our voices in this mail box” - honourable members, as you have been going out of Parliament, you have seen a box. That was the mail box, which the children brought to me. It contained more than 14,000 voices from more than 150 schools from the region. 

“Hon. Speaker, I would like to use this chance to thank the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the good work being done but allow me to deliver to the House some of the problems affecting children in the region: poor education, lack of teachers, books and classrooms, child abuse, defilement, rape and insecurity. The standard of education in the region is very low compared to other districts. This is caused by the few text books and materials, few teachers, few classrooms, long distances to school and insecurity for children and outbreak of epidemic diseases such as Ebola, AIDS and disabled children who are not going to school.

Allow me to talk about child abuse and inform the House that child abuse is common in the region. Defilement, rape, forced and early marriage, child labour and mistreatment, to name a few, are big problems. 

We are requesting the Government of the Republic of Uganda to help us with the following: better conditions for the teachers in areas hard to reach, construct more classrooms, employ more teachers, provide books, provide free education with no hidden costs, construct better schools for children with disabilities, and help us stop child abuse and defilement.

Hon. Speaker, we hope that our issues are raised and will be dealt with. We are grateful to the Speaker of Parliament and the National Parliamentary Forum for Children for allowing us to deliver the voices from the Western region to you. For God and my country!” 

That is the message that I received and it is a message to you, honourable members. Thank you very much.

2.36
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and which is urgent in nature. I wish to report to you and the august House that on Saturday, 7th this month, the Police, accompanied by the Military Police and some unidentified persons who were armed to the teeth, invaded the headquarters of a duly registered political party, that is, the Democratic Party, which is my party. They seized the party headquarters situated on plots 2/3, City House building, William Street. They went away with our party property: computers, TV and other items, including files. 

Mr Speaker, they did not only do that but also left some police officers there to guard the party headquarters to block us from accessing them and as we talk now, our party headquarters are still being occupied by those police officers - mean-looking men! You can’t even dare go to City House where our party headquarters are situated. 

This act, Mr Speaker, has lots of implications as far as constitutional governance is concerned in this country, as well as multi-party democracy. It is good the Minister of Internal Affairs is here; we would wish to know as to why our party headquarters were invaded and taken over by the Police, and up to now they are still being occupied by the Police? We have not been given any reason whatsoever, whether oral or written. 

We took the trouble to write to the Minister of Internal Affairs. We wrote a letter dated 11th June, seeking for a clarification on this matter and for information as to why there was such invasion of the party headquarters and why they were taken over. It is unfortunate that up to now we have not received any response from the minister. The letter is dated 11th and copies were given to your Office and to all Members of the House. We endeavoured to give you copies of this communication, which was duly signed by our president. So, apart from getting an explanation as to why these party headquarters were invaded and our property taken away, may we know the legality of this act? And if it is an illegal act, what position does Government intend to take on this matter and against the perpetrators of this crime?

Related to that, we have also seen a statement from the Attorney-General trying to interpret the judgement of the Constitutional Court and it is circulating in the media and in the public, but I do not know whether the Attorney-General intends to make a formal statement here on this issue because this is a matter that we need to discuss extensively. I have seen the interpretation, which has been given by the Attorney-General; it is wanting in material particulars, in my observation, and we need to dissect it, discuss it and see the way forward as Parliament. I have a copy here; I do not know whether the Attorney-General intends to bring a similar statement or this very statement to this House for our consideration. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, do you want to respond?

2.41
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Lukwago who has raised this point. As you very well know, Parliament pronounced itself on the establishment of a select committee to investigate some of the incidences that have taken place in the last several days, including the conduct of the Police. One of the areas to be investigated is this very point raised by hon. Lukwago. So, if it is your wish, I will come to the House with a comprehensive statement on the matter.

Nevertheless, since Parliament has already pronounced itself and a select committee of Parliament is going to investigate this matter, it would, in my view, be appropriate for this matter to be thoroughly investigated by Parliament, facts established and appropriate action taken. I await your guidance, Sir. 

THE SPEAKER: I think his point is that he wants his office back. Is it possible to open the office without prejudice to the inquiry? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I think that is a mater that is already being handled and I expect the offices to be open anytime -(Interjections)- in any case, I do expect that if they are not already open, they will be open by tomorrow. 

2.43
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the same vein, now that the honourable minister has agreed that at an appropriate time he will be able to come and make a comprehensive report, I also wish to find out from him if he could give us, Members of the Forum For Democratic Change, an explanation for the unexplainable arrest that the Police has made of a number of our members? 

Two weeks back, FDC organised a residential training for its youths in Kawempe Division and immediately thereafter, the Police swung into action and arrested six of our members. And last week on Thursday there was another workshop organised for the western region in Mbarara - yet another residential training with support from Westminster Foundation – where we received two experts to assist us in the training. Again, Police and the military swung into action, surrounded the hotel and dispersed the facilitators and our workshop participants. We will appreciate if the minister could also, in his explanation, give us information to that effect because we believe we are in multi-partism. We believe these are activities, which were conducted within the parameters of the law, and the necessary authorities were duly informed about these activities. If the Police are going to swing into action just because members of the Opposition parties are either conducting a workshop or carrying out an activity, it makes the programme for deepening of democracy a dream in this country. 

We would appreciate, Mr Minister, if you could enlighten us – not only on that, even last Saturday we conducted another similar meeting in Naguru. The Police again swung into action and it took us getting in touch with the Inspector-General of Police to come and cool down his members to say, “Please, this is a lawful meeting, can you please retreat and go back!” How many times are we going to always go to the Office of the Inspector-General of Police? Should I come from Arua to do that? Should somebody come from Kisoro? Should someone come from Kotido to always knock at the door of the Inspector-General of Police when they are conducting a legitimate activity? We would wish to hear that. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is obviously in the interests of Government, the Opposition and the country to have political parties organise themselves properly, have meetings held in peaceful and legal environments. What my brother hon. Wadri is raising- it is true that those incidents took place. However, the explanations given are not quite consistent with what I know in terms of the factual details. 

What is true is that the leader of the Opposition and some Members of the Opposition linked up with both the Inspector General of Police in order to ensure that there was no hitch in organising these meetings. However, in the case of the meeting in Mbarara which brother hon. Wadri has talked about, the Police, specifically through the Regional Police Commander, went to the area where the meeting was taking place to reassure everybody –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I hope that colleagues listen attentively.

THE SPEAKER: I think honourable minister you promised to make a statement and hon. Wadri added the incidence which – so when you make a statement, please include that.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Sir. I take your advice and I will make a comprehensive statement on the matter.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker; just a small matter on this statement. We really need to know the position because –

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, this is not the Attorney-General’s statement. You have sent me a copy. I think let us wait for the Attorney-General to be here then we can deal with it. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose­­_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are expanding this matter. The notification I have got from hon. Lukwago is in writing here.

2.48
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, on Thursday last week, we went and we were duly constituted as a Parliament sitting outside the Chamber; this Chamber. While we were there and prior to that, there had been a flurry of consultations that involved members both in the Opposition and in Government. At the end, a final position was arrived at where a motion which was later moved was due to be moved before the Budget speech would be read.

We sat expecting that even when it was not specifically spelt out on the Order Paper, given the understanding that was arrived at with you, hon. Speaker, this motion would be raised. Unfortunately, after you made your statement, you invited the Minister of Finance to read the Budget. Out of concern that there had been some agreed position, I rose on a procedural matter and I started to explain to you that I had risen because I had been informed as the leader of the Opposition and we had agreed to a position where a motion would be moved. I had seen a copy of the motion and I had agreed to it with all our members. Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, I was not given even an opportunity to explain why I had risen and at the end there were exchanges between me and you, Mr Speaker, the final of which was that you denied me the Floor. 

Being the honourable gentleman that I am –(Applause)- I chose not to contest the final statement given that we had the whole country and the international community in attendance for the Budget Speech. And since I was already denied the Floor, it was quite obvious that the entire Opposition was denied the Floor; and therefore I took a very difficult option of asking my members to leave. In fact, by the time I made that statement the microphone was already switched off.

Mr Speaker, I rise, first of all, to thank the many members on both sides of the House who reacted in support of what I thought was a positive thing because the concern was about Parliament. But I also rise to establish clarification because if the leader of the Opposition cannot even be allowed to explain why he rises, then who can be listened to? Mr Speaker what has happened creates a lot of difficulties for many of us. Our Members were very upset.

Secondly, I thank hon. Dombo and the Members who ensured that that motion was raised. But even when the motion was raised, given that we were not in the House and if we wanted to share in the challenges addressed by the motion –(Prof. Kamuntu rose_)- hon. Prof. Kamuntu, you and I hold professional jobs in different faculties; I do not know why you seem to disturb me too frequently -(Laughter) Mr Speaker, this is a very difficult situation, but if I did not rise to express my personal disappointment and the concern of my Members, I would be doing a great disservice to this multi-party Parliament. So, I thought that at the earliest opportunity I would rise to raise this matter before the House.

We would be very happy to receive reassurance because explanations were given which were not correct. I had not explained myself. Even in courts, before a judgment as to whether you should no longer be heard is made, at least they hear you to some extent. My being switched off was a big embarrassment to me and I believe that the person who did that should be followed up.

Mr Speaker, we in the Opposition want to work with you and our colleagues on the Government side as a parliament for the good of this country. It will not be possible to work in the way we have worked, if we are treated as if we are subordinate elements; if we are treated as if rumours about what we intend to do constitute our position without us explaining ourselves. We do hope that what happened was an exception that we would not want to see again. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not want to make any comment on what happened because I was shocked that the procedure of this House was not followed. We do not have procedures for Government side and we do not have different procedures for the Opposition. We do not have procedures for the leader of the Opposition or Prime Minister. The procedure we follow are common rules that must be followed by everybody. (Applause)

I had decided not to comment on this because I thought that given the time lag that has elapsed people had revised the Rules of Procedure and knew exactly what should have happened. But now that this has been raised, I am constrained to explain the procedure. 

The procedure is related to a matter that is not scheduled or a business whose notice has not been given. That day, as indeed today, hon. Lukwago, because he wanted to raise a point, which I allowed him to, had before the start of business, indicated to me that he would raise such a point. This was informal communication to me; informal, but it was intended to alert me that when the formal business starts he would rise to make a point. If you look at our Rules of Procedure specifically Rule 46 (1(b) and if your matter falls under that one, then you have to look at Rule 51 (1(b)

What shocked me was that it had been agreed, and apparently to the knowledge of the leader of the Opposition, that unscheduled business would come that day, although it was for the Budget, we had agreed with the person that we would move that business in the name of hon. Dombo whose business he intended to raise had been given to me and I had a copy. It also had been agreed that when I call the minister scheduled on business to move a motion, he would interrupt that business by standing. 

No sooner, not even a minute, had I finished calling upon the minister than somebody stood without having given notice to me; that was not within the rules. [Hon. Members: “Yes!”] The rules were accepting hon. Dombo - in fact when I said, “Minister of Finance, come in,” I expected hon. Dombo to stand and say, “Point of procedure.” I did explain to the hon. Member, that that morning some people had approached me. 

Let it be made clear that when one wants to interrupt a scheduled business, he has to informally approach the Chair and inform it that he intends to do so. And once this has been agreed upon, it does not mean that the Order Paper will be altered. No, the Order Paper remains as it is. The Speaker or Chair will start the business, but because of the foreknowledge, there will be an interruption; that is the procedure we are going to follow. Full stop! (Applause) Next business – [Prof. Latigo rose_] (Laughter)

PERSONAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Before we proceed on the next business, honourable members, in the distinguished members’ gallery, we have honourable Members of Parliament of the Republic of Kenya serving on the Kenya Parliamentary Service Commission. The team is composed of hon. Walter Nyambati, the Vice Chairman of the Commission; hon. Peter Mwathi, hon. Zakayo Cheruiyot, hon. Jamleck Kamau, hon. John Alago Aluoch, hon. Joseph Lekuton, and hon. Jilus Mugor. They are accompanied by staff of Kenya Parliamentary Commission. Please join me in welcoming them to Parliament. (Applause) Let us move to the next item. Yes, point of procedure?

3.03
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I have heard your statement and I am really very pleased with you that we are going to follow our Rules of Procedure.

Mr Speaker, having gone through our Rules of Procedure, I realise that Rule 46 says in parts: “The following motions may be moved without notice…” So, I wonder whether without notice implies that before one moves such a motion he/she has to first notify the Speaker. (Applause)

So, Mr Speaker, I have a matter of national importance, which I would like to raise today. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, the people of Lango; the people of greater North have heard, with pleasure, the calling by the President of the Republic of Uganda that we must work for prosperity. They are willing; they are ready, but there is a matter that is very important to my people and for the last two weeks my phone has been ringing from morning to the next morning and the matter is about cotton. Our people have realised that in order to fight –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, under what rule are you bringing that motion?

MR OKOT OGONG: Under Rule 46 (b) – to discuss a matter of definite urgent public importance.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to look at Rule 51 and read it?

MR OKOT OGONG: Rule 51 – I do not know whether you want me to go through all of it. “Adjournment Motion: Definite matter of urgent public importance. Rule 51(1) Any Member may move the adjournment motion for purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance, and if- a) not less than five other Members rise in their places in support –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to read 51(2)?

MR OKOT: “A Member desiring to move the adjournment motion under sub-rule (1) shall, save in exceptional circumstances given out to the satisfaction of the Speaker -”
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to resume you seat? Next item – 

MR OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order, in relation to Rule 6; it concerns the general authority of the Speaker. And Rule 6(2) says: “The Speaker shall preserve order and decorum in the House and shall decide questions of order and practice -”. 

So the point of order I am raising is in relation to the submissions of hon. Okot Ogong. He has indicated that our people survive on cotton and they do not have cotton seeds. And you have ruled because you have the authority that we go to the next item. So the people of Padre want to plant the seeds because the gardens are ready and there are no cotton seeds -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a lot to do. If hon. Okot Ogong has a matter of urgent importance- I have not said he doesn’t, but he still has to follow our Rules of Procedure. Now, if you have one, maybe after today, you will come to my office and comply with Rule 51(2), then we shall accord you opportunity tomorrow. Please resume your sit. And for you to internalise the rule, I give you an hour to go and do so.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.09
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Permit me to express concern over the torture and harassment subjected to me and my constituents by the Anti-riot Police recently at Kitebi and the Kiboko Squad at Ndeeba Market in my constituency. 

Mr Speaker, on 7 June 2008, I organised a youth cycling tournament which was followed with the launching of a development project of Kitebi Primary School. I am an old girl of that school and I had informed the Police about the function ahead of time. 

At about 4 p.m., several anti-riot pick-ups invaded my meeting in an enclosed school compound and opened tear-gas in front of me and my constituents, including school children. These people were very rough; they were dressed in police attire and behaved like military men. They directed the tear-gas at me and I became unconscious; I lost track of what was going on. 

Mr Speaker, the Police said that they had instructions to put everything to a complete end. They used excessive force to disperse every one on site. I could not even be allowed to tell my constituents that Police had ordered me to put everything to an end. The Police switched off the electricity to ensure that the loudspeakers were functionless. 

As if that was not enough, I saw with my own eyes one of the policemen directly pouring a toxic chemical in the eyes of one of my constituents. The young man may even lose his sight as a result of the invasion. 

Two days after the said event, on Hero’s day, at around 10 a.m. I received eight calls from my constituents in Ndeeba inviting me to immediately come and give advice over the security of their work in Ndeeba Market. I knew there had been wrangles over the ownership of the market. I immediately called Police 999 to rush and sort out any security problems. I rushed to the market and before I could listen to what my constituents wanted me to hear, one gentleman by the names of Fred Kazibwe, who calls himself the chairman of NRA in Ndeeba, commanded the Kiboko Squad to beat me in the presence of the officer in charge of Ndeeba Police post. Police was watching when the Kiboko Squad, commanded by Kazibwe, were kicking and beating me! Police up to now has not arrested any of the tormentors even when their names are well known. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to read some of the members of the Kiboko Squad who attacked and assaulted me in the presence of the O/C Ndeeba Police Post, Mr Onyango. One of them is Kazibwe Fred, the Chairman NRM Ndeeba Parish; Ssekandi Edward - not Mr Speaker - (Laughter); Izimba Geoffrey from Nakawa division; Nyaraya Francis, a cyclist at Owino Market; Farouk Mulindwa from Ndeeba; Charles Lubega, Najjuma from Ndeeba; Mama Kyama from Ndejje; Bitijuma Mangeni - he comes from the RDC’s office Kampala district. Magoola Patrick from State House; Nalubega Mai Hajat, Mbabazi from State House; Nkeize Wilson from State House. 

Mr Speaker, as I speak now, I have just received a phone call that they are seriously beating up people in Ndeeba. What is Government doing? Nampijja has no interest in that market; I have no interest in that market. My interest is to see that vendors and traders in Ndeeba market are free and secure. I do not have any interest!

Finally, I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, for the concern and sympathy you expressed over what happened to me. I also thank my constituents for remaining close to me during such a critical time in my life.

Mr Speaker, knowing what happened to me, the humiliation, torture and embarrassment that I received from my tormentors, I wish also to extend my sympathy to my MP, hon. Nabilah Sempala, for the torture, inhumane and degrading treatment she received from the Police force of Uganda. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker.

CONSTITUTING THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 159 AND RULE 160 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE  SPEAKER: Honourable Members, this item is coming because of rule 159 and rule 160 of our Rules of Procedure under which Sessional Committees are constituted. The names I am going to read are of various Sessional Committees that I understand have been arrived at in the agreement of both the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Chief Whip. 

Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal INDUSTry and Fisheries

Hon. Wonekha Oliver (Chairperson) 
Hon. Dr Katende Lastus 
Hon. Bagiire Aggrey 
Hon. Nsubuga William 
Hon. Bintu Jalia Lukumu Abwooli 
Hon. Kabonesa Juliet 
Hon. Kiboijana Margaret 
Hon. Magoola Zirabamuzaale 
Hon. Mugyenyi Mary 
Hon. Nayiga Florence 
Hon. Ssalabaya Haruuna 
Hon. Ahabwe Pereza 
Hon. Kagwera Stephen 
Hon. Wopuwa George 
Hon. Bucyanayandi Tress 
Hon. Odit John 
Hon. Kamya Beti Olive 
Hon. Kassiano Wadri 
Hon. Ojok B’leo 
Hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

Those are the names. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs

Hon. Kasamba Mathias (Chairperson) 
Hon. Abura Samuel Pirir (Vice Chairperson) 
Hon. Aleper Margaret 
Hon. Alupo Jessica 
Hon. Kamba Saleh 
Hon. Katongole Badhul 
Hon. Kazibwe Musisi Tom 
Hon. Kibedi Zaake 
Hon. Mbagadhi Frederick 
Hon. Mukose Mutabaali 
Hon. Ssekikubo Theodore 
Hon. Mujuzi Pius 
Hon. Kyaka Kyokuhairwa 
Hon. Muwuma Milton 
Hon. Latif Sebaggala 
Hon. Kyanjo Hussein 
Hon. Kiyonga Francis 
Hon. Akello Judith Franca 
Hon. Yokasi Bihande, and 
Fungaroo Kaps Hassan.

I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Sessional Committee on Foreign Affairs

Hon. Lule Mawiya (Chairperson) 
Hon. Kaliba Steven (Vice Chairperson) 
Hon. Nalugo Mary Sekiziyivu 
Hon. Matte Joseph 
Hon. Mutuluuza Peter Claveri 
Hon. Hood Katuramu 
Hon. Kyatuheire Jacqueline 
Hon. Bartille Johnson Toskin 
Hon. Lokii Peter 
Hon. Col. Phinehas Katirima 
Hon. Muwulize Norman 
Hon. Oleru Huda 
Hon. Okumu Reagan 
Hon. Dr Lulume Bayiga 
Hon. Akiror Agnes 
Hon. Kiiza Winifred 
Hon. Godi Akbar Hussein 
Hon. Amongi Betty Ongom 
Hon. Balikuddembe Joseph and 
Hon. Obua-Ogwal Benson.

I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Hon. Tindamanyire Kabondo (Chairperson) 
Hon. Oleny Charles (Vice Chairperson) 
Hon. Akol Rose Okullu 
Hon. Balyejjusa Julius 
Hon. Banyenzaki Henry 
Hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega 
Hon. Kakooza James 
Hon. Okorimoe Janet 
Hon. Tinkasiimire Barnabas 
Hon. Tuma Ruth 
Hon. Guma Gumisiriza 
Hon. Capt. Kyomugisha Grace 
Hon. Sejjoba Isaac 
Hon. Okecho William 
Hon. Nandala-Mafabi 
Hon. Oduman A.C. 
Hon. Oyet Simon 
Hon. Nsubuga Birekeraawo 
Hon. Ekanya Geofrey 
Hon. Simon Ross.

I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Sessional committee on Labour and Social Development

Hon. Amongi Beatrice Lagada (Chairperson) 
Kabanda Sabano (Vice Chairperson) 
Hon. Muyinda Rosemary 
Hon. Nokrach William 
Hon. Byamukama Nulu 
Hon. Mwebaza Sarah 
Hon. Omwony Adong 
Hon. Tubbo Christine 
Hon. Dr Makumbi James 
Gen. Aronda Nyakairima 
Hon. Kasule Lumumba 
Hon. Lubyayi Iddi Kisiki 
Hon. Lukwago Rebecca 
Hon. Nampijja Susan 
Hon. Acen Rhoda 
Hon. Aciro Concy 
Hon. Ogwang John 
Hon. Nakawuki Susan.

I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Sessional Committee on Information, Communication and Technology

Hon. Baliddawa Edward (Chairperson) 
Hon. Turyahikayo Paula (Vice Chairperson) 
Hon. Bahati David 
Hon. Katende Sematiko 
Hon. Kyeyago Jowali 
Hon. Igeme Nabeta 
Hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine 
Hon. Maj. Gen. Okello Francis 
Hon. Wangwa Nagudi 
Hon. Tubwita Grace
Hon. Ndawula Kaweesi
Hon. Kwebiha Joyce
Hon. Tumwesigye Elioda
Hon. Kajeke Wilfred
Hon. Oceng Alex Penytoo
Hon. Otto Isaa Amiza
Hon. Apiliga Moses 
Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba
Hon. Nalubega Mariam
Hon. Kawuma Muhamad

I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FISCAL INFRASTRUCTURE

Hon. Byandala Abraham – Chairperson
Hon. Baba Diri – Vice Chairperson
Hon. Asiimwe Brian
Hon. Balikowa Henry
Hon. Busima Cosma
Hon. Byanagwa Samuel
Hon. Byanyima Nathan
Hon. Kisira Margaret
Hon. Kwizera Eudia
Hon. Lokodo Simon
Hon. Nansubuga Nyombi
Hon. Jim Muhwezi
Hon. Otada Owori Amooti
Hon. Dombo Emmanuel
Hon. Piro Santos
Hon. Amuriat Oboi Patrick
Hon. Okupa Elijah
Hon. Omolo Peter
Hon. Mabbike Michael
Hon. Kabuusu Moses

I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

Hon. Tashobya Stephen  - Chairperson
Hon. Sabila Herbert – Vice Chairperson
Hon. Achia Remigio
Hon. Kiyingi Asuman
Hon. Ndeezi Alex
Hon. Niwagaba Wilfred
Hon. Maj. Mpabwa Sarah
Hon. Gen.Tinyenfuza David
Hon. Netalisire Sarah
Hon. Col. Kyamulesire Ramadhan
Hon. Bakka Mugabi Stephen
Hon. Namayanja Rose
Hon. Karooro Okurut Mary
Hon. Sekyanzi Ndawula Ali
Hon. Nyombi Peter
Hon. Ben Wacha
Hon. Lukwago Erias
Hon. Njuba Sam
Hon. Odonga Otto Samuel
Hon. Abdu Katuntu
I congratulate hon. Otto for having graduated with an LLB degree. 
I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

Hon. Masiko Winfred – Chairperson
Hon. Ochieng Peter – Vice Chairperson
Hon. Munyira Rose 
Hon. Bukeni Gyabi Fred
Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi
Hon. Kawoya Bangirana Hanifa
Hon. Kyahurenda Tom
Hon. Kyetunda Elijah
Hon. Ngabirano Charles
Hon. Kavuma Nvumeta Ruth
Hon. Nyanzi Vincent
Hon. Najjuma Kasasa
Hon. Onyango Kakoba
Hon. Stephen Mukitale
Hon. Yeko Arapkisa
Hon. Anywar Beatrice
Hon. Ibi Florence
Hon. Kasigwa Harry
Hon. Akena Jimmy
Hon. Ebong David

I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS

Hon. Menhya Gerald – Chairperson
Hon. Oburu Grace – Vice Chairperson
Hon. Badda Fred
Hon. Kashaija Robert
Hon. Kasozi Joseph
Hon. Tumwebaze Frank
Hon. Kiryapawo  Loy
Hon. Muhanga Mugisha
Hon. Olega Asraf Noah
Hon. Butime Tom
Hon. Kitatta Abdu
Hon. Nyomera Namoe Stella
Hon. Mukasa Bakaluba
Hon. Kibanzanga Christopher
Hon. Okello-Okello Livingstone
Hon. Opange Louis
Hon. Kikungwe Isaa
Hon. Nabilah Sempala
Hon. Loote Sammy 
I put the question?

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

Hon. Yiga Anthony – Chairperson
Hon. Boona Emma – Vice Chairperson
Hon. Akumu Mavenjina
Hon. Bakeine Marbel
Hon. Byarugaba Alex
Hon Byenkya Beatrice
Hon. Nyago Lydia Kibwika
Hon. Achia Terence
Hon. Mulumba Medi
Hon. Tunde Mary
Hon. Mpairwe Beatrice
Hon. Namara Grace
Hon. Otekat John Emily
Hon. John Arumadri Drazu
Hon. Amuge Rebecca
Hon. Ringe Chan David
Hon. Ssozi Kaddumukasa
Hon. Emigu Julius Peter
Hon. Ocula Michael Nyeko
Hon. Malinga Johnson

I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY

Hon. Rwembembera Kiiza – Chairperson
Hon. Sseguya John Lubyayi – Vice Chairperson
Hon. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit
Hon. Mugambe Joseph
Hon. Okot Felix
Hon. Lyomoki Sam
Hon. Maj. Gen. Oketa Julius
Hon. Bahane Silver
Hon. Tete Chelangat
Hon. Pajobo Joram
Hon. Kabahweza Hashaka Florence
Hon. Sauda Mugerwa
Hon. Tana Sanjay
Hon. Auru Anne
Hon. Iriama Rose
Hon. Ekemu Charles
Hon. Kawanga John
Hon. Angiro Gutomoi
Hon. Toolit Simon Akech

I put the question.
(Question put and agreed to.)

SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES

Hon. Seninde Rosemary – Chairperson
Hon. Baryomunsi – Vice Chairperson
Hon. Amooti Erisa Kaahwa
Hon. Balisemera Jane
Hon. Rwakimari Beatrice
Hon. Gudoi Yahaya
Hon. Kubeketerya James
Hon. Lwanga Kasole Bwerere
Hon. Nalule Safia Juuko
Hon. Obua Dennis
Hon. Sinabulya Silva Namabidde
Hon. Arimpa Kigyagi John
Hon. Kataha Museveni Janet
Hon. Sentongo Teopista
Hon. Rusaniya Barumba Beatrice
Hon. Prof. Anokbonggo
Hon. Christine Bako Abia
Hon. Dr Epetait Francis
Hon. Alice Alaso
Hon. Aol Betty Ocan
 
I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I think these are the Sessional Committees for this Session.  I thank you very much for the appropriate action taken and I wish the Members success in their new assignments.  

3.32
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you very, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, I appreciate the designation of the named members on the relevant committees. However, Mr Speaker, given the provisions of our Rules of Procedure, the doctrine of separation of powers and the fact that these names are not actually the desired names chosen by the backbenchers but are chosen and designated by the Executive; and given the fact that these are the committees that carry out the oversight role of Parliament but the Executive wants these committees to dance to their tune; how do we in future separate the functions so that Parliament does its job more efficiently, independently and objectively without playing to the whims of the Executive? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, for a number of us, this is not the first time we are in Parliament but this is the first parliament under a multiparty system. The rules which we used when we were under a Movement system, with a no-party parliament, were completely different from the rules which we use now. Previously, people would put down their names depending on the committee one wanted to serve on and we would vote. However, with the new system of party control and party discipline, we agreed on a system under which these committees are going to be constituted. Those are the rules which I read to you - rules 159 and 160. The situation is now different; parties now control who goes to which committee. So, if you want to change, definitely we can change. 

This morning, I was presiding over the Business Committee meeting and I informed the members that last year, the Commonwealth Secretariat and Don MacKinnon sent to us a team of experts on these matters. They wrote a report and made some recommendations. We agreed in the committee that soon we shall sit and discuss these reports and see what we can adopt and what we do not want to adopt. Actually, in this report you will find that the experts even recommended some space for caucuses so that they are recognised and therefore have a part to play. All these will be considered and it will be up to you to consider the kind of menu that you want to have. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One of the cardinal principles of democracy is to have leaders elected. I imagine all of us in this House were elected; how do we have committees with leadership that is not elected or that is being imposed on the committees? I think what we should propose is that the committees themselves should be able, under the guidelines which you have spelled out, to elect their own leaders. To have some chiefs somewhere to come and impose leaders on our committees, I think, is quite unfortunate. Even with a working relationship, you need to head a committee where –(Interruptions) 

THE SPEAKER: As I said, honourable members, we have Rules of Procedure and these rules are determined by us. We are the ones who determined the Rules of Procedure that we have followed today. Since they are our Rules of Procedure, we have the freedom to change these rules. I have actually alerted the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to study that report and start thinking of the way forward. So, maybe in future if you do not want it, we shall change democratically.  

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a matter which was stood over as we awaited the coming of the Attorney-General.

THE SPEAKER: No, that was not a matter over which you had notified me. You came to talk about the Democratic Party offices but when I gave you the opportunity, you expanded it. Definitely, tomorrow you can approach me or you can ask the Attorney-General to be there. (Laughter) 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PARTNERSHIPS BILL, 2008

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, before you come up, hon. Attorney-General, I want to say that our colleague, the Deputy Attorney-General, hon. Fred Ruhindi, lost a sister whose burial will take place  either tomorrow or on Thursday in Kyenjojo. Maybe the Attorney-General will tell us more. 

3.39
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  Mr Speaker, it is true that hon. Fred Ruhindi, MP, Deputy Attorney-General and Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs lost his sister, Madam Lillian Balikya, and the arrangements for the funeral service and burial are awaiting the arrival of some of the children who are in the UK and whom we expect to arrive today. We will be able to announce more concrete plans when they have gotten together and agreed on how to proceed with the funeral service. 

THE SPEAKER:  Okay. Let us observe a moment of silence.

(The members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

3.41
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Partnerships Bill, 2008” be read for the first time. 

Mr Speaker, I refer to section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001 and I beg to lay on Table the certificate of financial implications duly signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for scrutiny and subsequent report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Partnerships Bill which is coming up looks as if it is amending an already existing law. As you are aware, in Parliament, we are not technical people in those areas so we would be very glad if in that Bill you are bringing, which I have managed to see somewhere, you tell us why you are amending the other old law. It is not clear.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, who has told you that this is amending the other Bill? Maybe it is repealing. I think let us wait because at the second reading, the Minister will explain.   

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS BILL, 2008

3.43
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Geographical Indications Bill, 2008” be read for the first time. I beg to refer to section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001 and I beg to lay on Table the certificate of financial implications duly signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE SPEAKER: Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and subsequent report. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CONTRACTS BILL, 2008
3.45
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Contracts Bill, 2008” be read for the first time. I refer to section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001 and by the grace of God, I wish to lay on Table the certificate of financial implications.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue to seek firm clarification and ascertainment from the honourable minister. When we made the Budget Act, we had had previous experience that when we passed laws, we would spend a lot of tax payers’ money; we pass laws and they are shelved just because Government does not have money to implement the laws that we have passed.  

Right now, it is gradually looking like the process of giving us a certificate of financial implications is becoming ceremonial and Government is not committed. There are so many laws that have been passed by this Parliament and ministers have come here and said they cannot implement them because they do not have funds. I just wanted, on a procedural matter, to seek clarification form the honourable minister; is he serious this time that the certificate of financial implications indicates that money is going to be provided so that the laws that we are going to pass are going to be implemented? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Incidentally, who signs the certificate of financial implications?  

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, I have moved a motion for the Contracts Bill, 2008 to be read for the first time and I have also presented the certificate of financial implications. I have a small request to make; could Parliament take action on my motion and then I can deal with matters arising from the motion? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there are merits in the point raised by hon. Dombo. The certificate of financial implications, I believe, must be signed by the Minister of Finance who controls the budget. I would advise the committees that in case you do not believe in the effectiveness of the law or that it is not going to be implemented, when you are considering it as a committee, you are at liberty to summon the Minister of Finance so that you have a discussion with him. Should you find that the scheme is so exorbitant that it cannot be afforded, you may use that to make positive or negative recommendations. I so advise. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in last year’s budget, which is going to end on 30 June 2008, the Minister of Finance - the owner of money – said that the Anti Money Laundering Bill, which will be law, will be here by 30 March 2008. We have been here, it is coming to the end of the 12th month and there has never been a Bill or a law. Is this just for purposes of telling us and they go away or what? You are bringing other Bills yet there is an important Bill which should have been turned into law.

MR EKANYA: Supplementary to that, in 2006 when His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was opening the Eighth Parliament, he highlighted several constitutional amendments which were pending and directed the current Attorney-General to ensure that those amendments were handled that year. In 2007, he again highlighted the same matter.

Mr Speaker, you know that the team from the UK sent from the Commonwealth during their discussions raised the issue of late legislation which affects democracy and good governance in this country. May we know from the Attorney-General whether he has deliberately defied the President, or when he is bringing those constitutional amendments?

THE SPEAKER: Beginning next week, we shall be dealing with State-of-the-Nation Address. When we are handling it, you may raise your concerns and I think it will be addressed. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/08 BUDGET

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, in accordance with clause 2, sub-section (a) and (b) of Article 156 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I beg to lay Supplementary Schedule No.2 for the fiscal year 2007/08 amounting to Shs 104,535 billion before this august House.

THE SPEAKER: Let the supplementary business be handled by the appropriate committee of Parliament.

AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM (APRM) NATIONAL COMMISSION – UGANDA ASSESSMENT REPORT AND PROGRAMME OF ACTION

THE SPEAKER: For (ii), the owner said he will come later, not today. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, you did say that the person responsible says he is not ready; could we know the reasons as to why he is not ready?

THE SPEAKER: It is the timing. He has told me that there is a meeting concerning this particular subject in Cairo soon. They want to bring this report after that meeting because part of the proceedings there will form part of the document to be read here. So he told me to defer.

MR KATUNTU: We already have this report; is it going to be amended?

THE SPEAKER: Another document is going to be added, but not an amendment, so that you consider what you have with what they bring. 

INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT REPORT TO PARLIAMENT (JULY TO DECEMBER 2007)

THE SPEAKER: We shall deal with this one tomorrow

ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2007 – VOLUME 1, OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.56
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Richard Sebuliba Mutumba): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table volume 1 of the annual performance report for the year ended 30th June 2007 from the Office of the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee chaired by the person who has presented consider the report.

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2007 – VOLUME 2, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT

3.56
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Richard Sebuliba Mutumba): Mr Speaker, allow me again to lay on Table the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30th June 2007, Volume 2, central government. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the Public Accounts Committee take it over, scrutinise and report.

I have not been able to get the report of the Business Committee which sat today, but I will present it tomorrow. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.57 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 June 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)










