Tuesday, 16 June 2009

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this first meeting of the Fourth Session of Parliament and I hope that the short recess that you have just completed refreshed and energised you. I hope you have come with vigour to execute the expected constitutional responsibility. 

I also take this opportunity to congratulate you upon the good work done during the last session both on the parliamentary committees and in your constituencies. I wish to report that as Parliament, we were able to transact the following business: 18 Bills were passed; 32 motions for resolutions considered and adopted; 27 reports considered and adopted; 7 petitions were considered; 38 ministerial statements were presented and debated; 12 questions for oral answer were answered - that one I must point out was not a good performance. It translates to about two questions a month. Therefore, I would want to really ask the secretariat to be very strict with the format of questions and also to ask the ministers to structure the answers in such a way that questions can be answered quickly. Also as a presiding officer, it would be necessary for us to manage more rigorously the issue of supplementary questions. 

Secondly, we have improved on the working relationship between Parliament and the public, which is a cardinal principle for our governance. Through the Speaker’s outreach forum, we have been able to take Parliament to the people outside Kampala. Last year we met in November in Masaka with the leaders of Buganda and on the 20th and 29th of May this year, we met in Gulu with the leaders of Northern Uganda for a similar outreach. 

Hon. Members, I want to assure you that these meetings are a real eye-opener and they enabled us to have a different perspective of the management of public affairs through the eyes of other elected leaders like the LC V chairpersons, the speakers of the local governments, chief administrative officers, and so on. It is our intention that the outreach will become a regular feature of the parliamentary calendar. 

I also wish to take this opportunity to thank the UNDP for facilitating this forum. Our next outreach will take place in western Uganda and the other one will take place in eastern Uganda at a date to be announced.

We have a lot of business to be handled this session and this will require extra time and effort. I know that members have a lot of work both in Parliament and their constituencies but there are many things we have to accomplish. So, we require more discipline and better time management. I urge you to carefully work out a programme this session that will allow you to perform your work in the constituency as well as here in Parliament. 

In the last session, both in the plenary and in some committees, we were faced with issues of lack of quorum. This is not good for us especially since our proceedings are live in the media. It is, therefore, important that we improve on this bad aspect of our work both in the committees and the plenary.

Hon. Members, yesterday the Business Committee sat and the business we have agreed to do is as follows: today we shall receive papers from Parliament. There are a number of requests for funding mainly for the sustainable mineral development project. Tomorrow 17th of June, we shall deal with supplementary expenditure Schedule No. 1 and also deal with a report on the forest reserves by the Committee on Natural Resources. 

On Thursday we shall have question time as well as the Vote-on-Account and also deal with the report on the illegal sale of plots at the Old Taxi Park. 

Tuesday next week we shall deal with the report on the Economic Partnership Agreements, which as you know, hon. Members, have been a point of concern to members of this House. So, we shall have an opportunity to deal with them. 

We shall also deal with a report on the violence against women and then begin the Second Reading for the Contracts Bill, 2009.

On Wednesday we shall continue with the Contracts Bill. We shall also deal with the report on Equal Opportunities and the report of the Kampala City Traders (KACITA). 

On Thursday we shall have question time and also deal with the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009.

After that we shall begin the State of the Nation Address. We are hoping that by the close of business this week, the text of the State of the Nation Address will be available so that members can read them over the weekend and we start debate next week. 

Thereafter, the Business Committee will sit again to determine more business for the House. 
My other point of communication concerns today. It is a very important day; it is the Day of the African Child and today we are joining other African countries to celebrate this day whose theme is: “Accelerated Survival and Development: Creating a Safe Environment for Children.” I am informed that the objectives of the celebrations include: 

(i)	To commemorate the Soweto uprising where many children were brutally massacred by the Apartheid Regime in 1976.
(ii)	 To increase awareness of the current situation of the current situation of child survival and development in Uganda.
(iii)	To highlight the benefits of accelerated child survival in across all categories of children including children with disabilities.
(iv)	To review the extent   to which our policies and programmes address the survival and development situation and the gaps therein. 

In this connection, I urge members to continue championing, like you have done, and to defend the rights and welfare of our children particularly to take into account issues of child labour, the plight of street children, child prostitution, child neglect, child sacrifice, defilement, child molestation, trafficking and of course female genital mutilation. And also take into account the social economic welfare and education of these children.    

As far as our committees are concerned, hon. Members, we are in the transition stage and yesterday at the Business Committee we encouraged all the responsible authorities from all the sides of the House to complete selection of the members of their committees. And I expect that I will be able to announce the full composition of all the committees for the approval of this House tomorrow. In regard to that also, I have been requested by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to inform all those honourable chairpersons and deputy chairpersons who will have been appointed by tomorrow that they are invited to attend a sensitisation and training workshop on Friday, 19 June 2009 at Hotel Africana beginning at 8.30 a.m.

The Ministry of Finance is currently carrying out various reforms relating to the budget and implementing output oriented budgeting. This is geared at improving the monitoring function in government and the value for money by linking government’s strategic objectives, budget allocations and planned outputs. Therefore, as important stakeholders in the budget process, chairpersons and deputy chairpersons should attend this important workshop because it has a bearing on the mandate of the committees. 

I also take this opportunity to thank the Back Bench Members of Parliament for the record number of Private Member’s motions moved for Bills in the last session. As you recall, in the last two Parliaments we have not had more than three - in five years. But in this session alone, we had more than four and I do hope that they will be completed expeditiously so that the public can benefit from our work.

So, I warmly welcome you to this Fourth Session and wish you fruitful deliberations in all matters that will be referred to you for consideration. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

2.45 
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I rise on an issue of national importance. I came from Pader District yesterday; I have been there for four days and as we talk now, we have not been receiving rainfall for the last one and a half months. The people who have been returning to their homes had majorly cultivated maize and groundnuts but they have all been stunted. 

The people are very worried that within the next two months they may have nothing to eat and the threat for looming famine is very heavy in Pader District and parts of Kitgum. I wanted to bring this to the attention of this honourable House and specifically request the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business, plus the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to make strong commitments on the Floor of this House and probably send a team to investigate the magnitude of the problem in the North urgently. Otherwise, it is so alarming and the people are so worried that much as they have made individual efforts to go back home, the weather has let them down.
 Secondly, I want the government meteorologist to tell us the rainfall pattern because it looks like we do not know when it will rain and when it will not. So, can the minister in charge come to the Floor of this Parliament and give us a prediction of what will be the rainfall pattern in the whole country at least for a period that scientific invention can allow? Otherwise, Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity and I have appealed to the Leader of Government Business to come to the rescue of the people who have taken advantage of peace to go and settle home only to be let down by rain.  

2.48
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Emanating from your communication, I just wanted to correct two things.
You have raised the issue of questions on Thursdays; I think the Executive should take our rules seriously. They should take your statement seriously. Some of us have been asking questions but the Executive has not taken it seriously. I hope this time they take it seriously and answer the questions. I remember putting in a question in November last year regarding the fate of Shimoni Primary School and the Shimoni land but up to date, it has not been responded to. The ministers have changed but I know the offices are there. I hope this Thursday a response will come to that effect. 

I am happy the Prime Minister wrote to me after I had communicated to the responsible Minister for Finance to come and answer but unfortunately we were not able to get the response. I hope this time we should be able to get a response because there are so many issues that we are not aware of that we have read from the papers. So we need to know what is happening.
Two, it is also a culture when we have days like this, the Day of the African Child, Labour Day, Women’s and International Labour Day, for the ministers to come and give a statement here, but we have not seen one. I am wondering what is happening to the ministry; we thought that we would get a statement. 

Lastly, in the last two to three weeks the mistreatment that is smitten upon the women was all over the papers especially this woman from Pallisa where it was alleged that her husband made her to breastfeed a dog. There are contradicting statements that have we been in the papers about how the Police is handling the case and how the women of this country are mistreated. Can we have a statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs or the one of National Guidance and we get the status of what really happened over this inhuman act? We cannot continue like this in this country where a section of us is being mistreated to that level. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With regard to the question, starting from this Thursday I will put all the outstanding questions on the Order Paper. So it is up to the ministers to answer. The questions will appear automatically; whatever is outstanding will start appearing.

 2.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have been authorized by the Leader of Government Business, just as I was yesterday, to confirm that on our side as the Executive, we shall beautifully respond to all the questions for oral answer that will be presented to us. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, Minister of Health?

2.51
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not responding to the issue of the lady from Pallisa, which I think requires further investigations. But as far as the questions are concerned, I have had two questions, which were sent to my office, both of which were responded to.

Hon. Nokrach sent a question about the orthopaedic unit at Mulago. I sent the response but up to now it has not come up on the Order Paper. Hon. Nalule sent a question, which I responded to yet it has never appeared on the Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whom did you send the answers to? Where did you send the answer?

DR MALLINGA: We sent the answers to the Clerk’s Office.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You did not bother to tell the Speaker that you had sent your questions?

DR MALLINGA: We gave a copy to the Speaker. No -(Laughter)- and I also gave copies to the hon. Members who asked the question. If hon. Nockrach were here, he would say that he got a copy, hon. Nalule also got a copy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If they are within the precincts of Parliament they will be on the Order Paper this week.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you.

MS ROSE AKOL: I am just rising on a point that will require clarification from the Prime Minister and it is in regard to what hon. Otto has just presented. There was a commitment - and it is on record - as we were concluding the third Session of Parliament, the hon. Prime Minister committed himself that he would direct the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to call a meeting of all those MPs whose constituencies are being affected by famine. But up to today that meeting has not taken place and we are wondering when that meeting will take place because as it is of now, famine is still a problem. So, I want clarification from the Prime Minister about that commitment. Thank you.

2.54
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker, it is true there was a scheduled meeting with Members of Parliament to review or to be informed about the food situation. However, on the consideration before we could get any answer in terms of money to purchase the food, a meeting that is called and Members of Parliament are told, “we cannot address the problem” will not sound good.

Government finally raised money, slightly more than Shs 10 billion and now the food is being purchased. Madam Speaker, when I call a meeting I want to say, “The following has happened”, rather than call the members to make them more frustrated about alleviating their problem. So the meeting will be called now to inform the members that food is on the way, that food has gone and that can only make sense because we will have been helping the situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon.  Minister, how do you operate quietly and you do not even inform them that there is something you are doing? If you had written and said, “I am delaying this meeting but a, b, d, and d”, that would be understandable. But if you keep quiet, I do not know how they will know that something is being done.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the old saying is “actions speak louder than words” -(Laughter)- because if I write to say, “I am acting, I am processing ….” that will not really be the solution. Now I can concretely say that food will be going and that is more concrete.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The minister just holding the Floor is a Minister for Disaster Preparedness of the Republic of Uganda. And he has just made a statement to the effect that his ministry has been looking for money and it is now purchasing food and at his own convenience he will therefore call the Members of Parliament from those affected areas to tell them the status of the food.

Is the honourable minister in order to make a statement on the Floor of this House as if he is not the Minister for Disaster Preparedness? Because disaster requires speed for action but the way he is making the statement is casual as if our people are not starving in the camps. Is he in order to behave like he is a minister other than that of disaster? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I hope he is demonstrating his disaster preparedness. Hon. Members, in the gallery we have students and teachers from Gombe Secondary School in Butambala county, Mpigi District, represented by hon. Kaddunabbi and hon. Bitamazire. You are welcome. (Applause)

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Minister for Disaster Preparedness because I know what he is talking about is the Shs 10 billion, which was passed to buy food for Karamoja and about two districts in Teso. I sit on the Budget Committee and I know the circumstances under which this money was released. While in the Budget Committee as my chairperson is suggesting, some points of clarification were put across by members on whether this would cover all the famine affected districts and he said as a minister that this money is strictly going to cater for a few – just about two districts in Teso and Karamoja districts.

The matter being raised now is that there is looming famine in all the other parts of Northern Uganda especially Acholi the sub-region -(Interjections)- and I believe Busoga, and West Nile of course. I would like to seek clarification whether this really - the procurement that is being carried on is going to cater for these new cases that are coming up. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I remember that day when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister gave a directive to Prof. Kabwegyere to call us for a meeting after I raised the issues pertaining to famine in Teso but it also included the issue of schools, which had been blown by heavy storms all over the country. In Kasilo County alone, three schools had been blown away and as we speak today nothing has been done on the ground. Odapakol Primary school whose five classrooms were blown away by the wind has had its children studying under the trees to date and if it rains, there are no studies. Now if the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is responding in this way, how shall we be able to catch up with the rest of the world in terms of education, especially the schools which were affected? In his response now he is limiting his statement to the famine issue without responding to the other part, which had been directed to him by the Prime Minister at that time.

MR MICHAEL OCULA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whenever the Minister of Disaster gets up on the Floor of this House, I find a lot of problems with the way he addresses matters of disaster which have been raised. As we talk now, deaths have been reported because of famine in Teso sub-region and two people have been reported dead in Amuru, my own district. In Iprongo, Ananaka and in Atiak, people are about to die also because they are starving very seriously. In West Nile it is the same thing and here the Minister for Disaster is saying, “You MPs wait. I am still buying food and after that we shall see what to do”. 

What we are expressing is that we expect immediate and rapid government response to address the crisis in the Northern and Eastern parts of the country. What do I call a rapid government response? For example, this government has always failed to feed people and has always been resorting to feeding from the World Food Programme. There is famine now because the World Food programme has stopped distribution of food and I believe that if government came up strongly and said there is a looming disaster in Northern and Eastern Uganda, can there be international response to avert it? It would be done. I find it very lacking for the Minister of Disaster to come here in his casual manner as if nothing is going wrong with this country and we leave matters to go on like that. Can the minister assure us that tomorrow we are going to have a meeting? It is a simple thing. Can’t he call us in the conference hall here and say MPs from these parts of the country, what do we do? How difficult is that? Then from there can we have a response from government to avert that problem within the shortest possible time?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want the minister to clarify how often he interacts with the Department of Meteorology. Whatever we are talking about now is about false information that is being fed to us because I am one of the farmers who has been affected. Recently, a statement came out from the meteorology department saying you can now go and plant, the rains are going to be heavy and they are going to last quite a long period. Yesterday, I was reading The New vision and they are saying the rains are gone and now we are going for a terrible dry spell. We wonder whether these are not concocted statements from the meteorologists and whether the Minister for Disaster is aware of this.

Therefore, it seems we are giving our people a raw deal. Even in the central region here and perhaps even the west, most of the yields have been affected. The cereals are going to be affected. 

Where are we going to get protection for the people of Uganda because most of the countries surrounding us are all dependant on Uganda. Yes, we want money but there must be a valve to control what we should sell and what we should preserve even for the seeds for future planting. What policy is in place to safeguard that? Already somebody was telling me that a kilo of maize flour in Kitgum is going for Shs 3,000 or more. Who can afford that? We should come up with a policy to address this. 

Yesterday the President was telling some visitors that we have enough bananas which we even throw away in excess. Where is the excess and where is the surplus that we cannot take to Soroti or Gulu and our people are starving? These are the pertinent issues, which the minister should help us solve. Maybe he is not interacting with fellow ministers, Members of Parliament and even some other departments, which are supposed to be assisting. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really apologise for the frustration members have. If they understood my frustrations, we would probably be in the same position. First of all, sometimes I send food and it arrives to be eaten by mourners because those who should have eaten it have died. But this is not the desire of my office or even my own concept of what I should do. 

Hon. Members know that when you requisition for money from the Treasury, there are processes which you cannot overcome. My wish would be that if I have a problem and hon. Otto has told me, I should just go back, have money released so that by tomorrow trucks are going and food is delivered. But that is not how things happen. I want you to appreciate my frustrations and that it is not my desire to frustrate members.

As I said earlier, calling Members of Parliament to a meeting where I stand up and say, “Hon. members, as we sit here, I cannot purchase food”, would that be a worthwhile meeting or would I be saying there is no confidence in the Ministry of Finance? Within that kind of calculation, I thought that I address the problem before I can report to the members and that is what we have done.

We have been trying to see how we can circumvent the purchasing processes but if you circumvent them, the very committee of Parliament will say, “Why did you do this?” So we are concerned and we take every measure but we meet certain problems which we cannot just overcome my simply sitting and meeting. We now have money and in fact we had to go ahead and work out processes of purchase even without money being released. But you know the suppliers cannot give you food when they have no money in sight. So, all those frustrations do exist. 

My honourable friend here was worried about my demeanour; that when I stand here I do not give him the impression of how I should look like. That is my problem; I do not know what shape I should assume. (Laughter) 

With regard to the weather, so goes the saying that, “As unpredictable as the weather”. Whether or not we have a meteorological department that can adequately and accurately monitor the weather is still a problem. But given the changes occurring in the global weather, we are victims as anybody else. I remember I alerted the country that we were likely to experience floods even within Kampala. When the floods did not come, people said, “Kabwegyere, why are you alarming us?” and yet in one night you can have floods; and I thought it was my responsibility to warn people that floods may come.  

With regard to the current drought and food shortage, it is throughout the country. Even the food-secure areas are also experiencing food shortage, but that is expected because about this time every year, there is always a food shortage. What we have not succeeded in doing is to be prepared for a rainy day; otherwise for the information of Members, the World Food Programme carries out a programme of government. What UNICEF, UNDP or other agencies of the United Nations do is part of government programmes. We actually negotiate for money from the World Food Programme. 

Let me also inform this House that actually over 90 percent of the food that is supplied to those in need comes through the World Food Programme. The Shs 10 billion that we contribute is an insignificant amount compared to what the World Food Programme engages in and we appeal for money to go through the World Food Programme. So, let it be understood that many of these United Nations agencies perform work of government programmes; these are country programmes through which money comes to government but goes to them -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Minister. I appreciate your frustration and as friends, we have shared it sometimes. But after listening to what you have said about purchasing food, I am worried and I know for a fact that there is actually a serious food shortage throughout the country and I believe that the Shs 10 billion is for local purchases, and I also know that the food prices are so high now. The clarification I seek from you is whether you have engaged these partners who have always helped us, in realising the need for them to continue supporting the people in those areas that are affected, over and above what government is doing. Also, how do you intend to purchase food internally given the very serious shortage that we know exists, the very high prices of the food and the strong competition that you face from yourselves as people who want the food and those who actually want food for markets in Sudan, Congo and even Kenya? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, may we know what has happened to the Contingency Fund? We set up a fund to deal with these emergencies. Why are you not having money? 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To begin with your question, the preparations for presenting a draft Bill on the establishment of a Contingency Fund are all advanced. Pretty soon the matter will be before Cabinet and the Bill will be tabled in Parliament by the Minister of Finance. This is a fact. The Contingency Fund has to be provided within the law and a framework is being worked out and soon in this session, the Bill will come. 

For clarification, the moment we monitor shortages, be it of drugs or in health and in this case food, we alert our partners. Certainly they are very well aware. The director of the World Food Programme was in my office and we talked about the strategies and we actually had a meeting where we made appeals to our partners in development. So this is well known. 

On the question of procedures and preparedness, again I would like to inform the honourable members that because of some delays beyond our control, the issue of a disaster preparedness policy - how to go about crises - will be tabled at some point as a government policy on how to handle these crises. But the food crisis is not just in Uganda alone; the hon. Leader of the Opposition rightly pointed out that food is getting out of Uganda into neighbouring countries like Sudan. In Kenya, they are facing over 11 million people with food shortage. So the situation is really individual as well and we are doing everything possible within the constraints to make sure that we do not lose people. 

You have all heard the budget read and you will be discussing it. If that budget were adequate to meet the challenges in all our spheres, we would all be happy but it is not adequate. Even with food relief, I wish we already had in place regional stores for food so that if there is a situation in Teso, food is near enough to go or you could stockpile food in these stores. All this is not available yet and the budget cannot yet provide these facilities, which would increase the rapidity of response. So because of the inadequacies, response is not rapid and we cannot go beyond before we have the Contingency Fund or before we are better equipped financially. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 90,000,000 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE POST-PRIMARY EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAMME-PHASE 1 PROJECT

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda has negotiated a loan to finance the Post-Primary Education and Training Programme. I wish to lay on the Table, a proposal to borrow SDR 90 million, which is equivalent to 150 million, from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank, for the financing of the Post-Primary Education and Training Programme, Phase I of the project. I beg to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. To be submitted to the relevant committee. As I indicated, I hope by tomorrow all the committees will be in place. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW AN ADDITIONAL FINANCING OF SDR 3,100,000 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION(IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP, FOR FINANCING COST OVERRUNS IN THE  SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES PROJECT (SMMRP)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance. You are not ready?

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, this request was tabled to Parliament a long time ago so we expect that the committee chairman should be presenting a report. 

3.20
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, I am here to present, on behalf of the Committee of National Economy, the report for the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow an additional financing of Special Drawing Rights 3,100,000 equivalent to US $5 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank for financing the cost overruns in Sustainable Management Of Mineral Resources Project. 

Copies are being circulated. We had made these copies much earlier but we were unable to present this. May now I proceed?

This report that the committee is presenting is on the request by government to borrow this additional financing of $ US5 million from IDA. The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 5 March this year and referred to our committee according to Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and our rules 152(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure.

The committee has since considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report.

Methodology

The committee held a meeting with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development as an implementing line ministry; and the technical teams of the two ministries. We consulted the Committee on Natural Resources as a sessional committee in charge of this sector. 

I, therefore, now beg to lay on the Table the project appraisal document; the financing agreement of this loan; the Sustainable Management Mineral Resource Project progress report from September 20 2004 to March this year when they requested for this loan; the implementation plan of the loan plus the minutes of the committee on this loan request. I now lay on the Table.

The committee made on-spot checks on the activities under the projects in Entebbe.

Background and status of the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project, Parliament did approve the request from government to borrow US $25 million from the World Bank/IDA, €6 million from the Credit Nordic Development Fund and Unit of Account US $5.3 million grant from the African Development Bank, to finance the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project in July 2004. 

The project had a component of Government of Uganda counterpart funding amounting to US $3 million.

The main objective of the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project was to strengthen the government capacity to develop a sound mineral sector based on private investment and improvement of artisan and small scale areas.

The reports received indicate that the following have so far been achieved:

i)	Artisan and small scale miners and communities have since been trained in safe mining, better productivity methods and the associated environment and health issues.
ii)	The non-tax revenues (royalties and mining fees) have since doubled.
iii)	The project has carried out an airborne geological survey for demarcating mineral targets which has covered 523, 99 kilometres of magnetic, radiometric and electromagnetic surveys, accounting for 83 percent of the planned airborne surveys.
iv)	Capacity-building of geoscientists, engineers and technicians of Government has been undertaken through on-job training and academic training at Bachelor’s and Masters of Science level in specialised fields of geochemistry, mining engineering, geophysics, mineral processing, digital cartography, applied geology, mineral economics and contract negotiation.
v)	A joint mid-term review of the project by all financiers and stakeholders was carried out in January 2008 and it was recognised that not all the planned activities had been carried out as stipulated in the project implementation plan.

The pending project activities include: geological mapping of the 75 percent of the country’s land mass, geochemical surveys, and reconstruction and construction of offices and laboratories at Entebbe. There is also the construction of seven regional offices at Arua, Fort Portal, Gulu, Kabale, Mbarara, Moroto and Tororo, which require the extension of the project by two years. As you are aware the geological offices at Entebbe are one of the most ancient antiquities that we have in this country. 

There was a big variance between estimated and actual costs on the items as explained below.

Consultancy for enhancement of legal and regulatory framework study had been budgeted at US $510,000, but upon bid opening and evaluation, the cost was found to be US $748,000. Consultancy for the establishment of geo-data, GIS, internet and intranet for geological mineral information system had been budgeted at only US $510,000, but upon bid opening and evaluation, the cost of overruns was rose up to US $1,187,000. The consultancy for the establishment of the documentation centre had been budgeted at US $170,000, but upon Bid opening and evaluation, the cost shot to US $1.2 million. The other consultancy for geological mapping, geo-chemical surveys, and mineral resources assessment had been budgeted at US $4.8 million, but upon bid opening and evaluation, the cost rose to US $5.86 million.

In other senses, the consultancy for the design of institutional model had been budgeted at a cost of US $510,000, but upon opening and evaluation, the cost rose to US $520,000. The civil works had been estimated a cost of US $2.5 million, but this has ceased and bills of quantities indicate a cost of US $3.4 million. 

Operating costs had a shortfall of US $400,000. The consultancy for mineral sources by the communities had a shortfall of US $452,900 and training and mineral investment promotion had a shortfall of US $321,000. The total shortfall for all items mentioned has since rose to US $5 million. That is the reason for the request for the cost overrun.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, arising out of the funding of the project, government has negotiated with the International Development Association (IDA) to secure an additional SDR of 3.1 which is an equivalent of US $5 million for the purposes of supporting the cost overruns of the management of the mineral resource with the following terms and conditions of the IDA.

The loan amount, as I have said, is US $5 million, which is an equivalent of SDR 3.1. The loan is largely of concesssional nature with a maturity of 40 years including a 10-year grace period at a service charge of 0.75 per annum disbursed and outstanding amount. This is largely on friendly terms; it is a concessional loan.

The committee did observe that there was a big difference between the estimated and actual costs of items, thus causing cost overruns and putting into doubt the reliability of the appraisal documents and the project implementation for the earlier project. This exhibits poor planning on the part of the people who designed the earlier project in 2004.

Some of the activities under the project had taken long and were behind schedule by more than two years. This is partly responsible for the escalation in the costs of the project. There is no updated data on the distribution of minerals across the country. It is therefore, important that as a country we establish and take stock of the mineral resources and potentials available in the whole country. 

During the survey process, surveyors experienced threat from the population because of the misconceptions that there were plans to grab their land. This is clear indication that the population had not been well informed about the purpose of this survey and the project activities in general. I would like to call upon political leaders to always mobilize the people whenever such projects come to their areas, to be receptive.

Mineral assessment by plane was suspended in Karamoja and diverted to Northern Uganda yet that had not been in the original project plan. It was explained that the mineral prospecting planes were low flying and that they stood a high risk of being shot down by the indiscipline armed worriers. It was at a time when there were many armed people in the Karamoja region.

The global mineral boom had led to a hike in the cost of consultancy services in additional items like cement, which has also experienced astronomical increases. It happened that during this period – it is not only Uganda that is trying to take stock of potential mineral sources; it is a global boom and specialised experts in these areas have since become very expensive; their demand is now global.

The ministry was incurring high costs in training staff in the respective mineral specialties. It was also facing big challenges. Because of the labour turnovers and retention problems of staff, we did observe that there was no bonding of staff that were being trained by the department - the mineral department was experiencing the highest turn over in the ministry. It was first observed that whereas geologists in petroleum are paid a retainer fee, the same did not apply to other categories of mineral specialists.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee recommendations are as follows:

1.	That while undertaking mineral prospecting, the aspect of community mobilisation and sensitisation should be stepped up and emphasized to reduce the risk to life faced by prospectors from the suspicious population who mistake the exercise for land grabbing.
2.	There is need for bonding of staff that are being trained by the department; the staff should undertake a commitment to serve their country for a given number of years after training to make it possible to use the skills acquired to benefit the department, before they are allowed to move on for greener pastures.
3.	The retainer fee currently paid by the petroleum department to the geologists should also be extended across the board to other mineral specialists under the department.
4.	The ministry should expedite the process of mineral survey in the country putting into consideration the fact that minerals could be the saviour and main activity for the economically disadvantaged areas like Karamoja, but later on diversify the country.

In conclusion, given the mineral boom and evidence of output from the previous expenditure, the committee is satisfied with the need for additional funding. We find the loan to be in line with the implementation of the Mineral Policy of 2001, which was passed by this Parliament. This project, as approved by Parliament earlier, has the following key targets: increasing mining revenue, attracting mining investment, improving small scale out put and establishing mechanism to minimize and mitigate the social and environmental problems associated with mining.

The committee requests this august House to authorise government to borrow additional SDR of 3.1 million, which is equivalent to US $5 million from the IDA of the World Bank for financing the cost overruns in the sustainable management of the mineral resources project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us first hear from hon. Oduman before we get to hon. Ekanya, but five minutes only.

3.38
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the commit for presenting this report. 

However, I have two concerns in respect to the report of the committee. One is to do with the management aspect - the immediate need for additional funding. The major need is basically managerial, that is, under budgeting and lagging behind schedule of the project in terms of implementation. I have a concern - and I wish to get the assurance from the committee chairperson – whether what we now have as the additional funding to complete this project is indeed what is required for the project. I am asking this because the under budgeting is extremely unacceptable. I know you can under budget on one or two items in a programme. But how can we have seven core items being under budgeted for? This is a clear lack of focus in terms of what actually the project needs. 

When you look at page 3 of the report, you realise that there are not only problems of under budgeting. The report talks of a mid-term review of the project by all financiers and stakeholders to have been carried out in January, and that it was discovered that not all planned activities had been carried out. So I see a big management problem for this project, which puts in my mind a question on whether what we are talking about as being required now will indeed be the required. The role of this House will eventually be watered down if we get back here to approve additional sources of funding for such projects because of mere under funding. That is a big issue that we need to address.

The second issue relates to sustainability of debts. Recently the Minister of Finance said that she is concerned that the debt stock of this country is increasing rapidly. In spite of a government policy to gradually reduce debts over a long time, for the last two years debts have grown from US $1 billion to US $4 billion. She indeed must be concerned with that. However, while I agree with her, the question is: if that is the concern then who should help the minister to control these debts? It is supposed to be this House.

The ministry has a policy for every year to determine an annual borrowing cap, which is determined by the Ministry of Finance as part of its debt management strategy.

Last year alone, we are told the country committed into debts worth US $510 million. If that is the case, what is the annual borrowing cap that was determined this year as part of the government’s debt management strategy? What was that cap? Where does the US $5 million fall? Is it within the cap? I would have loved to see the committee tell us the annual cap determined by Government and that the US $5 million required, falls within and that there will be assured debt sustainability in the country in respect of this particular loan.

The other issue concerns us avoiding spending on consumption, which some members – but my concern is on the broad picture. The minister is clear. She has said she is concerned with debt sustainability and that debt stock is increasing yet it is our role to help the minister check that because it us to approve these loans. What is the committee giving us as a benchmark? Is this within or out? This will help us do a simple job of either rejecting or approving this loan. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Ekanya, hon. Bukeni and hon. Kagwera in that order.

3.43
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. But before I move on to comment, let me thank the honourable members of Cabinet and government for tabling a motion for the creation of Tororo District while I was out of the country. Thank you very much, Members of the Cabinet. (Applause) I hope Parliament will endorse the government position –(Interjections)– no, we are in government – this side is in opposition and the other side is in government – we are a government in waiting.

We need the chairman to clarify on a number of issues. I am one of the people who have been encouraging him to table this report because time is very important and nobody is waiting for us. However, can the chairman clarify to us – because if you read the attachment that the chairman put on the report at page 1, there is a question that was sent to the Minister of State for Mineral Development - just after the signature there is a question here: “Why has implementation of some of the activities taken so long?” The answer is that the procurement cycle takes about eight months. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the procurement takes more than eight months and this results into costs due to inflation; and the World Bank is to blame here. The chairman should therefore categorically state to us what liability the bank is taking. At the end of the day, the bank is charging us commitment fee for non-disbursed and disbursed money, service charge for disbursed and non-disbursed and there is also surcharge for delaying to implement the project. Once Parliament approves the money, and government signs the contract – the bank normally does not have money, because they operate in a cycle. They have to collect maybe a repayment from Ghana and Bolivia in order to disburse that money to Uganda. While on the other hand they blame and put conditions on us. They say, “You see, the draft of the procurement plan is not in conformity with the World Bank guidelines”. So it goes back to start afresh. So instead of the eight months, it may be one year and six months. 

Therefore, I want to ask the chairman whether they have engaged the World Bank. We need to pass a resolution here that once the money is approved – for instance you may go to a commercial bank and discuss the terms and conditions of the loan. After that, all the money is transferred to your account. So the current policy of the World Bank must be opposed and rejected. They should not continue to control the money and disburse it piecemeal; that must be revisited. If we do not revisit it, we are going to continue in this slavery. And that is why we are now asking for more money. They are keeping us in slavery and perpetual poverty. If a bank does not lend, it has no business. And their only market and clientele is Africa. The Europeans are also fighting this wrong policy and have resisted it; what is our position on it?

The second issue is surcharge for non-disbursed funds. Why should we pay surcharge for non-disbursed funds? You have not indicated that in your report, but it is in the World Bank document. You have only talked about service charge. As I speak now, some of you need to read the report of the Auditor-General. If the project is for two years and government does not receive the money within that period, government forfeits the money and yet we still pay surcharge, service charge and commitment fee. This is illegal and criminal. We need to engage the World Bank on this. The Ministry of Finance and other negotiators need to be firm on this policy because it is cruel.  

Mr Chairman, you also need to clarify: what has been the revenue from the mineral sector? This sector contributes substantial amounts of money to our economy, but government allocated piecemeal in terms of budget allocation to the mineral sector. So they cannot do adequate work to monitor the quantity of minerals that are exploited. So sometimes, our technical people are compromised. Therefore we need to know the ratio in terms of revenue that the government derives from the mineral sector and the budget allocations. 

Madam Speaker, I managed to get a copy of the Mineral Investment Policy of Government of Uganda by the Ministry of Minerals and Investment Authority. But the information on this document is very scanty. They quote surveys and studies by professors of 1930s, 1940s and archives. But it does not give us information that resulted from the aerial survey that resulted from the loan approved last time. You know, Tororo is very rich. So I wanted to know the products of the aerial and airborne survey that was conducted in my area. 

Otherwise this information is very scanty, it talks of the minerals that were discovered by the colonial government in the 1950s the first UPC Government of 1960s. It does not mention the results of the aerial and airborne survey carried out recently in Tororo, with the quality and quantity of iron ore available. With that information, you can even go to an investor abroad. 

Before I was born, people knew that there was Iron Ore in Osukulu Hills. So when I grew up I looked for this data, and the information is the same as that quoted in the mineral investment book. I am sorry we have to approve this loan, but the Chairman of the committee of Nation Economy needs to present and lay on the Table the results of the airborne and aerial survey in terms of quantity and quality that is available. 

Lastly, we need also to know that most of those consultancy firms in the world are now forming what is called oligopoly -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving way. The information I want to give is that I met two people who wanted to get a copy of the agreements that the government entered into with the mineral exploiters in this country. We had to take the issue to court to make the Attorney-General’s chambers release that information to Ugandans who wanted to know the deals that the Government of Uganda had entered with the different mineral and oil exploiters in this country. 

So, the access to Information Act is not in any way helping us to get the agreements that Government of Uganda has entered into with the different actors. It leaves the impression that the honourable ministers and permanent secretaries for the various government departments just make a deal with those who come to tap the minerals and Ugandans do not have access to that information. So we went to court and we are waiting for a court order for the minister to release that information. Thank you. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you my brother, hon. Otto. In fact I can advise you; I know you have colleagues in the Senate and the House of Commons. You just write to them. Most of these companies are trading in London and New York stock markets. If you write to them – because most of these companies like Heritage Oil, Gas and so forth have signed an agreement to publish what they pay. If you write to the members of the Senate, Congress and House of Commons to state that they have failed to publish what they have paid and the agreement, they will be de-registered from the New York and London Stock Markets and they will suffer the consequences. So don’t bother going to court. Let us deal with them from that angle. I am a shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs. 

In conclusion, I was talking about oligopoly. Most consultants in the world have a network system. They get information in terms of costs of projects in advance, form oligopolies, build them up and agree. If the cost of a consultancy was US $600 million, they will sit and say, “Instead of all of us doing paper work, let the five of us get US $100 million each so that at the end of the day, the cost of the bid will be US $1200 million.” Because all these companies know one another, they say, “Of course if all of us refuse to bid at that cost, the government will be forced to look for more money”. 

Therefore, I would like to ask government to table, in this House, the human resource capacity per sector that we have in this economy. What other governments are not doing is establishing parastatals so that they don’t only rely on consultants. For example you know what happened in the road sector in Kisoro as well as in other sectors. The cement industry, which you have talked about: Hima Cement, Bamburi Cement, Tororo Cement have formed an oligopoly. They sit and agree and push government. So in this sector, how can you rule out the aspect of the consulting firms that bid, having formed an oligopoly before bidding or a cartel in order to rob us? 

So may I request that the Prime Minister directs every ministry to present to us the human resource capacity we have per sector so that when these companies form oligopolies or cartels, we can resort to our own. Thank you, Madam Speaker and I urge my colleagues to approve this loan with all its defaults.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us have five minutes each.

3.57
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to support that we approve the loan. However, I want to find out from the chair and the minister responsible whether they have taken in consideration the current economic crisis as they ask for this money. This is because if you look from 2004 when it was first approved up to now, there was a bit of stability but now prices are changing every now and then. 

My problem is, whether asking for US $5 million, when you add up the shortfalls as mentioned by the chairperson, it is more than US $5 million and yet they were budgeting at the time when there was a bit of stability and the discrepancy is US $5 million. Any small shortage will cause any area of spending to fail completely yet as we have been told and as we know, we continue to pay for the interest and charges and we are not benefiting. How sure are we that this time this money you are borrowing is going to be enough in view of the changes and the total, which I have added is about US $5,120,000, which may have increased as we speak? 

The other area is: having switched from Karamoja because of the stubborn warriors who have now been disarmed anyway, to Northern Uganda, is the work and the lines in kilometres that they were going to carry out in Karamoja the same in the entire Northern Uganda? Is it going to be the same in terms of cost? In any case what about Karamoja, which has not been provided for in terms of funds yet we expect there are more minerals in that area? Is there a provision, as you ask for this money, to cater for money that will be used in case what you are asking for is not enough or are you going to come back to Parliament as you waste more time?

The ministry should also be informed that minerals are not benefiting the people who own the land where the minerals are. In fact, like in the case of my constituency, you just hear that there is a certain company that has made purchases at their own price. You don’t know at how much and people are not benefiting. One time it is a company from South Africa and another time from Britain. We don’t know what they are doing and we are not being told the volume of the Fermatulite that was found there other than the information that was on record before. 

I think as you get this money, the understanding should be that you are going to give us information about all minerals, their quantities, volume and what we should expect in the areas where these minerals have been found. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.01
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My submission is going to be in two parts. One, I am looking at the loans that we pass here generally. I rise to support the loan in principle but demand that this Parliament be kept in the know. Usually when we pass a loan here, that is the end of it. Parliament is not informed of what follows. 

The other issue is that at times these loans are not reflected in the actual work on the ground. I beg that whenever we get a loan, it should be reflected on the ground.

I share with my colleagues that this Parliament should have full knowledge of the minerals in this country and we should not be given information in bits and at the will of some people at given times. It is very unfortunate that there has been a lot of talk about petroleum in this country but this Parliament only has bits of information about it. I believe most of my colleagues cannot rise and say the issue is like this or that. This is not a good practice and this Parliament should be kept in the know especially concerning petroleum issues, which are selling so much in this country.

On the committee, I thank the chairperson of the committee but in the report there is mention that the committee had spot checks on the projects in Entebbe but it is not illustrative. We don’t know which projects and it is left hanging.

There is also the other issue that artisan and small scale miners and communities have been trained but it has not been indicated who these are and where. I think this Parliament should know. 

Similar to this is the issue of capacity building of geologists and engineers. They have been trained but who are these people and where are they? We really need to get information but not in a sketchy manner.   

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, it was mentioned that there is a big difference between the estimated costs and the actual costs, and I thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee because they have attributed this to poor planning. But these people who plan are paid. Do we pay them to plan poorly or we pay them to plan effectively? And if they do not plan effectively, what do we do as a country? Do we keep asking for more loans? 

The other issue is about the retainer fee that is paid to the petroleum geologists. I think this should apply even to the other specialists because many of them share the same profession. So, there should be no reason as to why some people should be paid highly and others paid less. 

I think the demand for the loan is correct but the report has left out many issues that need to be further clarified. Thank you.

4.05
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. This is a request for an additional US $5 million and Parliament did approve the request from government, which we passed here to borrow US $25 million from the World Bank and another Euro 6 million from the Nordic Development Fund and Unit of Account 5.3 million from the African Development Bank with government counterpart funding of US $3 million. It all totals to US $29.3 million. 

However, on page 3 it says: “A joint mid term review of the project by all financiers and stakeholders was carried out in January 2008 and it was recognised that not all the planned activities had been carried out … the pending project activities include: geological mapping of 75 percent of the country’s landmass; geochemical surveys and the reconstruction and construction of offices ….” 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, this request is for an additional US $5 million when US $29.3 million had already been disbursed and the work to be done ranges from 75 percent. This is work not touched. It is here in this report. What magic are you going to use, Mr Chairman? How are you going to overcome this? You begin with 75 percent of the work untouched and on top of that US $29.3 million is spent but you are now requesting for a mere US $5 million? Something must be wrong somewhere. Unless we get clear clarification about this, in which direction are we moving? This is a dark pit. Again we shall be told to borrow more and more and more because it cannot be sustained. I challenge the chairman of the committee to prove me wrong on this. This is a bad loan. It is misconceived. It is meant to do other things and not as stated in the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, show me the area that says that only 25 percent was done and 75 percent is outstanding. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, on page 3, “A joint mid term review of the project by all financiers … that is from the top paragraph “… was carried out in January 2008 and it was recognised that not all the planned activities had been carried out as stipulated in the project implementation plan. The pending project activities include…” And you can see, “…geological mapping of 75 percent of the country’s landmass …” And yet essentially this loan, the US $29.3 million, was meant to do this. (Mr Mukitale rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, allow him to respond.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, the 75 percent of the pending landmass survey is true but it does not mean that we are only seeking US $5 million to do all that work. You are aware that Karamoja is pending and so many other areas too. So, it is not proper to say that this US $5 million alone is going to give us all the data for the whole country. Other surveys have been done outside this loan. So it is not true to say that the US $5 million is for all the 75 percent because apart from Karamoja, there are many other areas where we need data. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think his point was that if we first borrowed US $29.3 million and we were not able to accomplish the task, now this additional US $5 million, what difference is it going to make? I think that is what he is asking. How will the US $5 million cover the 75 percent that is remaining?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I did lay on the Table the project progress report from September 2004 when that big loan was secured and I could not go into all the details. I have laid on the Table a copy and I think what we could do is to get enough copies for members so that they appreciate the details of what was covered by the previous loan. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, honourable chair, I think you are not being fair to the House. You read that report; I have not read it. Now you are saying that it will be laid on the Table? Can you point out the relevant areas and answer his question before we proceed?

HON. MEMBER: Answer it! (Laughter)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, the committee has a challenge and it has people to assist them. They have a sessional committee which I think he has intentionally not consulted because they would be together. The chairperson is here; she is here. Because you are new, you have just come in; this is something where they could even give you a track record of what has been happening. This means that things went wrong a long time ago and now we are coming in –(Applause)– really is it unfortunate, you know. At this particular time when we are expecting something big; we are now talking of getting money for other things. I think the chairperson with his committee are just unfair; the committee members must actually be punished –(Laughter)- because they should be able to sit with the Sessional committee so that they are updated in order to do good work.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, it is not true that our committee does not work with sessional committees. We invited the Committee of Natural Resources where I also happen to be a member but they were not able to move with us in the field. What I can request –(Interruptions)

MR BUKENI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of the Natural Resources Committee; I am not new on that committee. I have sought my advice from my chair over this matter as to whether we formally interacted with the National Economy Committee over this matter and she has said that there was no formal interaction for them to meet and share with us as committees. To the contrary, we were meant to just attend a meeting while they were sitting. So, there was no formal commitment to members to address this matter and we therefore never put in our formal input. Is it, therefore, in order for my honourable colleague, the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy who is also a Member of the Natural Resources Committee, to come here and hoodwink this whole House that we were really invited and we failed to join them? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is difficult for me to know how the committees were working because I do not attend them. But, please can you answer the question he raised?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I want to put it on record. I did invite the Committee of Natural Resources in writing and hon. Winnie Masiko did delegate the Vice-Chairman, hon. Ochieng who attended our meeting. So it is misleading for anybody to –(Interruption)

MRS BYENKYA: Madam Speaker, way forward over this matter. If there is still time, I am just beckoning on the two committees to sit down and interface on the matter instead of embarrassing one another on the Floor because it is not parliamentary. So let them go back and study the matter, interface and then they come up with a position. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, do you want to answer this question? Okay, you answer it. 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I can see there is a problem. when you look at page 2, 3.2(iii) “The Project has carried out an  airborne geographical survey – it should be geological; you are right – for demarcating mineral targets, which has covered 523,099 line kilometres of magnetic, radiometric and electromagnetic surveys, accounting for 83 per cent of planned airborne survey, ….”

As far as I am concerned, the area that had not been covered was only Karamoja. It is also true that by the time I left some of the analysis that was supposed to take place had not taken place. But I am finding it difficult to believe because I have also seen this geological mapping of 75 percent of the country’s land mass -(Interjections)- she can give information.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas the Member on the Floor is telling us that the only are that was not covered was Karamoja with around 13 percent, under page 4; the observations; if you go to No.3 it says: “There is no update data on the distribution of minerals across the country. It is important that as a country, we establish and take stock of the mineral resources available in the country.” (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know this is just revalidating the question asked by hon. Ssekikubo. He said if we borrowed 29 million, we have not achieved what we can and we are seeking an additional 5 million, how will that 5 million assist us to complete all this? That is what he is asking. 

COL GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Actually hon. Ssekikubo had not properly added; his arithmetic was not correct. The money is not US $29 million; not even 30 because there is an exchange rate involved. Look, it is US $33 million, 60 Euros; a Euro is stronger than the dollar. Sixty Euros is about US $8 million plus 33 that is about 41, plus 5.3 UAs, which is also stronger than a dollar. So the money is in the estimate of about US $60 million. Really, hon. Ssekikubo had not carried out his arithmetic properly; it is not 29 million; it is about 60. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what are you saying?
 
COL GUMA GUMISIRIZA: So, what I am saying is that they must be very serious. A lot of money has – this is not to say the US $5 million; 3.1 Special Drawing Rights (SDR), which they are now seeking for our approval here. Meaning that the money is   too much, and it is almost difficult to believe that they still require extra money for this kind of gymnastics.

4.21
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was going to make my contribution earlier but having heard what the hon. Member for Hoima said I thought maybe we would gravitate our position.

I was on the National Economy Committee in the last Parliament and I remember this loan request very clearly; probably I even drafted the report. The problem you run into is this: if procurement takes eight months - the loan was approved in 2004 - even if you double it like hon. Ekanya did, it brings you to 2005. The crisis we had in the scramble for minerals really started coming in 2007/08, meaning that most of the consultants that should have formed the basis for the actions that took place subsequently should have come around 2004/2005 at a time when there was still no serious scramble. I got worried when I saw that it was being suggested that there was such a huge international demand that made the bidding process go up. I had my doubts and I want this information so Members can know.

The real scramble was in the last two years, 2007/2008 and then the economy went down. That was the time when consultancy fees shot up all over. So, these figures where you open a bid and the bid is above board and you just accept, I thought you would even re-bid or things like that. I get very worried about that one. Members should know that the scramble was recent. And it is important that these issues should have been brought out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have not helped us, what do you want us to do? Government Chief Whip, anything to say?

4.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, as I was submitting, it is true the survey took place but analysis of the data is still ongoing. I, however, have a problem with the report because I think when you look at the report, there are things you cannot easily say that, “This is what we have on the ground, this is what has been covered and this is what needs to be covered.”

My view really is that if we are going to pass the loan, it is extremely important that the basis of passing this loan comes out clearly and we have information, we have a report which we can defend. (Applause) And I think it would not cost us too much for the chairperson of the committee and the ministers to take off time, look at this report, so that we have got a report which we can easily defend. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And maybe just to add, really chairperson, these offices you are going to build, can you quantify them? The artisans we have been told about, can we know how many they are in the country? Put in some more meat. And please meet with the Committee on Natural Resources as well.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for your guidance and I would like to concede that we need to harmonise the percentage with the ministry in our report. (Applause)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I think the chairman has yielded. What we wanted to know is that there has arisen serious inconsistencies in the submission, so we would request that the report be withdrawn and be reconsidered later. And I agree with him that the report should be carefully withdrawn the way he has done it. (Laughter)

COL GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, to recap this issue of this loan, the other day when the Budget was being read, the President said that he is likely to set up a commission of inquiry to find out about UPE and USE, he said that he had heard that a few things were not adding up. I want to propose that something must be done in respect of the moneys the country is borrowing from multilateral and bilateral sources -(Applause)- because I suspect - I have no empirical data but I am extremely suspicious that there is something wrong with the department of aid coordination which I suspect could be housed in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

And can I add that Ministry of Finance should give us a detailed performance disbursement equation of these loans so that we know the entire debt portfolio and performance of each loan? Because for sure I know that each loan has not performed more than 30 percent – the majority of the loans from 1996 save for the UPE, in the Ministry of Education, poverty and a few others. The majority of the loans have not performed more than 30 to 35 percent.

And therefore government is paying heavy penalties. Hon. Kajara although he is a new minister, and hon. Kamuntu, they know - especially hon. Kamuntu, I suspect he knows because he is an economist, he is a financial manager. Government is paying a heavy cheque. So, can we please - because you see this business of –(Mr Kajara rose_)- it is really too much. So we request, we are partners, we are ready to support you, but this business of passing loans that end up not performing, performing below average and therefore government pays heavy penalties, is extremely unbecoming. It is very unprofessional and we think that something should be re-examined.

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, regarding what has been said by hon. Guma, regarding the performance of loans, according to the Budget Act, Section 13(1), (2) and (3), the Ministry of Finance is required to lay before Parliament every financial year the performance of government loans, including government’s total indebtedness, including grants received, guarantees of loans.

As I speak, if members checked in their pigeon holes they would find a report on loans, guarantees and grants for the Financial Year 2008/2009 which were presented before Parliament by hon. Bbumba on 31st March 2009. This is in the pigeon holes of each Member of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is good information. So debate on this matter is deferred. (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) But there is nothing to debate.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE ANALYSIS OF THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY FOR THE FIRST HALF (JULY-DECEMBER 2008) FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2008/2009

4.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Birahwa Mukitale): Thank you, Madam Speaker - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance given the recent performance of the Chairman Committee on National Economy that we have all ably witnessed. Would it be advisable to proceed for another report given the fact that even its leadership as of now is being contested? Wouldn’t it be fair for us to give him time to take some water and then probably at a later date he can reflect and bring a better report? I just seek your guidance, for his good.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the chairperson works with a committee. They will support him in this presentation, unless he himself volunteers not to present but I think he has got his colleagues here, they will support him. Please, proceed.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. Before I go to the state of the economy report, I would like to request that time is given to then Minister of Finance so that our earlier request to discuss the issues of debt portfolio and debt strategy, which was undertaken by the Ministry of Finance, is granted and they present to Parliament because I can see we may end up with problems of looking at one sector of energy and we do not holistically look at other performing and non-performing loans.

I would also seek to inform you that we were ready to present the performance of the economy for the first half of the year ending December 2008 way back in March. This business was cleared in the Business Committee and was on the Order Paper all the time from April through May. We have since moved and the committee is working on the third quarterly report as required by our rules. We are on the period of January ending March 2009. This is a period which has the effects of the global economic crisis and it is timely. Now that we are ready to present the third quarter next week as per the Business Committee, I request that I lay on the Table this report which should have been laid three months ago, let Members read through it and on Tuesday when I present the latest and the most valid report, Members can deliberate appropriately. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I appreciate the trends in the economy since December and it is several months gone now. We agree with you that you can lay this on the Table so Members peruse it and then we can look at it together with the presentation for next week.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I now beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on National Economy on the analysis of the performance of the economy for the first half, July ending December 2008, for the fiscal year 2008/2009. I beg to lay. 

4.36
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance. For the last one week there has been tension in Malaba and for the last two days clearing agents have not been filing in papers because they are on a sit-down strike. 

As you may be aware, the government constituted a Cabinet sub-committee to handle the issue of investment in Malaba and the investor is already undergoing building the dry port but it is disappointing to note that the Uganda Revenue Authority with the Ministry of Finance has changed the policy which is threatening the investment that is going on in Malaba as regards the construction of the inland dry port. I would like to seek the indulgence of this House that the Prime Minister tables here a position on the change in clearing and management of customs of Malaba. As we speak now, URA has issued a new guideline that importers can clear goods at their point of destination. That means if you are an importer in Soroti, you just pass Malaba and then you can clear your goods in Soroti, Jinja or Kampala. That introduces a convoy system and that means somebody can smuggle in goods of any quantity and even offload in the middle of the road. There is no inspection in Malaba and this is raising a lot of tension.

The intention of the Ministry of Finance and URA is basically to sabotage the dry port construction that is going on and the investor is worried because if that happens - he is putting up an investment of US $10 million - how will he recoup his investment? I am seeking your indulgence that the Prime Minister directs the ministers of Finance, Industry and Trade to come up with a position so that the investor is aware that his investment is secure and he will be able to recoup his money.

4.38
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, before I direct the Minister of Finance, we have a Minister of State for Finance who may make a few clarifications because he may have made mistakes here and there and I do not normally want to give directives before I am privy to facts. May I request hon. Kamuntu to make a response? I thank you.

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much and the Prime Minister for the opportunity to clarify on these issues. The matter of the dry ports is rather complicated because it involves two ministries: Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and there has been negotiations between the investor and the government – hon. Ekanya knows only too well the complication is that as an entry point, the port would benefit from where it is located naturally. And consequently, hon. Ekanya has a vested interest as a Member of Parliament representing the area that these activities are carried out in these areas. But when they provide for importers to clear the goods at the point of destination or origin, it is more efficient from the holistic view point. We need to carry out a cost-benefit analysis, Mr Prime Minister, for us to be able to advise you technically. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to add something to his answer? 

MR EKANYA: No, but when will the minister present a position here because the strike is going on in Malaba? We need to know so that we appeal to the clearing agents in Malaba since this adds them a cost. For instance if you are handling an importer from Jinja, you need staff and you need an office in Jinja; you virtually need an office in every district. 

Secondly, the clearing agents are the ones striking because the change of policy introduces new costs to them and they were not informed in advance - (Interruption) 

MRS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. The information I have is that every town and every district has a URA office with staff and the goods that come into Uganda are sealed. So, whichever destination a container reaches is where it reports. The officials of URA will come and ascertain that your container is sealed and there is nothing tampered with and it is opened in the presence of about three bodies. So, you do not need to worry. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I just want to correct my honourable colleague. It is not true that every district in Uganda has a Uganda Revenue Authority office. It is the original, old districts that have. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I am seeking clarification from hon. Ekanya. Unfortunately I am not a good economist but if URA has brought in a policy, I guess it should be well researched and pre-tested that goods should be cleared from the final destination. How then does it become a problem if a container can be driven all the way from Mombasa to Pader district? How then does it become a problem that relates to the question you have raised before this Parliament because my people would even get employment instead of only the people of Malaba? I just do not understand the politics and the economics of what you are saying? 

MR EKANYA: There are complications. One is that a clearing firm that did not have an office in Pader needs to open up one. 

Two, the clearing firm needs to have offloading and handling equipment in Pader. That means that they need to virtually invest in every district and that has come in a short period when they do not have the necessary resources. 

And, it also requires URA to have a convoy system because they must escort the goods. What has been happening in the past is that some importers branch off the road and offload the goods and then cause accidents and that is why inspection must take place at the border. But now the change of policy is basically allowing all goods to enter. Someone can even smuggle arms because inspection is not taking place at the border. The borders are control points worldwide. If you change a policy of anything entering the country - you go to Entebbe; there is inspection, disease control and so forth and this is causing a lot of instability at the border and as government, we should be concerned. That is why the hon. Prime Minister needs to ask the Minister of Finance to present a statement. I had a meeting with the Minister of Finance yesterday and –(Interruption)

COL GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, about three months ago the Committee of Finance chaired by the Member of Parliament for Bunyaruguru, Gaudioso Kabondo Tindamanyire, visited Uganda Revenue Authority and we talked to the top management, including the Commissioner-General of URA. They really were in difficulty to appreciate the efficiency of this dry port in Tororo, in Malaba and in other locations. According to them, they had not planned it and they enumerated the possible losses of revenue - very scientifically, I cannot remember them off head – so, I do not understand. Hon. Kamuntu of course is talking to his Prime Minister and he is not listening; but this is precisely the problem and when we raise some of these issues they say, “Ah, this Guma man! He is abusing us doing this and that.” What hon. Ekanya is saying is that do not look at him as being in FDC; he is raising realistic empirical things which one can really find out by driving to Tororo. And because URA top officials said that it is going to cause them a lot of problems such as revenue loss, they never saw anything positive out of this dry port. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, given the circumstances, why don’t we set a time frame for the minister to bring a good statement with researched information? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, before the minister gets the microphone –(Interruptions)

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I thought you had allowed me to save the time of the House and basically what I wanted to say was that I have done the necessary consultations because the issue of a dry port is more complicated, as hon. Guma implied. It involves two ministries already to do with consultation, it also involves autonomous institutions as well and consequently, may I pledge to the House that if you give us a month, I will come to the House with a comprehensive report to answer all the dimensions of these problems so that this matter is rested once and for all? Thank you very much. 

4.48
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I agree with the concerns that have been raised here by members but this is a matter that needs urgent attention. There is a strike. Is it not possible for the Minister of Finance to direct URA to defer the matter and the implementation to some later date as we give time for this to be worked out? This has paralysed business at the border. So, we need a stop GAP measure for at least one or two weeks. Let them continue operating for at least two weeks as the matter is being sorted. Otherwise, we are going to fail to collect revenue. That is what we need to address now. 

4.49
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Close to a month ago, members of the Committee on National Economy, led by hon. Bikwasizehi travelled to Mombasa and when we reached there, we discovered that Ugandan goods were lying there in bulk and had been confiscated for failure of payment by clients from this side. They were given an amnesty over and over again and it still was not working out well. We found over 1,000 vehicles simply being vandalised and for lack of a better word, they were rotting all around and when we further asked questions to the port authorities, they said, “You have a problem. We advised you to create a dry port so that your goods could be destined to your country straight away so that you can work out the rest of the modalities when the goods are already away. We do not have space in Mombasa to keep goods for you as you still look for the money and under such circumstances, it would simply be wiser for any smart economist to accept this type of idea.” 

I do not know why it is getting difficult for us. Probably it is because we do not interact with our business people and we do not know their plight but if we were able to interact with them and knew the trouble under which they operate, we would simply have given this a go ahead by giving the minister a nod but with a precision of making sure that this port works, other than making changes. 

If I have to comment on this shift in policy that goods could be destined to points of final reception, how are you going to manage the minute split of consignments of one taking half a container, another taking one container? You are unable to manage things at the port of entry and yet you promise to go and manage minutely in every small district? It is the joke of the year. 

Madam Speaker, let us agree that there are companies, which are frustrating the efforts of this dry port because potentially, they have to lose out and this is the reason they are putting pressure on government to recreate a policy that is just going to make us fall on our own face. This Parliament should not allow itself to be used by these fellows who are doing games with trade. I thank you. 

4.52
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Kyanjo for bringing part of the issues out. I believe the idea of the inland dry port is that other than having CIF to Mombasa, you could have CIF Malaba and somebody moving from Pader to Malaba would find it very easy. But listening to what hon. Ekanya said, I think there is more to this issue than he brought out because in the first place, he is talking about an investor –(Interjection)– please, hon. Guma, that is why I said he was talking about an investor and I am just asking; investors are cleared by the Uganda Investment Authority. Did this investment get cleared by UIA or not? But if he or she did, then we would have a problem because then the trust and the commitment that our country gives to investors would be challenged. So, we clearly need to understand this. Is it a speculative investment where we have no prior commitment, where there was no guidance and policy?

Secondly, rather than wait a month, can the minister sort out this talk about a strike in Malaba whether true or not and whether the basis of that strike is this inland port as a matter of urgency because that cannot wait a month, so that we can know for example by tomorrow? That would help us. In the meantime, you could also consult on the nature of that investment so that when you make your statement, we know the nature of your investment. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, sometimes we use general words. When I say the matter is more complicated, I mean that part of it is implied by the intervention by the Leader of the Opposition. You have many interests in this matter. First there is the interest of the investor. Second, by establishing a dry port, it also creates a monopoly which excludes big companies that have been clearing their goods straight from wherever they are coming from to here. So it will require them to go through a dry port. It is not an agreed position. You would have to consult them [MR MUKITALE: “Information”.] sure, you can give me the information. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, hon. Minster, for giving way. I am from the background of export and import and I would like us to be very careful when dealing with this matter. A port in Mombasa is not supposed to be a store. Goods must be churned out as fast as possible. A border entry is not supposed to be a store; goods must also be churned out. It has a lot of implications - turnover of transporters and the owners of goods. 

In 1994 when URA was having problems with the transition depot, I was among the people who initiated the idea of the internal container depots. Very many investors in this country have put money into those depots and they have been doing it with very little assistance from URA. We seem to be having a policy reversal when the investor in Tororo demanded a monopoly. So, Parliament should stand against a monopoly. However, I must also add that this investor in Tororo should be supported. For these other small importers who may not have global networks in Mombasa and whose cargo is being confiscated because they do not have contacts, that cargo can come through the dry port and we need that equilibrium. So, we must support those who for the last many years have already put in place their ICDs and their networks to deny the monopoly, while at the same time reducing the congestion in Mombasa by allowing an internal dry port. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from a Member of Parliament from the border. 

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, the issue of a dry port in Tororo was discussed by all the MPs of the eastern region sometime ago in Mbale and we had the opportunity to meet these people. They looked like serious investors but somehow a development came up where they had to go and sort out issues in court and I think that is why there has been a delay in establishing this dry port in Tororo. It appears that Parliament does not have enough information about what is going on in respect to this dry port.

The committees of finance have been to Malaba and Mombasa and the Committee on the National Economy has also been there but all these committees have never submitted any report to this Parliament to tell us exactly what they found out. 

I would request that as the Ministry of Finance studies this matter, these committees which have visited these places should bring the reports, their findings and recommendations to this Parliament so that they can compare notes and decide what to do. I think that would actually lead to solving the problem once and for all because from what I know, the whole thing was taking on a regional dimension. Others may think, “Because we are not from there we must not allow this because this employment is being taken to Kampala and we must have the employment in Tororo.” 

These were issues which were coming up and so, I would suggest that the ministry actually coordinates these reports and takes their recommendations quite seriously. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I do not see why our reports should go to the ministry to be coordinated from there. These are committees of our House.

MR OKECHO: Fine. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When can they bring this information? We want to know what is going on. 

You know, hon. Members, I have really been thinking about the number of times I have read in the press about Ugandan properties being destroyed and auctioned in Mombasa in thousands and thousands. There must be a problem. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like I said, we are probably dealing with something that needs to come out. There was a recent attempt, I think it is still going on, by some group of people - I do not know whether that was Uganda but we keep reading in the papers - seeking land in Mombasa to establish a depot or something related to that. I would not be too surprised if there is not a linkage now between those who are doing this thing in Mombasa and what is happening in Tororo.

This is the problem that we have in this country. We have become too selfish -(Interruptions)- yeah, even Mafioso in some way. Therefore, it is now important that this matter is actually brought out formally and we sort it out.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I want to thank all those Members who have contributed to this debate and provided very useful information. That confirms the proposal I had made to you that because of the complicated nature of this problem, if you gave me a month -(Laughter)- yes but part of the investigation -(Interjection)- I said within a month. I did not say at least a month. So, within a month from today when you have directed me I will start the investigations into the strike. I will consult all the interested parties in the dry port, those who are affected; I will consult all of them and I will give a comprehensive report. 

I also know. This matter has been discussed at the highest level and the fact that it has not been resolved should indicate to you that there is more than what meets the eye. That is what I will bring to the Floor of the House, Madam Speaker, if you give me the chance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that now a government assurance? It is now a government assurance that you bring that report in one month - yes.

PROF. KAMUNTU: You are the Speaker of the House and you have directed. Yes. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Speaker says one month and no more. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate. The issue is that the minister needs to assure the House that he will impress upon Uganda Revenue Authority to maintain the status quo so that the clearing agents can file papers and the strike ends. Otherwise if the strike continues we are going to have the President of Burundi and that of Rwanda calling President Museveni. It is not good for our image that Rwandan goods are being delayed at the border. There are other Ugandans who need their goods to be cleared. So, I really want to request that the status quo be maintained as we wait for the report so that the clearing agents continue with the operation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, will you be able to say something about the strike tomorrow, minister?

PROF. KAMUNTU: I will plead with you, Madam Speaker, that when you have directed on behalf of the House that work be done -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The strike? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: It includes the strike because - (Interjections)- let me say it firmly. As a government we have executive authority and responsibility to ensure that these strikes do not happen. And in fact with or without this debate, we would have addressed this strike. But what I am saying to you, Madam Speaker, and which I would plead with the Members to allow us to do, is to carry out a thorough investigation so that we do not come with half-baked solutions requiring repeated debate on the Floor of the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we have no problem with the one month for the main report but we just want the report on the strike.

PROF. KAMUNTU: What I am trying to avoid is to pre-empt -(Interjections)- I am trying to plead with you not to pre-empt my action because if you pre-empt it and tie my hands it would be difficult for me to operate. That is what I am pleading for. Thanks.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, there is a serious response problem with the minister. Now I am even suspicious that if you give the minister one month, a lot of legal things will happen to complete the process and you will be told, “This has already happened and this has already happened; we cannot reverse it.” The way the minister has talked and said that he needs one month even to include reporting on the strike, there is a serious problem. 

Either the minister tells us tomorrow what happens with the strike or we give him two weeks to report to this House on everything. I see the minister buying time rather than trying to resolve this problem. If this is the case then the minister may be, as somebody said that he knows, part and parcel of this problem.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, maybe the Leader of the Opposition would want to add pressure but I want to assure him that he does not need to twist the arms. Action is going to be taken. 

On the issue of the strike, surely you cannot expect a government to allow a strike to continue without response. Yes, there must be a response. There is no way you can let it continue. There is going to be a response. The response is part of the package and if it requires reporting - (Interjections)- no. Am I supposed to allow information? I am informed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him explain how he is going to operate on this one.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Hon. Ekanya I am fully informed. Madam, Speaker I am just pleading – my suggestion of a month was arrived at after consultations that you must have seen. My giving you this timeframe is realistic because I wouldn’t want to tell the House something that I cannot do; never. And the strike – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, we have no problem with your one month for the main report. What we want you to address is what you are going to do about the strike.

PROF. KAMUNTU: As government we are going to handle it effectively and immediately. If I work with the Minister of Internal Affairs, we report to you within –(Interjections)– yeah! If they commit illegal actions, yes, they will be arrested.

MRS BYENKYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to help all of us. Let us give the Minister the one month he has requested for, but when it comes to the strike, he should inform us, on a weekly basis, on the progress until it comes to a conclusion.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Minister is definitely defending the Executive arm of government. The Legislative arm of government, which you are guiding, must also put its position clear. Can we direct the Executive to restrain Uganda Revenue Authority from going ahead to implement what they are doing now until we get a report from the Minister? We can do that, I think. Let us do our part; the rest is upon the Executive. We shall ask the Minister after one month. The financial year is coming to an end and we have been having shortfalls in revenue collections; we should not delay; we will cause more shortages to the economy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, fortunately tomorrow is a cabinet day. The Leader of Government Business is here; he has heard your concerns – can you address this matter and give us a report by Thursday? I am saying this because the strike at the border is urgent.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, about periodic reporting on the strike, I can say that with permission from the Prime Minister who is also Leader of Government Business in this House, I can do that. We can even give you a report tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Hon. Members, let me give you some good information that our Member, hon. Mary Mugyenyi who is a Member of the Pan African Parliament was elected the Vice-President of that Parliament on 28 May 2009. Let us congratulate her and wish her a successful tenure. Yes, Leader of Opposition.

5.11
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity to raise a matter that I had hoped my brother, hon. Lokeris would have probably raised, it being a matter of national importance.

Last week on Wednesday I got a report from my constituents that a group of Karimojong warriors had attacked a young man who was cultivating with oxen in his a garden. They killed the young man, but did not take the oxen. Two days later – in fact on the Budget Day – we again got reports that another group of warriors had attacked Orom, in Kitgum District. At about the same time I met hon. Abura Pirir and the hon. Member of Parliament for Moroto Municipality over this issue. According to them, the Turkanas had crossed from Kenya, attacked and taken cattle. What normally happens is that they create a chain reaction. If the Turkana take cattle from the Matheniko, the Mathenikos will go and take cattle from the Jies and the Jies will come for cattle from the Acholis. The chain reactions ends up –(Mr Lokeris rose_)- I think you will be given time to give a substantial response.

Otherwise, I am bringing up this matter because it is a matter of concern and as you heard, there has been dry spell for quite some time. The first rains fell yesterday –(Interruption)

MR LOKERIS: Thank you my brother Ogenga-Latigo. I also want to ask you not to say that I am jubilating. I cannot do that because the Pokot from Kenya raided cattle from my constituency yesterday while I was there. So I cannot say that the raiding is not taking place because it is affecting us as well.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Lokeris. Members can notice that there is no backbencher Karimojong here. (Laughter) I suspect that they have all gone back – because it is a real crisis. Over 6,000 head of cattle were supposed to have been taken. This becomes a real problem especially now that there is drought with people having no food. Many of the people now depend so much on cattle for milk and blood. It is going to be a crisis. That is why I thought this is a matter that should be brought to the attention of the country to get a formal response from the relevant ministers like that of Defence. I was told that in two of those raids, the barracks were overrun. And –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just over the weekend when I was in Pader – the Minister of Defence was of so much help to me because I received two bodies, one of Lt Charles Okidi whom we buried on Saturday in Rwakikoko and a Private, whom we buried in Lagile. What I am trying to say is that the barracks was actually overrun. And now that a Lieutenant was killed, you can imagine how many Privates were killed. In Pader alone, we received two dead bodies. I cannot tell how many were taken to the other districts. I thank the Minister of Defence for having delivered the body on record time although we had to mount some additional political pressure.

GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of information on two issues. One is that whenever a Lieutenant is killed it means a lot of people have been killed. That is not true. He could be killed alone.

Two, I would like to report that it is not a barracks that was overrun; it was just a small detach. That is an important correction. It is true that some soldiers were killed and action is being taken to address that issue. I thank you.

MR SANTOS: Thank you so much honourable colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the Government of Uganda disarmed the Karimojong and promised security for them. But where were the UPDF when the 6,000 head of cattle were being taken?

Madam Speaker, I am saying this because on the 21st February, a cross-border raid happened in my constituency, the Dinka of Southern Sudan crossed to East Moyo constituency, Adjumani District and went away with 600 head of cattle. And the army were not there to protect the local population. What was the purpose of collecting the guns from the Karimojong if the government was not ready to protect the people and their cattle? This is a very serious issue and the Ministry of Defence should give a statement about this lack of protection for the people and their property. Thank you so much. (Mr Lokeris rose_)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Hon. Lokeris, I am not prepared to take any more information from you because this is a problem of your people and you should be the one presenting; you should not be informing me. 

Part of the problem we face is that many of us as leaders have become too self-centred. You have a problem occurring in your place, but instead of letting the country know so that appropriate action is taken, you think that it is more appropriate to keep quiet so that you are not inconvenienced where you are. (Laughter) But I am very worried, Madam Speaker; in the confusion of drought, there will be chaos in the anxiety to survive unless we systematically address the challenge of feeding the Karimojong in the circumstance and ensure protection for them. 

For us we have asked for a simple thing. For all the years I have been in this House, Madam Speaker, you would remember I have been asking for roads between Karamoja and our place; just access roads. If you do the roads, you can have people take food for them, if they raid, you can quickly follow them up – but I do not know whether when we speak the frequencies are not the same. Awori is saying yes, he is the ICT man. Since you are there now, maybe you should help to equip government so that the frequencies that we convey can be transcribed easily and they get the message. (Laughter)

But on a very serious note, the rains came yesterday. Somebody was talking about the weather; yesterday in one of the papers, the weather people said that the short rains had ended. And to answer them, it rained. But with the drought, the cattle raids will come to Teso, Bugisu –(Interruptions)

MR BARTILLE: Madam Speaker, I just want to add some information to what the Leader of the Opposition is informing the House. I think the cattle rustlers are on rampage in Uganda, Tanzania, Kenya and Sudan. Almost every corner of our region is now reporting issues of raids. I think the Ministry of Defence should rise up and see how they can protect the borders. 

On the Kapchorwa side, Bukwo is getting problems from Kenya. The other time they were even claiming that Ugandans had entered into Kenya, which was not true, but they were using that as an excuse to continue to raid. So as we get this information, it is really important that government takes a step to beef up security along the borders; including Karamoja. With the operations in Southern Sudan, the soldiers seem to have been engaged and withdrawn from the areas where they have been deployed, and now the cattle rustlers are on rampage. Thank you.  

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable member for giving way. I think it is high time government came up with a comprehensive report as far as disarmament is concerned. We went to Karamoja and the report we got was that we were receiving the guns back. The subsequent reports have been that the situation is getting better; the Karimojong are now giving in the guns voluntarily. By the time we went there, there were no policing structures at all in Karamoja. 

We have now been told that there are policing structures in Karamoja. In the presence of soldiers from the Third Division, and the presence of police, how then can we have cattle rustling to a tune of 6,000 head of cattle? Is the situation worsening or improving?

As hon. Toskin said, we are talking about rustling areas neighbouring Karamoja. But even internally – we went to a place called Kaleng sub-county in Kaabong and these people were suffering. They cannot even have enough to eat because everything we taken away from them. They are farmers but are in a worse situation than those outside Karamoja. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the point has been made. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: The point I want to make is that as a country, when things happen, we should bring them out. And the question of Karamoja is more than guns. We have said this to government –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. As Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs, I would deeply be interested in knowing the role of the new minister of Karamoja in this whole arrangement. Where is the new Minister of Karamoja in all this? (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I can see some people thinking that you are asking out of malice. But the fact is that there is a Minister for Karamoja; they did not say that –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: The Minister of State for Karamoja has been active. She has been to Karamoja several times; she has clear plans to ensure that the people of Karamoja can feed themselves. They have been given seeds, and they have planted. 

On the issue of cattle rustling, of course Defence and Internal Affairs are handling the issue. However, from time to time things can go wrong but we have the capacity to ensure that stability is restored and if necessary, the Minister of Defence, having consulted the Minister of Internal Affairs can make a statement on Tuesday. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business for this and since there is a commitment to present a statement on Tuesday, I will cut short my submission. The Prime Minister made it clear that because these are security matters, then the Ministers of Defence and Internal Affairs will come and make statements. As to the agriculture that the Minister for Karamoja is doing, you know that I am actually a professor in the field of agriculture and that my understanding of agriculture there is very solid so I am not going to comment on that. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m., tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.28 p.m., and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 June 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

