


Thursday, 11 June 2020


Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

PROCLAMATION BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Statutory Instrument No. 70 of 2020, proclamation of Parliament by the Hon. Speaker, Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

“WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda has indicated to the Speaker his wish to address Parliament and the nation on the national Budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021, under Article 101(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 10(4)(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda;

COGNISANT of the fact that Financial Year 2019/2020 will end on the 30th day of June 2020;

AWARE that it is expedient that the President addresses Parliament and the nation on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021; 

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Article 95(2) of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at Parliament Building on the 11th day of June 2020 at 1400 hours, to receive the Presidential address on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala on the 26th day of May 2020.

Rebecca A. Kadaga 
Speaker, Parliament of Uganda.”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have three pieces of communication. First, on 1 June 2020, His Excellency the President wrote to me returning the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2020 and the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2020; to reconsider clause 2, which sought to amend section 4 of the Income Tax Act and clause 3(d), which sought to introduce a new subsection 3(a) and section 5 of the Income Tax Act on rental income for multiple buildings.

He also returned clause 3(b) and clause 7(a)(i) of the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, on deductible incomes for purposes of determining tax on rental income for any person.

In regard to the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, he has resubmitted clause 2(b), 2(c), 2(d), 2(f), 2(g), 2(i) and 2(k). They will accordingly be referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for further perusal and report back.

Honourable members, we have in the last few days suffered some mishaps in the region. Namely, the death of President Pierre Nkurunziza of Burundi, followed by the death of Ambassador Christopher Onyanga Aparr, our ambassador at the Permanent Mission in Geneva and the death of Gen. Kasirye Ggwanga, which also took place during this period.

Honourable members, you will remember that President Nkurunziza was our Guest Speaker at the Eighth National Prayer Breakfast on 8 October 2006 at Sheraton Hotel. On that occasion, the late President talked of a prophecy for his presidency and his walk with Jesus. He said he was wounded in battle after God’s message that he would be Head of State. He shared how God was with him after he was abandoned for dead by his fighters and spent four months in a river but he came back to be President of the Republic of Burundi.

President Nkurunziza became the President of the National Council for the Defense/ of Democracy. Others know it as the CNDD on 28 August 2000 and presided over the Movement as it moved towards political compromise with the Government. He was later re-elected President of the CNDD–FDD political party in August 2004 and became the candidate in the forthcoming legislative and presidential elections. He came to victory with his party, with a large majority of the popular vote. 

We convey our condolences, not only to the people of Burundi but to the Summit of the Heads of State of the East African Community, as he was our President within the Community.

Honourable members, Ambassador Christopher Onyanga Aparr has been our ambassador in Geneva. From 1996 to 2001, Ambassador Aparr was our ambassador to the Russian Federation and the 15 Commonwealth of Independent States of the Former Soviet Union. In 2003, he was appointed ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany, Austria and the Vatican, resident in Berlin. From the year 2010, Ambassador Onyanga was the High Commissioner to the Federal Republic of Nigeria and the ECOWAS states. 

The country has lost a diplomat and great administrator, who many would like to emulate. 

We also note the passing of Maj. Gen. Kasirye Ggwanga, an army officer of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, who served the nation since 1972. He died at the beginning of this week. He was an interesting person, an environmentalist and lover of dogs and his gun. The late General once said: “I like dogs to guard me because they can never betray me like people. I do not even trust my bodyguards more than my dogs.” 

The late General had dreams of writing a book about his personal life but he died before it could become true.

Therefore, honourable members, I would like us to rise and observe a moment of silence in honour of these three dignitaries. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President, 
Your Excellency, the Vice-President, 
Rt Hon. Gen. Moses Ali, the acting Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business,
Honourable ministers,
The Leader of Opposition in Parliament,
Honourable ministers of state,
Dean of the Diplomatic Corps,
Honourable members of Parliament,
Head of Public Service and Secretary to the Cabinet,
Chief of Defence Forces,
Inspector General of Police,
Commissioner General of Prisons,
Governor Bank of Uganda,
Ladies and gentlemen,
We welcome you to this Budget presentation. I would like to thank the President and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the work they have done to enable us have this Budget.

You may recall that last week, on Thursday, we convened for the opening of the Fifth Session of Parliament and His Excellency. the President delivered the State of the Nation Address. Today is a very important day in the Parliament calendar and I welcome all of you to listen to the presentation of the approved Budget for this financial year. 

On the global scene, the economic outlook of many nations is bleak and some of the giant economies are in recession. Uganda’s position is equally hard as we have been afflicted by not only the COVID-19 pandemic but also floods, locusts and other disasters. For the economy to be resuscitated, therefore, it calls for deliberate, elaborate fiscal and monetary policies, coupled with change of work style through digital transformation. 

In fulfillment of Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the President caused to be prepared and laid before Parliament the proposed annual budget for Financial Year 2020/2021 and this was done on his behalf by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 23 and 24 April 2020. Thereafter, the annual Budget was committed, in accordance with section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to the Committee on Budget and to each sectoral committee, that part of the annual Budget, which falls within their jurisdiction. 

Significant to note is that the Budget preparation did not factor in some of the challenges and effects that may arise due to COVID-19 and technically, it means that this Budget may require realignment. 

Parliament received the proposals of that Budget and considered the National Development Plan, Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and National Budget Framework Paper. I would like to thank the Committee of the House and honourable members for performing their constitutional obligations in spite of the COVID-19 pandemic and despite not being classified as an essential service. Indeed, many Members had incidents where their cars and they, themselves, were impounded for not having stickers but Members withstood those challenges until the work was done. (Applause)

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has complied with the provisions of the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. On your behalf, I request the minister to present to Parliament and the nation the highlights of the approved Budget for Financial Year 2020/2021. Later, we shall have the opportunity, through our committees, to carry out oversight and make an assessment whether the intentions and projections outlined in the annual Budget have been met or not. 

I believe that honourable members and the nation are anxiously waiting to hear what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will present to the country. 

Let me, therefore, invite the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present the Budget. 

PRESENTATION OF THE BUDGET SPEECH BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON BEHALF OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

2.22
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, can I lower this mask so that I can be heard properly? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you can, honourable minister.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda,
Your Excellency, the Vice President,
The Right Honourable Speaker of Parliament,
The Right Honourable Deputy Speaker,
His Lordship the Chief Justice,
His Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice,
The Right Honourable Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business,
Right Honourable Deputy Prime Ministers,
Leader of the Opposition,
Honourable ministers and members of Parliament,
Members of the Diplomatic Corps,
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen.

In accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution and section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the revenue and expenditure estimates for the Financial Year 2020/2021 were approved by Parliament on 24 April 2020. This statement, therefore, summarises the economic policy underlying the budget estimates. It is with pleasure that I deliver this speech on behalf of His Excellency the President.

Madam Speaker, today, we face unprecedented times. The global coronavirus pandemic has, without exception, impacted the lives and economic activities across the world. The pandemic has worsened the effects of climate change and the locust invasion that Uganda and the region had already been grappling with. Uganda has been reasonably successful in dealing with these emergencies. Allow me to commend His Excellency the President for his visionary leadership in the fight against these natural disasters and emergencies. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, these emergencies have adversely impacted our economy. The livelihoods of many Ugandans have been negatively affected with declining household income and in some cases, the loss of jobs and food insecurity. Economic activity has drastically declined, with reduced demand for agricultural produce, the disruption of input supplies to manufacturers, as well as the disruption of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) activities. Inflows of foreign direct investment and remittances of Ugandans in the diaspora have also declined sharply.

Madam Speaker, the crises we have recently faced cannot, however, distract us from our long-term development strategy. These emergencies, indeed, present several lessons and opportunities that we have drawn on to craft the economic stimulus and growth strategy, which I will elaborate on today. These opportunities include the following:
    i. The acceleration of our import substitution and export promotion strategy for a range of goods including medicines and other health products; the products of agro-industrialisation  and light manufactures, which Uganda can produce with a comparative advantage;
    ii. Digitalisation of many aspects of socio-economic activity to improve efficiency and reduce costs. This can be applied through e-Commerce, e-Government including tele-conferencing, procurement and the dispensation of justice; e-Learning; robotic automation, artificial intelligence, cyber security and cloud computing and digital marketing in tourism. This permits to fast-track implementation of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR);
    iii. Strengthening contingency planning to mitigate the impact of disasters and protect the most vulnerable persons;
    iv. Transforming informality of doing business to being formal; 
    v. Reform of urban transport to reduce congestion, starting with the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area and eventually the regional cities; and
    vi. Domestic tourism stimulation to encourage many Ugandan residents to explore local touristic destinations.

Madam Speaker, we shall therefore, seize these opportunities and continue on our path to developing an integrated, self-sustaining economy as laid out in the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Ten-Point Programme. 

Uganda will also actively promote the development of African and global markets to enable access by Uganda entrepreneurs. The NRM Government shall, therefore, profitably add value to the range of agricultural products and minerals that Uganda is endowed with, as guided by His Excellency the President in the State of Nation Address. 

We shall build a strong and durable economy addressing the eight fundamental human needs namely: food, clothing, shelter, defence, human resource development, which is health and education, infrastructure like electricity, roads, rail, Information Communication Technology (ICT), Telecoms and spirituality. This will establish a firm basis for service industries such as tourism, hospitality like hotels, bars, night clubs, casinos, among others as well as entertainment concerts, sports, etcetera to flourish.  

Madam Speaker, the budget has, therefore, been based on the theme: “Stimulating the Economy to safeguard Livelihoods, Jobs, Businesses and Industrial Recovery.”

In my statement today, I will, therefore, do the following:
    i. Take stock of progress in economic and social transformation that  forms the foundation for Uganda’s resilience in the face of the emergencies we have faced and continue facing; 
    ii. Present the economic stimulus and growth strategy; and 
    iii. Present the financing framework underpinning the economic stimulus and growth strategy. 

Progress in economic and social transformation
Madam Speaker, the NRM Government has taken great strides to establish a strong foundation for economic and social transformation over the last five years, during the implementation of the Second National Development Plan (NDPII). The strong foundation we see today has built the resilience we can see in the face of emergencies that we have recently faced. I will highlight some of the achievements we have registered in this regard, before spelling out the economic stimulus and growth strategy; 

National Output 
Madam Speaker, the Uganda economy has continued to grow, despite the effects of the recent emergencies we have faced. Uganda’s GDP, in the year 2019/2020 is estimated to amount to Shs 138 Trillion. The economy is estimated to grow by 3.1 per cent this financial year, ending 30 June 2020, slower than the average growth rate of 5.4 percent in the previous four years. Had it not been the emergencies we have faced in the last six months, the rate of economic growth would have been at least 6 percent per annum.

The agriculture sector grew by 4.2 per cent, up from 3.8 percent in the previous four years. However, the industrial sector grew by only 2.3 percent compared to an annual average of 7 percent in the previous four years. The services sector grew by 3.6 per cent over the year, compared to the annual average of 5.6 per cent in the previous four years. 

These statistics demonstrate the effect of the recent emergencies that the country has faced. Despite the temporary shocks, the medium term outlook for economic growth is positive and will be stronger given the measures we will implement.

Primary production 
Substantial progress has been made in primary production. The agriculture sector plays a central role in Uganda’s economy, as we all know. It accounts for 45 per cent of exports and employs 64 per cent of all Ugandans and 72 per cent of all youths and thus, its importance to influencing household incomes.  

Primary production of commodities has increased significantly. Coffee production increased from 5.7 million, 60 kilogramme bags, to 7 million bags between 2017 and 2019. Fish catches have grown from 391,000 metric tons to 561,000 metric tons, between 2017 and 2019. 
This was largely as a result of the strict enforcement of fisheries regulations and addressing challenges of poor quality fingerlings and limited access to feeds. A total of 13,800 acres of sugarcane have also been established at Atiak Sugar Factory in Northern Uganda and more is planned when the Amuru project starts.

Human Capital Development
Madam Speaker, the wellbeing of Ugandans has also improved significantly over the years. For instance; 
    i. The literacy rate of Ugandans in 2018 increased to 74 per cent of all adults, compared to 72 per cent in 2014; 
    ii. Maternal mortality have reduced to 336 per 100,000 births from 438 per 100,000 births in 2011 and under-five child mortality has reduced to 64 per 1,000 births from 137 per 1,000 births in 2011;
    iii. Access to safe water in rural areas today is at 69 per cent, increasing from 65 per cent in 2015, with 38,500 villages representing 66 per cent of the total 58,000 villages in the country having been provided clean water;
    iv. Access to safe water in urban areas stands at 79 per cent, compared to 77 per cent in 2015, with piped water main network increasing from 17,600 kilometres to 20,200 kilometres. Over 66,000 new customers were connected during the year, bringing the total number of connections to over 720,000.
v.    Rural sanitation coverage is at 79 per cent while sanitation in urban areas increased to 87 per cent.

Economic infrastructure
Power
Madam Speaker, we continue to make long strides in developing economic infrastructure. Witness this: Electricity generation capacity now stands at 1,254 Mega Watts, with the completion of the 42 Mega Watt Agago-Achwa II, the 76-Mega Watt Kyambura and the 5.9- Mega Watt Ndugutu power projects. 

The 183-Mega Watt Isimba Power Project and its transmission lines were commissioned and the 600-Mega Watt Karuma Power Project is 98 per cent complete and due for commissioning in November 2020. 

The Karuma-Kawanda transmission line is also 82 per cent complete. Construction of Nyagak III Power project also resumed in May 2019. 

The electrification of industrial parks has also progressed with the commissioning of the Mukono and Iganga Industrial Parks sub-stations. 


Under the Rural Electrification Programme, 14,820 kilometres of medium-voltage power lines and 10,280 kilometres of low voltage distribution power lines have been constructed. 

Since we launched the free Electricity Connections Policy in November 2018, 277,500 rural households have been connected – (Rainfall briefly interrupted the proceedings) – Can you hear me? The Speaker has instructed me to continue. I will try to speak as loud as possible. 

As I was saying before I was interrupted by the rain, since we launched the Free Electricity Connections Policy in November 2018, 277,500 rural households have been connected with a target to connect 300,000 rural households annually.

Transport
Madam Speaker, transport infrastructure has improved considerably, with the stock of the paved national road network today totalling 5,600 kilometres, increasing from 4,300 kilometres in 2015. 

The metre gauge railway network is under rehabilitation. The railway currently facilitates transportation of 18,000 tons of cargo monthly and 2,000 passengers daily, in order to support decongestion in greater Kampala. 

In the air transport sector, 13 aerodromes have been rehabilitated countrywide and expansion of the Entebbe and construction of Kabale International Airports are progressing as scheduled. Uganda Airlines is revived and began operations during the month of August 2019.

Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
Madam Speaker, ICT services have also performed well over the period. Internet users have increased from 7.5 million in 2016 to 11 million in March 2020. Total telephone subscriptions, of which mobile connections constitute 60 per cent, increased from Shs 21 million in 2016 to Shs 28 million in January this year. The value of mobile money transactions increased from Shs 3.4 trillion in 2016 to Shs 7.2 trillion in March - 

End of Take D


Take E
11 June 2020
Joseph

MR KASAIJA: Cont’d
…January 2020. 

The value of Mobile money transactions increased from Shs 3.4 Trillion in 2016 to Shs 7.2 Trillion in March 2020. The National Backbone Infrastructure now covers 49 districts, 480 Ministries, Agencies and Local Governments and seven border posts. The monthly average unit cost of internet bandwidth for One Megabyte per second on the backbone has reduced from $300 to $70. The 500-seater ICT Innovation Hub at Nakawa was also completed during the year. 

Furthermore, one 122 ICT Innovators were supported under the National ICT Initiatives Programme to develop e-Solutions. Some of their software applications have been used for business continuity during the coronavirus lockdown. 

Posta Uganda launched Community Information Centres in Kitgum, Kasese, Moroto and Mubende to enhance provision of information on 	Government services and programs. Posta Uganda also successfully implemented the International Postal System at 48 district post offices, enabling improvement in international and national operational efficiency in timely exchange of post.

Science, Technology and Innovation 
Madam Speaker, in the Science, Technology and Innovation Sector, core projects have, too, progressed well. For example, the Machining, Manufacturing and Industrial Skills Training Centre at Namanve was commissioned in January 2020. The center will provide industrial skills training and apprenticeship, and manufacture high quality precision machine parts and accessories. 

The first phase of the construction of the Kiira Vehicle Plant at the Jinja Industrial Park is 50 percent complete and two Kayoola Electric Buses have since been developed - and I have travelled in one of them - assembled and tested under a Technology Transfer Project with China High-Tech Corporation. I speak what I have said and done.

Governance
Madam Speaker, to improve urban security, Phase One of the Safe City CCTV project has been rolled out in Kampala Metropolitan, Wakiso, Mukono and Entebbe. Crime surveillance has also been enhanced with the deployment of LDUs across the country. The Uganda Police Force (UPF) also conducted electronic profiling of guns, which will help to curb gun-related crimes. Consequently, crime levels reduced by 9.8 per cent from 238,746 cases reported in 2018 to now, 215,224 cases in 2019. 

Madam Speaker, to increase access to justice, we have established One-Stop Justice Law and Order Sector centres, each consisting of a court and police services, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, prison reception centres, probation and community services, in 84 districts across the country. 

In addition, plea-bargaining was instituted to decongest court and improve the court efficiency. Consequently, cases aged over three years have reduced from 24 per cent in 2017 to 17 per cent in 2019. 

Madam Speaker, to improve public service delivery, systems across Government have been developed and integrated as follows:
1. The e-visa/works permits systems and the Integrated Border Management System is now operational at 11 border posts and was extended to 17 Uganda Missions abroad that can issue visas to intending visitors. Consequently, average monthly visa applications have increased from 4,500 applications in 2016 to 12,700 applications in 2019.

2. Electronic-passports have been integrated with the National Identification and Registration Agency register, leading to a reduction in passport issuance from 10 working days in 2016 to four working days today.

3. Business registration now takes four hours; and

4. Service Uganda Centres have been established at 18 zonal offices to eliminate bureaucracy and reduce cost of doing business. 

Madam Speaker, the fundamental progress in the socio-economic transformation of Uganda that I have highlighted is a result of the NRM Government’s holistic development strategy. This socio-economic progress provides an underlying resilience to Uganda’s economy, which has enabled us withstand the temporary disruption of the coronavirus pandemic, the locust invasion and the effects of climate change.  

Economic Stimulus and Growth Strategy
Madam Speaker, the Economic Stimulus and Growth Strategy that the NRM Government will implement commencing next financial year and in the medium term, is aimed at achieving the following three key objectives:  
    i. Improving the wellbeing of Ugandans;
    ii. Boosting economic transformation; and
    iii. Improving peace, security and good governance

Madam Speaker, these objectives address the three most critical aspects of Uganda’s society, namely; the peoples’ welfare, the viability of farms and businesses, and the social eco-system in which they exist and is a major determinant of their future prospects. I will now detail interventions in each of them in turn:

Improving the wellbeing of Ugandans 
Madam Speaker, in pursuit of improving the wellbeing of Ugandans, Government has identified interventions that address their welfare, namely;
    1. Food security and good nutrition; 
    2. Enhanced healthcare provision; 
    3. Ensuring universal access to water and sanitation; 
    4. Increasing social protection for the most vulnerable population; and 
    5. Transforming education delivery. 
I will now detail the specific measures to be implemented in each area. 

Food Security and Good Nutrition
Madam speaker, the coronavirus pandemic has brought to the fore the need to ensure adequate food security and nutrition. Food security and adequate nutrition is of paramount importance for a healthy and productive life and it is a major factor in healthcare as it reduces the burden of preventable diseases and malnutrition. It also contributes significantly to reduced maternal, neonatal and child deaths. 

Uganda is blessed with adequate rainfall as we can witness now and arable land, which provides the necessary conditions for agricultural production, an adverse climatic condition notwithstanding the fact that it has disrupted us here. The 14 products that have been identified by His Excellency the President will, therefore, be developed commercially. These products are maize, cassava, banana, beans, Irish potato, sweet potato, millet, sugarcane, cattle (beef and dairy), coffee, tea, cocoa and fish. To reduce post-harvest losses, the construction of storage facilities of 42,000 metric tonnes capacity that commenced in Iganga, Isingiro, Amuru, Kalungu, and Nebbi will continue. 

Madam Speaker, in order to improve Nutrition, Government will aggressively implement programmes to ensure adequate sensitisation and awareness of all Ugandans on the benefits of good nutrition for their health and wellbeing. I would like to encourage all Ugandans to embrace healthy living through nutrition, wellness and active living. All Ugandans should place due emphasis on physical and mental activity by exercising regularly and making healthy food choices and by reading and writing. 

Enhanced Healthcare Provision
In order to promote health for all Ugandans, Government will strengthen the health systems. In this regard, health spending has been increased to ensure the recruitment of additional health workers and also provide for their welfare. 

In order to deal with the Coronavirus pandemic and other similar epidemics that may occur in the future, Government has prioritised the purchase of personal protective equipment (PPE) and additional funding has been provided to increase intensive care beds at national and regional referral hospitals. Funding has also been availed to procure coronavirus test kits and other materials in order to curb the spread of the virus and ensure readiness for possible secondary waves of infections, if they should occur. 

Government will enhance surveillance and decentralisation of management of the coronavirus in the country. Government will also support scientific research and innovations, especially in vaccine development. We have already advanced on this vaccination against coronavirus. 

Further measures to strengthen health systems include the following:
    i) Undertake mass sensitisation and awareness on immunisation, the use of mosquito nets to prevent malaria, HIV/AIDS prevention and the prevention and management of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs);
    ii) Develop centres of excellence for delivery of specialised medical care by completing the construction of the Uganda Heart Institute in Mulago, establish centres for cancer treatment at regional referral hospitals and commission the Regional Hospital for Paediatric Surgery at Entebbe and fast-track the construction of the International Specialised Hospital of Uganda at Lubowa to stop medical tourism;
    iii) Strengthen the supply chain for medicines and medical supplies to improve the availability of medicine and ensure accountability thereof. Much of this medicine will be manufactured here in Uganda; and
    iv) Ensure health centre IIIs are functional with health workers, basic medical equipment, supplies and medicine. 

The total number of functional health centre IIIs is now 1,327 and 41 health centre IIs are being upgraded to health centre IIIs in the coming financial year. 

Enhancing access to Safe Water and Sanitation and Utilities
Madam Speaker, in order to ensure universal access to safe and clean water and improved sanitation, we will consolidate and build on achievements I reported earlier by undertaking the following interventions, details of which are in the “Background to the Budget”:
    i) Construct nine Gravity Flow Schemes (GFS),  40 solar-powered Water Supply Systems and drill 455 water wells;
    ii) Construct 30 water supply and sanitation systems, develop bulk water transfer master plans and designs for 15 Water Supply and Sanitation Systems;
    iii) Construct 12 small scale solar power irrigation schemes and an additional 50 irrigation schemes in West Nile, Acholi, Ankole, Lango and Central Buganda sub-regions.
    iv) Intensify monitoring and forecasting of weather and water levels, floods and effectively disseminate information to guide policy actions by stakeholders; and
    v) Enforce environmental protection regulations for settlements on lake shores, riverbanks, wetlands, forests and flood-prone areas. 

Colleagues, you know this is a real problem, which we must handle squarely by preventing people from settling very close to the lake shores, river banks and flood-prone areas. You have seen what has happened in the recent past. 

Providing Emergency Social Protection
Madam Speaker, Uganda’s vulnerable population including the elderly, requires protection more especially to address the aftermath of the recent emergencies. Government will, therefore, prioritise targeted support to the most vulnerable groups and those at higher risks of food insecurity, old age and the chronically ill. To this end we will: 
    i) Continue to provide relief aid in response to the coronavirus crisis and natural disasters such as the locust invasion and climate change crisis, that is, floods and landslides. This will allow the rehabilitation of adversely affected schools, health units, water points and other social infrastructure and provide relief to the vulnerable households affected. An allocation of Shs 45 billion has been made towards this intervention for the time being; and

    ii) Roll out the Social Assistance Grant for the Elderly (SAGE) nationwide to persons aged 80 years and above, including the elderly aged 65 years in the piloted 15 districts. An allocation of Shs 107 billion has been made for this intervention in the new financial year.

Transforming Education delivery
Madam Speaker, education plays a central role in the development of the human capital. In order to improve the effectiveness in the delivery of education, Government will prioritise the following actions: 
i) Roll out the new education curriculum including the Early Childhood Development (ECD) curriculum.
ii) Expand access to vocational education and training, including international accreditation of Business, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (BTVET) institutions as centres of excellence.
iii) Improve the quality of tertiary education institutions by ensuring there is adequate staffing and increasing the emphasis on academic research.
iv) Enhance teaching supervision using digital platforms in the inspection of schools through scaling up the Integrated Inspection System; and
v) Develop the provision of lessons through digital platforms such as television, radios and the internet to ensure continuous learning and implement the electronic delivery mode in validation and distribution of self-learning materials to learners, as it has been happening in the past as you may know. 

Boosting Economic Transformation
In order to boost economic recovery and make progress with our economic transformation agenda, the Economic Stimulus and Growth Strategy we will implement shall:
    (i) Restore household incomes and safeguard jobs.
    (ii) Re-ignite business activity.
    (iii) Provide tax relief to businesses.
    (iv) Enhance economic infrastructure; and
    (v) Improve good governance and maintain security law and order. 

The specific measures that Government will implement are the following: 
    1. Restoring household incomes and safeguarding jobs. 
Madam Speaker, following the immediate adverse impact on household incomes and jobs of the emergencies we have recently faced, interventions will be implemented to increase agricultural production to ensure national food security and expand regional food exports. 

This measure will also sustain the supply of inputs for agro-processing. The restoration of demand for agricultural produce is key to jumpstart this process. 

Safeguarding jobs and other non-farm incomes is also critical for the restoration of demand for agricultural products. These actions ultimately ensure the recovery of aggregate demand for domestic products while boosting incomes for the majority of the households, both rural and urban.

The specific actions that will be implemented in this regard are the following:
    i) Enhance the provision of improved agricultural inputs using NAADS e-Voucher Scheme to farmers and up-scaling agriculture extension services to boost production of key agricultural commodities for which an allocation of Shs 300 billion has been made.
ii) Create jobs for the vulnerable but able-bodied persons affected by the coronavirus by expanding labour intensive public works in urban and peri-urban areas, for which an allocation of Shs 130 billion has been made for the youth especially around Kampala.
iii) Provide rainwater harvesting technologies in rural communities, implementation of solar irrigation schemes and investment in the construction of multi-purpose water reservoirs.
iv) Roll-out regional and community-based storage facilities to store increased agricultural products and reduce post-harvest losses; and
v) Provide seed capital to organised special interest groups under the Youth Fund, Women Entrepreneurship Fund and the ‘Emyooga’ Talent Support scheme, for which an allocation of Shs 256 Billion has been made.

Re-igniting business activity

Madam Speaker, Micro, Small and Medium enterprises (MSMEs) are the backbone of Uganda’s economy, representing an estimated 85 per cent of private sector companies in regard to employment. 

The vast majority are operated by households yet have also been extremely vulnerable to the recent emergencies, as they have low cash reserves and limited access to affordable investment finance. This also applies to other manufacturing firms that have been unduly affected by the coronavirus crisis. Restoring their economic activity, therefore, enhances household incomes, especially in urban areas.  

Madam Speaker, in order to improve the availability of investment finance and the cash-flows of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and other manufacturing firms, we will implement the following measures: 
    i. Provide credit, through SACCOs and Micro Finance Institutions to support micro and small-scale enterprises. I have allocated Shs 94 billion for Financial Year 2020/21.  
    ii. Increase access to credit at Uganda Development Bank to offer low-interest financing to manufacturing, agribusiness and other private sector firms, for which I have provided Shs 1.045 billion over the medium term.
    iii. Increase funding to Uganda Development Corporation for public-private partnership investments to facilitate our import substitution and export promotion strategy, for which I have provided for the start, Shs 138 billion. 
    iv. Provide for banks to restructure loans to their borrowers who are facing liquidity constraints and provide additional liquidity, on a case by case basis, as recently guided by the Bank of Uganda.
    v. Reduce charges on mobile banking and mobile money transactions to improve efficiency, reduce person-to person contact to prevent spread of the coronavirus; and
    vi. Expedite the payment of arrears owed by Government to private sector firms commencing July 2020, for which I have provided Shs 673 billion in order to address liquidity constraints faced by suppliers of Government. Priority will be given to Small and Medium Enterprises, cooperative societies and contractors.

Tax relief to businesses
Madam Speaker, in order to further address the short-term emergency liquidity requirements of businesses, boost their cash-flows and ensure business continuity, I propose the following tax relief measures, which I will in due course present to Parliament:
i) Defer payment of Corporate Income Tax or Presumptive Tax for Corporations and Small, Medium Enterprises (SMEs). I am deferring until September 2020, the payment of any Corporate Income Tax and Presumptive Tax due 01 April 2020 to 30 June 2020, for tax complaint businesses with a turnover of less than Shs 500 million per annum. 

Furthermore, no interest or penalties will accumulate on these amounts during this period. This is aimed to benefit companies and Small or Medium Enterprises (SMEs) especially in tourism, manufacturing, horticulture and floriculture. 

The number of taxpayers benefiting from this measure for whom Corporate Incomes Tax is applicable is 10,140 and the deferred tax is estimated to be Shs 12.5 billion, which can be ploughed back into the business. 

In addition, the number of taxpayers benefiting from the presumptive tax measure is 23,892, and the deferred tax is estimated to be Shs 1.38 billion. All this money is meant to remain in the hands of these business people so that they do not cry about cash flows.

ii. Defer payment of Pay as you Earn (PAYE) by sectors affected - I am deferring payment until September 2020 of PAYE due from 01 April 2020 to 30 June 2020 for tax compliant Ugandan businesses facing hardships as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. No interest will accumulate on tax due during this period. An estimated Shs 65.35 billion due from PAYE for manufacturing and tourism sectors is being deferred. For the floriculture sector, the expected PAYE deferral is Shs 0.237 billion.

iii. Waive interest on tax arrears - I am waiving interest and penalties on tax arrears accumulated before 01 July 2020 to lessen the tax liability of businesses that voluntarily comply with their tax obligations. The expected tax relief as a result is estimated to be Shs 50 billion.

iv. Provide for tax deductibility of donations for the coronavirus response. I would like to use this opportunity to thank all of you, Ugandans and even non Ugandans, who have been able to contribute so generously, to the fight against this enemy called coronavirus. I am allowing the value of the donations, the private sector as made towards the coronavirus response. You can deduct that one from your income; and

v. Expedite payment of outstanding VAT refunds. The Uganda Revenue Authority will speed up payment of outstanding VAT refunds due to businesses accompanied by measures to limit fraud. An additional Shs 120.53 billion will be refunded.

Financial sector stability 
Madam Speaker, in order to ensure financial sector stability in support of the economy, I reiterate the Bank of Uganda pronouncements on measures being implemented to mitigate risks to overall economic growth, and also ultimately support the financing of businesses: 
i. Providing for adequate capital buffers for supervised financial institutions to ensure effective operation by deferring payments of all discretionary dividends and bonus payments for at least 90 days, effective 24 March 2020. This preserves the capital of a financial institution and is intended to support the real economy.
ii. Smoothening out volatility in the foreign exchange market arising from global financial markets.
iii. Providing exceptional liquidity assistance for a period of up to one year to supervised financial institutions that may need it.
iv. Waiving limitations on restructuring of credit facilities. Supervised financial institutions have been permitted to restructure loans and provide loan repayment holidays to companies and individuals affected by the coronavirus pandemic; and 
v. Encouraging the reduction of mobile money and other digital transactions fees that are chargeable by mobile network operators and commercial banks in order to limit the use of cash and customer visits to banks.
  
Enhancement of economic infrastructure 
Madam Speaker, economic infrastructure covering roads, rail, water, irrigation and air transport remains key to economic recovery and boosting economic transformation. The interventions that will be implemented to enhance economic infrastructure include the following: 
i. Undertaking emergency maintenance of roads and bridges infrastructure across the country following the destruction caused by floods. You see what the wind did here. In some rural areas like Bundibugyo, Kasese and Mbale, people [HON. MEMBER: “Butiaba”] No, Butiaba has not been washed away. I am talking about the mountains that have been washed down. Gen. Katumba, the ball is in your court. The money is coming and it will be there. [HON. MEMBER: “From where?”] – Are you despising the Republic of Uganda? We are not broke at all.
ii. Developing warehousing capacity at community, district and regional hubs across the country to restoring supply chains and promote exports.
iii. Expediting construction of priority industrial parks and special economic zones.
iv. Rehabilitating the metre gauge railway, improving water transport safety by installing navigation aids and development of air cargo infrastructure, including the completion of the new cargo facility at the Entebbe International Airport; and 
v. Expanding feeder and national road network, power and Information and Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure. 

Improving peace, security and good governance
Madam Speaker, Government will continue to improve peace and security, the rule of law and good governance. As we have done before, good governance will be enhanced to provide the necessary conducive environment to facilitate all aspects of societal development. The specific measures will address:
i. The promotion of peace and security at the community and national level.
ii. Enhancing effectiveness in public service delivery.
iii. Increasing access to justice.

Peace and security 
Madam Speaker, in order to promote peace and security of persons and property at the community level, we will implement the following measures:  
i. Intensify community vigilance by strengthening the local council system, promote community policing in coordination with Local Defence Units (LDUs). 

Madam Speaker, one of the reasons this virus has not spread in the rural areas - the single most significant reason - is vigilance by the councils and even the wanainchi. At least I can speak for my constituency. No person can go and stay there for a night without the knowledge of the LC1 chairman. He will question him or her on where he or she is coming from. If he is coming from a suspicious area, that person will be taken by the chairman to the nearest health centre for safe custody. 
ii. Complete the roll out of the safe city CCTV project in Jinja, Lugazi, Kayunga, Njeru, Gulu and Masaka and ensure its effective utilisation in monitoring crime and responding to distress calls. 
iii. Improve border control through phased implementation of border point automation in order to control illegal entry, improve compliance with immigration laws and regulations and ensure national security. I think yesterday you saw bwana accompanying our neighbours back home because of this vigilance. 
iv. Strengthen the capacity of internal security; and 
v. Fast-track implementation of the convict transitional policy to integrate former convicts back into their communities.

Madam Speaker, in order to ensure the defence of the country, Government will further strengthen the capability of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and enhance the effectiveness of the intelligence apparatus.

Access to Justice
To improve access to justice, the following interventions will be undertaken:
i. Construct an additional five one-stop Justice, Law and Order Service centres across the country.
ii. Implement the electronic case management system in the Judiciary to increase efficiency in case management.
iii. De-concentrate services for Government analytical laboratories and business registration services to regional centres in Arua, Fort Portal, Gulu, Mbale, Mbarara and Moroto.
iv. Build capacity of local council courts in adjudication in order to decongest courts of petty cases and increase access to justice. To date, 38,000 local council court officials have been trained and a further 78,000 are targeted for training in Financial Year 2020/21; and
v. Eliminate case backlog by implementing the case backlog reduction strategy, including the use of non-custodial sentences such as community service to reduce remand population.

Madam Speaker, Parliament recently enacted into law the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018, which comprehensively provides for the functioning, operation and administrative independence of the Judiciary. Construction of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal has commenced and will eventually address housing of these important appellant courts of law. I was there recently to inspect it. We, therefore, look forward to enhanced performance of the Judiciary.

Public Service Delivery
Madam Speaker, to achieve better Public Service delivery, the following actions will be undertaken: 
i. Integrate systems and implement one-stop service centres to allow the public to access related services in a single location. The Service Uganda centres will be rolled out to 18 zonal offices across the country. 
ii. Develop the Public Investment Management Systems (PIMS) policy to strengthen sector coordination in project identification, preparation, implementation and export evaluation; define roles and responsibilities of project stakeholders, enhance project management and institute a culture of maintenance of public assets.
iii. Implement e-Government procurement across all ministries, departments, agencies and local governments and monitor Government contracts and procurement in partnership with non-state actors in order to improve efficiency, eliminate corruption in procurement and reduce cost of doing business.
iv. Enhance tele-conferencing facilities in Government to limit person to person contacts in addition to reducing on operational costs in terms of travel expenses; and
v. Fully implement the Leadership Code Act, including the operationalisation of the Leadership Code Tribunal to ensure that the Leadership Code of Conduct is effectively enforced among all leaders and public officers.

Madam Speaker, in order to address the challenges of corruption, the following measures will be undertaken:
                        i. Enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of oversight and anti-corruption institutions in identifying areas of risk.
                        ii. Strengthening the implementation and follow-up on audit recommendations. 
                        iii. Strengthening the implementation of public finance management rules and regulations and the role of internal audit; and
                        iv. Enhancing capacity of the Financial Intelligence Authority and related security agencies to intensify surveillance and gathering of vital information to curb anti-money laundering and terrorism financing.

Let me now turn to financing framework. Madam Speaker, Government is developing an integrated financing strategy to guide and monitor how we appropriately raise domestic revenue and both domestic and external debt financing over the NDP III period. This strategy lays out how Government shall approprately raise financing to meet its development goals, in both the short and medium term. It will also ensure that Government only borrows at most favourable financing terms for projects that will provide a socio-economic growth dividend.

Madam Speaker, with respect to the financing framework that underpins the Economic Stimulus and Growth Strategy I have elaborated, it specifically balances the need to restore economic activity on the one hand while raising adequate revenues to finance Government expenditures. The sources for funding include domestic revenues and public debt financing.

Domestic revenues
Madam Speaker, domestic revenue measures for next financial year are anchored on the Domestic Revenue Mobilisation Strategy (DRMS), which aims to mobilise sufficient revenue to support infrastructure development and social welfare. The strategy balances competing challenges of increasing the revenue effort to support expenditure needs while at the same time facilitating investment and industrialisation. The strategy seeks to enhance revenue collection to finance the larger part of our budget in the short, medium and long term and to create a tax system that is fair and transparent. I repeat this: the strategy seeks to enhance revenue collection to finance the larger part of our budget in the short, medium and long term and to create a tax system that is fair and transparent.

Madam Speaker, in view of the recent emergencies we have faced, Government introduced modest adjustments in some taxes to raise revenue. This will support enhanced economic recovery as well as maintain an acceptable level of social welfare. 

Tax administration will be strengthened to improve efficiency in revenue collection. The capacity of local governments, including the roll-out of the digital collection of fees and rates, will also be enhanced to improve local revenue generation. My appeal to my fellow Ugandans is that let us all pay our taxes, particularly the business community. 

Paying taxes is a noble duty. We need your taxes – please, I am particularly addressing this to the business community – in order to facilitate you to make better business. You need roads, water, electricity, railway, airport and good lives of the people who will be consuming your products or services. Let us pay our taxes without coercion. I thought I should stress this point.

Madam Speaker, next financial year’s revenue target is Shs 21,810 billion, comprised of tax revenue amounting to Shs 20,219 billion and non-tax revenue of Shs 1,591 billion. This target translates into a revenue effort of 14.3 per cent of GDP. To achieve this target, we will implement the following new interventions: 
    i. Further roll out of use of digital tax stamps and expanding the range of products covered in order to deter under-declaration of production and importation. I know my friends in manufacturing – some of you are not happy about this system but, as I have just said, it will help you to know what you are doing and it will help us to know what you are doing. Do not worry, we are not coming to rob you. Digital stamps also ensure that goods on the market meet the required health and safety standards.
    ii. Widening the scope of the income tax withholding agents across all sectors in order to broaden the tax base. 
    iii. Enhancing rental income tax collection and compliance by implementing a digital collection solution as well as gazetting rental income tax chargeable in different geographical areas for taxpayers who do not voluntarily declare their rental income.
    iv. Gazetting VAT withholding agents with an applicable VAT rate of six percent and provide for penalties for failure to withhold; and
    v. Roll out of the use of Electronic Fiscal Devices (EFDs), which are cash registers interconnected to the Uganda Revenue Authority, to improve record keeping and tax compliance.

Madam Speaker, the modest adjustments to tax rates that have been made include the excise duty rate on fuel and adjustments to improve competitiveness in the region, support compliance, remove ambiguities in the legislations as well as close loopholes that may lead to revenue leakage. 

In order to promote import substitution and the development of local industries, we have increased import duties on goods that are produced or can be produced locally. The import duty on agricultural products has been increased to 60 per cent and other products to 35 per cent. 

Hitherto, we have been importing refined industrial sugar, yet we are a surplus producer of sugar. We have agreed with sugar manufacturers to produce refined industrial sugar locally and we shall protect them from imports. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, in order to support agriculture, VAT on the supply of agricultural equipment will be exempted. The supply of processed milk will also be VAT-exempted to enhance the price competitiveness of milk produced in Uganda. In order to respond effectively to the COVID-19 pandemic, taxes on supplies for diagnosis, prevention, treatment and management of the epidemics, pandemics and health hazards, will be exempt from customs duties.

Public debt financing
Madam Speaker, total public debt as at December 2019 amounted to $13.3 billion, with external debt accounting for $8.59 billion or 64.4 per cent while domestic debt amounted to $4.74 billion or 35.6 per cent of total debt stock.

Madam Speaker, Government’s approach to public debt financing is elaborated in the medium term debt strategy for the five-year period commencing next financial year. We shall make sure that strategy is available – it is on the website anyway. If you check on our website, it is there. The strategy seeks to contract only affordable external debt in preference to domestic debt. The approach to reduce domestic debt in preference to external debt is intended to lower the cost of interest payments to 2.2 per cent of GDP compared to 2.6 per cent of GDP, if we were to continue borrowing signficantly from domestic sources.

Madam Speaker, to ensure that public debt remains sustainable, we will implement the domestic revenue mobilization strategy to increase Government’s capacity to finance programmes with less reliance on domestic and external borrowing. I hate borrowing and I do not want to do it but I am forced to do it because the revenue that I am collecting is not sufficient to enable me to cover all the demands Uganda has put on the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. These days, you call me the “minister for borrowing”. 

In response to the Coronavirus crisis, Government has commenced negotiations with some creditors for debt relief. This will free resources to finance interventions in the fight against the pandemic.

Resource Envelope and Allocations for Financial Year 2020/2021
Madam Speaker, the resource envelope of Financial Year 2020/2021 totals to Shs 45,493.7 billion of which, domestic resources amount to Shs 25,585.6 billion. Domestic financing amounts to Shs 3,560.3 billion, while external financing consists of project support of Shs 9,515.3 billion and general budget support Shs 2,906.7 Billion. Domestic re-financing amounts to Shs 7,486.1 billion and Appropriation-in-Aid is Shs 215.6 billion.

Madam Speaker, total expenditure amounts to Shs 37,792 billion of which recurrent expenditure is Shs 19,787.8 billion and development expenditure is Shs 18,004.2 billion. Sector allocations can be found in the Budget as approved by Parliament.

Conclusion 
Madam Speaker, Uganda’s economic outlook is positive. I can repeat the other thing. I hope you remember it. The Coronavirus pandemic has helped us to once again, demonstrate the economic capacity and the vast opportunities that our country has. The budget for Financial Year 2020/2021, will support the economy to fully recover, harness the potential that we have and get back to our progressive journey of double-digit GDP growth rate. (Applause)

The focus of the budget for next financial year places emphasis on supporting livelihoods and the recovery of business enterprises, without losing focus on our long-term development initiatives. To this end, the Government will support the private sector to scale up production, sustain and increase employment. 

I call upon Ugandans to ensure they keep safe by particularly following the directives from His Excellency the President and Ministry of Health regarding COVID-19. 

Madam Speaker, as I was waiting for you this afternoon, I got a newspaper. Let me tell you, for those who are waiting to see dead bodies especially for those in the rural areas because the people in town are not much of a problem. You heard the President the other day talking with the religious people on Heroes Day. 
There are some Ugandans who are waiting to see dead bodies to prove whether there is this danger. Now, I am going to give you witness here. 


Madam Speaker, there is a young lady from Sudan whom I had the pleasure to meet many times. She was called Najwa Abbas. She died on 27 May 2020 after contracting Coronavirus. So, people who are saying – (Interjections) - She died in Sudan. Did you want her to die here? If we had handled this issue, Jege Jege - I hope I will not be ruled out of order. I hope you understand when we talk about ”Jege Jege”. If we had not been firm, I can assure you that we would already be having dead bodies. I am therefore imploring leaders to follow the guidelines from the Ministry of Health and the President to prevent death. It is real and around. If you think it is a joke, I have come here because I knew this girl very well. (Interjections) Should I say “a lady”. The camera people can show you. That is the girl and it is a testimony I am sharing with you.

Madam Speaker, she was very instrumental. She helped us to deal with issues in Sudan. I met her here for about four to five times. Now today, I learnt that she died on 27th, after contracting Coronavirus. 

Madam Speaker, the recent emergencies, especially the Coronavirus pandemic have necessitated additional interventions and resource allocations after the Budget was approved. We have since been undertaking extensive consultations with several stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, on remedial actions. Consequently, the budgets of all Ministries, Agencies and Local Governments will be revised to align them with the nine strategic priorities and 14 production lines articulated by His Excellency, the President. 

Madam Speaker, you remember when I presented the budget here, I told you that budget had to be revised. I am just repeating what I said that time. I had read something to do with that budget – (Interruption) - since I had to fulfil a legal obligation. We will come back here sooner than later to tell you how things should move.  

Consequently, the budgets of all Ministries, Agencies and Local Governments will be revised to align them with the nine strategic priorities and 14 production lines articulated by His Excellency, the President. This will focus the budget on production not on consumption. I will accordingly return to Parliament for the necessary approval. I beg to submit. (Applause)


THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Your Excellency, the President and distinguished guests, members of Parliament, as I indicated earlier, Article 155(1) of the Constitution, states that the obligation of presenting the National Budget to Parliament lies on the President. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been his delegate here and he has performed delegated function but the ultimate responsibility of this budget lies with the President. He will be invited to make his remarks.


Before I invite him, I would like to remind members that on 2 June 2020, the House amended its Rules of Procedure to provide for a virtual Parliament. The House, amongst others, was expanded beyond the physical precincts of members in the Chamber of Parliament to include virtual presence via designated digital platforms.

Consequently, by the powers vested in the Speaker, under Rule 8 (1) of the Rules of Procedure, I have designated a virtual Chair of State for the President in the House, for purposes of delivering to Parliament, an address on the National Budget for the financial year 2020/2021, as provided for under Article 101 (2) of our Constitution.

I also wish to remind the honourable members that as per Rule 236A of our Rules of Procedure, all parliamentary processes online – and members were actually present in the House – will be treated under the Rules of Procedure.

Therefore, in accordance with Rule 10 of our Rules of Procedure, the House shall be called to order and stand in silence when the President enters or leaves the House. The President shall be heard in silence. The address of the President shall not be followed by any comment or question and he will not also participate in the proceedings of the House in any way.

I now invite His Excellency, the President to make his remarks about the Budget; Your Excellency.

3.46
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Your Excellency the Vice President; the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; honourable ministers, Members of Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition, members of the diplomatic corps and all the invited guests and Ugandans who are listening, first of all, I would like to extend condolences to the people of Burundi on the death of His Excellency, Pierre Nkurunziza.

Secondly, I want to extend condolences to Ugandans on the death of Amb. Onyanga and Maj. Gen. Kasirye Ggwanga. May their souls rest in eternal peace.

I want to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for presenting the Budget. You all heard what he said. However, before I talk about the Budget, I must repeat the most important point of the moment; the proverbs I told the people the other day; the Runyankore one but first of all, the Luganda one says: “Nantabulirirwa yasaabala bwa bbumba” meaning somebody who could not be advised was told, “Please, you cannot make a boat out of clay. If you want to make a boat, use wood. You do not only use wood; you use wood of a certain type.” However, he could not listen. He said he could make a boat out of clay but when he tried to sail with it in the lake, he drowned there. 

The other proverb says, “Omuzira ateekengera awangula lumu.” Meaning a brave man who is not careful only wins one battle because after that, he is killed and there is no other battle to win. Those are the Luganda proverbs.

There is a Runyankore one which says, “Amagara nigakira amagana” which means, life is more important than wealth. All these are proverbs of your people.

Some days ago, I was getting worried because I saw people in Kampala moving around carelessly in big groups. They were talking and shouting but with no masks. Then Heroes Day, I really told you what I thought, that if you are disappointed that we do not have enough dead bodies like the other countries, you will get them if you do not listen.

We shall have teams of people putting on white burying people, like you have seen in other countries. Those groups are also there; they are arranged to bury people quickly because nobody can touch them. If you die of Coronavirus, nobody will touch your body except the ones putting on those protective covers.

Please, we cannot go on begging people to live; okwegayirira omuntu nti munange tofa. This is not how you run a country. We tell you mature people that this is a danger - you have seen people dying in other parts of the world and we go on saying, “police.” What is the police for? It should not be police to enforce this; it should be yourselves!

I am very happy with the LCs in the villages who are enforcing that, as the honourable minister said. However, all of us should enforce this on ourselves without having to bother the police. We have just told you:
    1. Tonsemberera, do not get near me; social distance.
    2. Masks. The Government masks - I think they started distributing them yesterday. The acting Prime Minister launched the programme and they will be distributed to everybody. So, number two, put on the masks.
    3. Clean the surfaces like this one where we are speaking. Clean them with disinfectants; and
    4. Do not touch yourself in the eyes, nose and mouth with unwashed hands.

Because of that, actually we are bringing down – we are winning this war if only people could listen. The total figure of positive people in Uganda, up to yesterday, 10 June 2020, is only 679. However, this 679 includes some people who one of the laboratories at Makerere classified as positive when they were not because there was some carelessness.

They had very few people; only three were working there and I think they got tired and they started not doing things properly. Some samples, which the Minister of Health should clarify, maybe tomorrow or the day after, were classified as positive when they were not. However, this was quickly discovered, fresh tests were done and the facts came out. Therefore, I do not know whether these 679 include those or not but the Minister of Health will clarify.

These 679 are after we have tested 143,000 so we are winning the war against this virus. I was looking at the figures of the last few days - For instance, from the population, on 8 June 2020, we had only six who were positive out of 918 who were tested. On 9 June 2020, we had only four out of 1,384 tested. Yesterday, 10 June 2020, we had eight out of 1,053. 

However, even on the side of the drivers; Ugandan drivers who were coming back, on 5 June 2020 we had zero. On 6 June 2020, we had seven, on 7 June 2020 we had five, on 8 June 2020 we had five, on 9 June 2020, we had four and yesterday, we had six.

Therefore, we are winning this war, if everybody listens because the drivers at one time - For instance on 30 May 2020, we had 49 who tested positive. Then there was another day when they were 20, on 28 May 2020 they were 22 and on 26 May 2020 they were 23.

However, this is because these had gathered and piled at the border with South Sudan. When I spoke to His Excellency Salva Kiir, he opened for them and they came. There were big numbers because they had been piling there but as you can see, the numbers are reducing now. Therefore, please, let us be serious and ensure that we defeat this small enemy; small but very dangerous.

Yesterday, when we were celebrating Heroes Day, Hajji Sedunga of the Veterans’ Association spoke very well in our local language Luganda. He said, “Obulwadde tebulina magulu” to mean, the virus has no legs, it does not move. It is moved by the people with legs and who are the people with legs? It is us. You are the ones carrying the virus from here to there. If you do not carry it, nobody will carry it or if you are careful with yourself.

The drivers seem to be controlled but within the population, like these six people of 8 June 2020, the four of 9 June 2020 and the eight of yesterday, many of them are from the areas of Elegu, Amuru and Rakai. That is where the majority of these few who are showing up are coming from. The Minister of Health should give more details, maybe tomorrow.

This means that the locals are not doing what hon. Kasaija talked about; vigilance by the LCs. If they are vigilant, this problem will be controlled. If anybody comes from the neighbouring countries or from any anywhere else, please report him immediately to the area LCs; they know what to do. Do not keep something, which is dangerous to all of you but also to those individuals. 

The fact of the matter is, if they are identified and they come to the Government treatment centres, they get cured. We have not lost anybody; nobody has died up to now. Out of all these 679 cases, nobody has died. One hundred seventeen (117) have recovered and been discharged.

Therefore, by hiding, you are committing two mistakes: First of all, you are going to infect more people and secondly, you are going to die when you should not die because when you come to the treatment centre, we shall treat you and you will be cured. It is a very big mistake and totally unnecessary.

Regarding security in the region, Uganda is stable and nothing can disturb us here. We have been building a lot of capacity. When some people made the mistake of thinking that they could de-stabilise Uganda by crime and so on, they woke us up and we enhanced our big potential. There is no way anybody can disturb our peace.

In the region, there are quite a lot of issues and we can help therein. Any of the brothers who may need us to help, we can help because we have the capacity. Like we have done with Somalia, we can help. We are in touch - I would like to encourage regional leaders to, if necessary, get regional coordination so that we have total peace in our area.

Regarding the Budget, as you heard the minister reading, it emphasises – Yes, there has been a problem of this virus and it has affected some sectors. Sectors like tourism were knocked out. That is why you heard that instead of the growth being six per cent, it is 3.1 per cent. 

However, I am not pessimistic at all. I am very optimistic. The little we had done has made us survive in spite of the total lockdown. Things are no longer coming from abroad. There are the fellows who used to okushaka. The people who buy things from others - the lazy people - are the ones who okushaka. In the village, okushaka is a very bad thing. The home which buys food from other people and does not grow their own food is despised in the villages.

Those who have been okushaka all these little things have been shut up. So, we are here by ourselves and we are standing; we are eating, electricity and water are running, hospitals are running, vehicles are moving. We are moving with very little from the outside world. I think the virus came to wake us up. 

As such, we are going to be very strict with import substitution. I am very glad the minister is talking of levying a tax on imported things, which we are making or we can make here. Those will be taxed, so that we produce everything that we can produce here ourselves. Secondly, we are going to promote export to other countries. 

In all this, we are going to emphasise the nine areas he talked about, which coincide with human needs. There are human needs that will never go away; even if there is war, those needs will remain. These human needs are food, clothing, shelter – houses like this one – I am sorry you had that problem of the rain; I could see how it was disturbing you – medicine, security, infrastructure, education and health. The minister forgot to add the ninth - spirituality. We added that one because the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. These are the areas we are going to emphasise.

The minister pointed out to you that because of what we had focused on, correctly, in the past, things are moving even with this virus. In paragraph 13 of his speech, page 8, he told you about the amount of coffee we are exporting. He said that we are now exporting seven million bags. In 1986, Uganda was exporting two million bags but we now have seven million and I have told you that we are aiming at 20 million bags. There is no reason why Vietnam should export 11 million bags and we are just at two million. I do not know who can produce coffee easier than ourselves in the world.

He also talked about how the fish has increased in the lakes. You remember that in my State of the Nation Address, I was also talking of fish farming. The fish catches, which have increased in the water, should also be added to the fish farming, which we are going to promote. There is an experiment in a swamp called Limoto in Pallisa, where people shifted from spoiling the swamp by growing rice and instead, they are now doing fish farming. They are using only an acre at the edge of the swamp and earning Shs 70 million while they were earning only Shs 7 million when they were spoiling 10 acres of the swamp with rice. I had talked to the Rt Hon. Speaker to take some of you, honourable members, to Limoto to see that pilot study, which we have done. It is very good.

In paragraph 22, on page 13, the minister talked of the Kiira and Kayoola vehicles. This is what the National Resistance Movement (NRM) has been telling you. Apart from agriculture, minerals, forestry and services like tourism, you must take advantage of the products of the brain. The brain is also a resource. A country like Japan has no minerals, agriculture and oil but it has been the second richest country in the whole world until recently when China overtook it; it is now number three.

The prosperity of Japan is based on their human resource - the products of the brain and the skills of the human hand. That is why we are all driving Japanese cars. These are not potatoes that have been grown; these are products produced by the human intellect and skill. We are moving to that area. Ugandans, our scientists and entrepreneurs must move in the direction of the products of the brain and skill.

In that paragraph, the minister was talking of the Kiira and Kayoola vehicles but there are so many products from scientists in the area of crops and agro-processing, Information Communication and Technology (ICT) and the area of medicine. The other day, I told you how the young people have found one of the best medicines for malaria. We might find the one for coronavirus. In fact, our people would have found it long ago if it was not for the laziness of our bureaucrats and rebelliousness - the ones who do not listen. I tell them but they do not. Otherwise, our people would have found some of the antiviral treatment long ago.

In paragraph 41 on page 25, he was talking about the emyooga, the money for skills of the youth. There is Shs 256 billion but I would want to increase it. We need much more money there because that is where many of the youth are.

I am very happy with paragraph 43, about providing Shs 1,045 billion to Uganda Development Bank (UDB). That is about one trillion shillings. That is very good. Therefore, Ugandan manufacturers should go to UDB and borrow money at low interest rates and make all these little things you are importing. Sometime ago, I told you how Madam Nakyobe and my small group are going to solve for you the problem of leather. We shall no longer be okushaka leather. All the leather will be processed here, so that those who want to make shoes and other items get the leather from here. Therefore, for import substitution and export promotion, the address is UDB; go there.

There is some issue in paragraph 58, which needs to be addressed - the tax collected. Uganda has got the lowest tax to GDP ratio. As you can see in that paragraph, it is only 14.3 per cent of GDP as tax. African countries go up to 18 per cent, some up to 20 per cent. So, what is the problem? The European countries go up 40 per cent - the ones who are giving us aid.

There has been a lot of corruption in URA. I have cleaned that one and we shall clean some of the other places. Wherever there is corruption, we shall get you, like we cleaned the URA crowd who were begging as if they were doing us a favour, instead of working for their country. Those young people were given a great opportunity to serve their country; instead, they were doing other things. Therefore, we have dispersed them - that URA crowd.

This 14.3 per cent is not good. That is why I would like to appeal to Parliament; for instance, this Bill which I returned – on the rentals - this is cheating. Somebody has got 40 houses and is paid rent but he says he is building new houses, so he is not saving any money. He is collecting money and building new houses and when he builds them, he gives them to different people. No, we are saying, pay tax per house. If you build a house and you finish it and start renting it out, do not mix it with another house. This is the argument. We shall come and argue. Unfortunately, the caucus cannot meet so easily now, but we shall debate and see. 

That is why you have got low tax collection - 14.3 per cent. Because of that, you must borrow now and when you borrow, you pay interest. When you are discussing, I want the minister to remind you of how much money we are paying in interest. When I spend my own money, it is my money but when I spend borrowed money, I must pay back that money and also pay interest on it. If you are to see the amount of money that we pay in interest each year, it is a lot of money. The minister can tell you how much it is. 

We are wasting; that money would be doing more work. However, you borrow because you are shielding people who do not want to pay taxes - there is some collusion. People do not want to pay taxes and they just hide. There is a lot of corruption and we are going to expose it. That is why this figure - 14.3 per cent - is not what it should be.

I am glad the minister mentioned something about distance learning. We are discussing more in Cabinet and we shall tell you more. However, this is a very good way of teaching, from a distance, so that if even if there are dangers like this one we have today, learning continues. We shall tell you more about that. 

On the exemption of diagnostics - that they are imported - be careful there. The minister needs to harmonise because in one paragraph he was talking of import substitution and protecting all locally made products from outside competition, then in the other one, he was talking of diagnostics coming in free. What if our people are making them here? Our people are going to make diagnostics - they have already started. They are even going to make the medicine. So, we shall not accept that game. Anything we make here - medicine, machinery – will then be taxed; we shall tax the competition from outside.

I am glad the minister alerted the honourable members that when we looked at the budget, we found a lot of wastage. Hiring halls - people are dying because of the coronavirus and you are talking of hiring halls for meetings! Why can’t that money be saved? Entertainment - one of our research people joked and said, “if you are eating four samosas, why don’t you eat one and you save three to be invested in production”. Therefore, we are coming back to engage our people and tell them “Please, Uganda’s economy can take off.”

The minister gave figures about the industrial rate of growth and so on. However, this is cumulative because you know, there was a time when people were not working - they were staying at home - but some of the sectors grew by 100 per cent. If you take the sector of sanitizers, at what percentage did it grow? How about the sector of protective equipment? There are sectors which have grown phenomenally. However, because there was a general shutdown, the average was a bit lower for industry and for the other sectors.

I congratulate the minister and I thank the Rt Hon. Speaker and everybody. I wish you good luck. Thank you, very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Your Excellency the President, for performing your constitutional obligation. Honourable members, thank you for your kind attention.

Colleagues, as you are aware, certain processes and formalities have to be completed at the beginning of every financial year. I draw the attention of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the Secretary to the Treasury that in compliance with Article 164 of the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the ministry is supposed to present to Parliament the names of all the accounting officers of the ministries, institutions and departments of Government for the financial year 2020/2021.

I would also like to remind the whips of the different parties to handle the deployment of Members to sessional committees.

I would like to give notice to members of the Business Committee that the committee will convene on 18 June 2020 at 11.00 a.m. to consider the programme of business for the First Meeting of the Fifth Session of the Tenth Parliament.

Honourable members, in many ways, time is of essence, taking into account the possibility of election activities that will disrupt the flow of business in Parliament especially in the First Meeting of the Fifth Session, which normally runs from June to October. I, therefore, adjourn the House to 16 June 2020 at 1400 hours. Unfortunately, again, we are unable to have our traditional reception. I can just say thank you for coming. The House is adjourned to 16 June 2020. 

(The House rose at 4.26 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 June 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem

