

Wednesday, 17 June 2020

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR


 THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. As you may recall, last week, I communicated to you that His Excellency, the President, in accordance with Article 91(3) of the Constitution and Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, retuned the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 and the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020.

In accordance with the Rule 142(2) of the Rules of Procedure, Bills passed by Parliament and returned by the President for re-consideration are required to be laid on the Table by the minister within two weeks of their return. At an appropriate time, I will ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to formally lay the Bills on the Table so that they can be referred to the committee for appropriate action.

I also wish to remind members of the Business Committee that we have a scheduled meeting tomorrow at 11 o’clock in the morning in Conference Hall A. I urge you to come so that we can plan the balance of our work. Is there something wrong with this gadget?

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. For the last couple of days, I have observed that attendance of the House by Cabinet has been very thin yet there are many sticky issues that have been outstanding without being answered. Yesterday, you raised a number of issues that ought to have been answered by the responsible minister but they were not handled.

Madam Speaker, I am sure you are experiencing the same pressure that some Members of Parliament are also experiencing. People who were involved in trading with Sudan, whose cases were debated by this House whereupon Parliament passed resolutions and a budget passed for that purpose, have not been paid.

Madam Speaker, you have been calling the minister to come and tell Parliament why these people are not yet paid. Up to this very moment, whenever there is an issue of South Sudan traders, the minister sneaks out. I really do not know what we can do.

Madam Speaker, there are also issues, which are very critical particularly, issues related to COVID-19 where we want the minister to bring to us the stimulus package and some of the answers that have remained hanging so that we know how to move forward and comfort our people. However, the ministers are not there. Even now, there are only two or three ministers. Where are the rest yet today is not a Cabinet meeting day? 

Madam Speaker, as members, we have tried except that we are restricted because we cannot all come here every day but we have tried. What is the problem with the ministers? Do they fear death? Do they think by being here, COVID-19 will kill them? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know who is leading the Government this afternoon. Are you the acting Prime Minister? Where are your people? 

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Cecilia Ogwal for raising that issue.

Madam Speaker, a number of colleagues are on the way coming. As we speak, we are now three in the House and we are ready to answer any questions or issues regarding Government work.

THE SPEAKER: You people are hijacking my work. 

2.46
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This has become a habit. Yesterday, you remember, after House business started you had to suspend proceedings – yes, we resumed after 30 minutes but that was the time the Government Chief Whip and the Prime Minister came in. There were only two ministers, although at a later time, the third one came. We actually expected that at least today, since yesterday they were not there, they would be here. Now, the acting Prime Minister is saying they are on their way to here. I wonder whether they are using a boat. Otherwise, we need to be serious about the attendance by Cabinet.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware that today is not a Cabinet meeting day. Even then, the ministers of state should be available but they are not here yet many ministries have more than one minister. They can no longer talk about Cabinet meeting because they no longer attend Cabinet meetings; I know that. So, acting Prime Minister, please call your people to be here. 

Honourable members, I would like to inform you that on the 24 June 2020, we shall be dismantling one lift to prepare for replacement. So, if you find one of the lifts closed, it will be because we are trying to improve the facilities here. We regret the inconvenience. 

There were two matters of national concern. Yes, hon. Mbwatekamwa, but only two minutes.

2.48
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I would like to raise is about the lower local councils. The lower local councils like the LC IIIs and others no longer hold meetings yet the minister has failed to clarify the reasons as to why they cannot do so.

Much as we might use the disguise of COVID-19, when you look at the structure of the lower local councils, there are not even more than 18 members. They are about 20, 18 or 15 members, which makes a council. 

Madam Speaker, the challenge is that the technocrats have tried to embezzle the money because the politicians are not there to monitor what they are doing. As I talk, in Mubende, the technocrats have used even the unconditional funds without the knowledge of the council. They are actually not allowed to even come to the council hall or offices.

My prayer is: can the minister clearly air out whether the lower local council meetings were banned completely? If they were banned, what next? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the lower local council meetings touches representation of the people. So, the Minister of Local Government should tell us what happened to the lower local council meetings and when the councils will be allowed to resume their work. You could give us an answer on Tuesday, next week. 

Hon. Nantaba, two minutes –

2.51
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, you will recall that early this year, one of our cultural leaders from Kayunga District presented a petition regarding the ongoing destruction of our forests and the grabbing of forest land.

This matter came to Parliament and I recall that you instructed the Minister of Water and Environment to take action, first of all by visiting the locus to see what exactly is going on. Since that time, we have not had any action taken.

As I speak, Madam Speaker, tractors and earthmoving equipment have been deployed to destroy the only three forests that we have in Kayunga yet you are much aware that our dams, including Isimba Dam in Kayunga, are threatened by the recent floating islands and that is due to environmental degradation.

Madam Speaker, my request is that the minister takes up this matter urgently to save these forests because they are threatened and as I speak, destruction is eminent. It is dire and we need action to be taken as immediately as now, if we are to save the environment. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister of Water and Environment is here. I recall that this House instructed you to go and visit that forest and come and update us.

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Nantaba for raising this issue. It is true, Madam Speaker, that early this year, colleagues raised a number of issues concerning the environment and you directed the ministry that we need to go and crosscheck and report back.

Madam Speaker, we indeed started checking on those places that colleagues raised issues on and I was able to reach some, including Kyankwanzi. I have a report on Kyankwanzi and I am waiting to report to this House. Since March, it has been ready. I was not able to reach Kayunga because in the course of time, we had rising waters and flooding.

However, I engaged my colleagues earlier and I promise that I will go and check her area because conservation of the environment, particularly the forests, is a welcome move. Budongo is also affected as well as many others. I thank you heartily for taking concern.

As a ministry, we shall reach there and take action. However, Madam Speaker, I have already checked on the others you asked me to check on and actually, I even have the status report you had asked me to prepare. When I am put on the Order Paper, I will present that report.

I beg that you give us one week to come and report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you, in the meantime, stop the graders; stop the actual cutting until you get there?

MS ANYWAR: Yes, Madam Speaker, that is a way forward. I am going to get in touch with my technical team to go immediately on the ground and ensure that there is no further destruction. When I am given time, I am going to go there and bring a report to this House, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

BILLS

FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL NO.2, 2020

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill No. 2, 2020” be read the first time. 

BILLS

FIRST READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL NO. 2, 2020

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill No. 2, 2020” be read the first time.

BILLS

FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL NO. 2, 2020

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill No. 2, 2020” be read the first time. 

BILLS

FIRST READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL NO.2, 2020

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill No. 2, 2020” be read the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Are they accompanied by certificates, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, they are accompanied by the Certificates of Financial Implication. 

THE SPEAKER: Has the Clerk got them?

MR BAHATI: The Clerk has received them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those four Bills are committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

Hon. Majegere, I think you wanted to say something and then hon. Okupa. You have two minutes.

2.57
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have to apologise. Yesterday, you gave me a chance but I was not around.

Madam Speaker, I have 10 villages of LCs have missed their pay of Shs 120,000 per year. These villages – (Interjection) –Yes, it is Shs 10,000 per month. These villages were gazetted by the Electoral Commission. If a village is gazetted by the Electoral Commission, it has a code and therefore, they have to get paid. However, these 10 LCs did not get their payment.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. I would like the minister to tell me why my LCs have not been paid and when they are getting paid. 

When I contacted the chief administrative officer, he gave me two versions: one, that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wrote to them that the money for new villages should be got from local revenue. When I asked the CAO for documentary evidence, he could not provide it. He then told me that there is a circular advising them that the new villages should wait.

When I contacted the CAO to give me evidence, he showed me a page, which was just referring to new sub-counties and new town councils. There is nothing, which refers to the new villages. Therefore, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should tell me why my LCs have not got their money and when they are going to be paid.

Madam Speaker, you know the period we are in now. The roadmap is out; it is a terrible period.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Majegere, I wish you could state the villages so that the minister can check.

MR WAIRA: Madam Speaker, thank you for that guidance. The villages are:
    1. Mbale Road
    2.  Nabyama beach
    3.  Igayaza 
    4. Busitema
    5.  Kasozi A
    6.  Luwuuta
    7.  Muyanzi
8. Bugumya Kaliro
9. Kakooge
10. Kitumbezi - (Interruption)
MS MUTONYI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, in Manafwa District, there are over 40 villages that have not been paid. Unfortunately, when you asked the minister to read out the names of the villages, I was not ready with the names of my villages. I can, however, produce them in the course of the day. 

So, when I called the CAO, he said the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development only sent them money for the old villages, and yet these villages I am talking about elected their leaders through the Electoral Commission in, I think, 2018. These elected leaders who have not been given money would feel left out and abandoned, and they would wonder why they were elected. 

Madam Speaker, I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should explain to us why those villages were created, and elections were done in them and yet they are not given the money. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if everybody is going to bring information, I do not know where we shall stop. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this is a policy issue. Why haven’t you paid the new villages?

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, those villages which were created and elections have taken place, and they have not been paid - as everybody knows, we are closing the financial year in two weeks’ time. If there is anybody who has not been paid, but they are legally in office, we shall be able to pay them in July. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I now ask the honourable members whose villages have not been paid to compile the lists of the villages and we send them to the ministry so that they can be – I saw hon. Abala.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would encourage the honourable colleagues to work with the Ministry of Local Government. For us, we are at the tail end, making sure that we appropriate the resources needed through Parliament to handle that matter. If you have any complaint, do approach the Ministry of Local Government. Thank you.

MR WAIRA: Madam Speaker, once elections are held, it means these villages are already coded, and the codes are with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Yesterday, I contacted the Ministry of Local Government, but the ministry said, “You write, and then we will write to the CAO”; the CAO whom I have been contacting. 

Do you see that process? As you know, Madam Speaker, this is a dangerous time. If I read my list, it is almost a quarter of the constituency. If these people are missing their pay, and then you ask us to contact the Ministry of Local Government, that is a very long process. Please Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, pay the LCs.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are the pay master. You should know who you pay and who you do not pay. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we would like to confirm that those who have not been paid will be paid in July when we begin the new financial year. So, we call upon our colleagues to inform these leaders in the villages to hold on for a few weeks because their allowances will be fully paid by Government.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have that in writing, honourable minister, so that the members can go home and read the letters to the LCs? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we shall issue a circular to all the accounting officers and sub-county chiefs so that this message goes down. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Okupa, you have two minutes.

3.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A few months ago, when Uganda Christian University wanted to conduct lectures and exams online, the Ministry of Education and Sports together with Parliament resolved that all those things should be suspended. I was, however, surprised that from Monday, this week, Law Development Centre (LDC) started conducting lectures and exams online and students are being asked to pay Shs 20,000.

May the Minister of Education and Sports tell us whether there are now some exemptions for some institutions of higher education to start teaching? It is because those who are in the villages cannot access the online exams because there is no internet. This is what is worrying most of the students. 

We know there was a ban. How come that LDC started conducting lectures and exams on Monday this week?

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr JC Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What is true is that all education institutions in this country were sent on holidays. That is a fact that I know. The information hon. Okupa has provided is shocking to me. I am going to find out what is happening, and I will try to do what is right in enforcing the directive of the President. 

THE SPEAKER: Please do that and give us an update. Let us go to Item No.4. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO € 69.0 MILLION (SIXTY-NINE MILLION EUROS) FROM AGENCE FRANÇAISE DE DEVELOPMENT (AFD) TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF WATER AND SANITATION INFRASTRUCTURES AND ASSOCIATED ACTIVITIES IN THE DISTRICT OF ISINGIRO (THE “PROJECT”)

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay Government’s proposal to borrow up to €69.0 million to finance the construction of water and sanitation infrastructures and associated activities in the district of Isingiro.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the proposal is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

	PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO UA 50 MILLION ($68.5 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) TO FINANCE THE KABALE-LAKE BUNYONYI/KISORO-MGHINGA ROAD UPGRADING PROJECT

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a proposal of Government –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much. Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. It has never been a culture of this Parliament to borrow money for one district. Almost all the districts of Uganda have problems of water and sanitation. Is it in order for the minister to bring to the national Parliament of Uganda a proposal to borrow money for water and sanitation for only one district, and yet all the districts in Uganda like Kasese, Mayuge, Arua and Pader equally have the same problem? Is the minister in order to handle the national Parliament as if it is a district council of Isingiro?

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister explain why he has only brought Isingiro although I am aware Isingiro is really water-stressed. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, just yesterday, we laid here a proposal to construct solar powered water systems in all the districts with the lowest water coverage in Uganda. For the interest of Members of Parliament, tomorrow, if you like, the Minister of Water and Environment can come and give a statement on the plan and how far they have gone with water coverage and financing the projects, and the projects that are being undertaken in the different parts of the country - so that members can know where we are in terms of water construction for irrigation and consumption.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will send this to the Committee on National Economy. If there are members with objections, go the committee and raise those objections there as they can be included in the report. However, I do know that Isingiro is very water-stressed; that one I know because I have been there.

LAYING OF PAPERS

 PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO USD 235.458 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF THREE MAJOR NATIONAL ROADS; NAMAGUMBA-BUDADIRI-NALUGUGU (29.0KM), KATUNA-MUKO-KAMUGANGUZI ROAD (104.0KM) AND LAROPI-MOYO-AFOJI (SUDAN BORDER) ROAD (37KM)

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a Government proposal to borrow up to $235.458 million from the African Development Bank to finance a construction of three national major roads; Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road, Laropi-Moyo-Afoji Road to South Sudan border, Katuna-Muko-Kamuganguzi Road.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I send that to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO UA 50 MILLION (USD 68.5 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) TO FINANCE THE KABALE-LAKE BUNYONYI/KISORO-MGAHINGA ROAD UPGRADING PROJECT

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay  a Government proposal to borrow up to $ 68.5 million to finance the Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi/Kisoro-Mgahinga road. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I send it to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE GOVERNMENT ECONOMIC POLICY RESPONSES TO COPE WITH THE EFFECTS OF COVID-19 AND STRATEGIC ECONOMIC DIRECTION FOR SUSTAINED GROWTH

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, are you still on this issue of the stimulus on item No.5(III)?

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as you are aware, we requested you this morning that we will be making a statement tomorrow on the issue of the Budget regarding the questions raised by the chairperson of the budget committee. We would like to request that we can make this statement tomorrow on the economic stimulus so that both can go together.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I would like to raise is that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is having a lot of queries here concerning power, including the loan that we got in 2017. However, every time the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is on the Order paper, she will always try not to be available.

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding right? Why don’t you use your powers to urge the minister to at least be here tomorrow? However, it is becoming a tendency that she has been appearing on the Order Paper for over 17 times and she is ever absent.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Order Paper has more than one issue related to energy and it is true that the minister had not been visible for some time here. Therefore, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is directed to come here tomorrow and handle the issues, which are on the Order Paper. They are many and they have been on for some time. Therefore, acting Prime Minister, ensure that your minister is here tomorrow.

(Member rose_) we have talked about the issue of South Sudan. You have just come. Honourable members, I communicated on that yesterday and we have talked about it today; you came late.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE 2021 GENERAL ELECTIONS ROADMAP

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should urgently come because members and the country are interested in discussing the issue of the roadmap. Therefore, the minister should come tomorrow so that we start a dialogue on this issue.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for instructing the minister to be here tomorrow. The issues of elections are now more than just a roadmap. I am aware that the Electoral Commission invited bids for printing of the ballot papers; those who submitted theses bids are stuck with the Attorney-General. However, we are also learning that a German company called Veridos has also taken over the issue of printing these ballots and they will be the ones to supply machines that will be used to identify voters on polling day.

Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is whether the minister should not be comprehensive in answering all the issues relating to these elections, including the issues I have mentioned - such that he does not come here to speak about timetable but about the credibility of these elections, whose ballots have now been privatised to someone who came here to make money. And the bids are stuck with the Attorney-General for advice to the Electoral Commission.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I instructed the minister to come so that members can have an opportunity to discuss issues connected with elections. Therefore, he is not limited to the roadmap; you are free to ask him questions. Therefore, acting Prime Minister, it is important that hon. Kamuntu comes for this issue.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020 RETURNED TO THE HOUSE BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister are you ready?

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 as returned to this House by the His Excellency the President in accordance with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution and Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure be laid.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020 RETURNED TO THE HOUSE BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Excise Duty (Amendment) Act, 2020 for reconsideration as returned to the House by His Excellency the President in accordance with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution and Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to correct you; it is not an Act yet. It is the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020. It is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO EURO 10.0 MILLION FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ITALY TO FINANCE THE KARAMOJA INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PHASE II PROJECT UNDER THE HEALTH SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN (HSDP)

The Speaker: The chairperson of the committee is not here. The vice-chairperson is also not here. Let us go to the next item, please.


MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO USD 224 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) AND UA 37.54 MILLION (USD 51 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND TO FINANCE THE KAMPALA CITY ROADS REHABILITATION PROJECT (KCRRP)

The Speaker: I think they are the same people.

3.28
The vice-chairperson, committee on national economy (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am sorry for the delay. May I request that we start with the loan for Karamoja?

The Speaker: It is up to you. We had called it already. Karamoja is important; let us start with it.

Mr bategeka: Madam Speaker, before I present the report, permit me to lay on the Table the following documents with respect to the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to €10.0 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Phase II Project under the Health Sector Development Plan:
1. The report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to €10.0 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Phase II Project under the Health Sector Development Plan;

2. His Excellency the President’s approval of the loan.

3. Brief to Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to €10.0 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Phase II Project under the Health Sector Development Plan.

4. His Excellency the President’s approval of the project.

5. His Excellency the President’s guidance on the debt policy, projects in the pipeline and the implementation of the National Development Plan.

6. Clearance of financial implications.

7. Affirmation of commitment letter from the Ambassador of Italy to Uganda.

8. Clearance letter by the National Planning Authority. 

8. The project budget for Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project.
9. The loan agreement between the Government of the Republic of Italy and Government of the Republic of Uganda on the financing of the project.

10. The procurement plan for the project.

11. Minutes of the meetings held to consider the proposal by Government to borrow up to €10.0 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Phase II Project under the Health Sector Development Plan.

Madam Speaker, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow up to €10.0 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Phase II Project under the Health Sector Development Plan in accordance with rule 166 (2) (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

In its methodology, the committee held meetings with officials from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and economic Development and the Ministry of Health. 

The committee also reviewed documents that were made available by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee also reviewed the draft loan financing agreement between the Government of the Republic of Italy and Government of the Republic of Uganda on the financing of the project; and documents from the National Planning Authority -

The Speaker: Members can read all that. Go to the body.

Mr Bategeka: That can be read. Let us go to the project objectives.

The primary objective of the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project Phase II is to contribute to the acceleration of the progress towards universal health coverage through the delivery of essential health services in Uganda.

The expected project outcomes are:
i) Six new health centres III;
ii)31 general/maternity wards;
iii)20 outpatient departments;
iv) Five operating theatres;
v) 75 staff houses;
vi) Five incinerators;
vii) Construction of toilet systems;
viii) 10 placenta pits;
ix) Eight medical waste pits;
x) 16 medical stores;
xi) One ambulance;
xii) Procurement of equipment items for 10 health centres at the level of health centre III and IV; and
xiii) Re-tooling for primary health care for the eight districts (eight vehicles, 16 motorcycles and eight public address systems for outreaches, monitoring and community mobilisation, and health awareness campaigns for remote area communities).

The components of the project are four and they include the following:
1. Infrastructure development 
This component will build new health centres III and construct new wards at the existing health centres III and health centres IV to make them functional. 

In the existing health centres III and IV, the project will replace the old dilapidated infrastructure with new infrastructure. The project will build six new health centres III and upgrade 12 health centres II to health centres III and three health centres III to health centres IV. 

2. Equipment and priority retooling for primary health care 
This component will provide equipment to selected health centres according to the medical equipment standard lists recommended by the National Advisory Committee on Medical Equipment. Furthermore, the project will support the local governments in primary healthcare through selected health centres for re-tooling. 

This component will cover health sensitisation, community outreaches, monitoring, supervision and training of the communities that live in Karamoja in order to reduce vulnerability and increase awareness about public health. Each of the eight districts will receive a car (four-wheel drive), two motorbikes and equipment to support primary healthcare, particularly the implementation of the community health initiatives of Government.

3. Consultancy  
This component will support Ministry of Health, targeting the Directorate of Planning and Development in the following areas: 
    • Project supervision;
    • Project coordination; and
    • Project assistance.


4. Project Management 
This component will support Ministry of Health, targeting the Directorate of Planning and Development in the following areas: 
    • Fuel;
    • Taxes;
    • Allowances, including travel inland;
    • Semi-annual coordination meetings;
    • Environmental and social impact assessment and soil studies; 
    • Four vehicles for clerks of works. 

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, permit me to move to the loan terms, financial returns and budgetary implications. 

Loan Terms 
The Government of the Republic of Italy will make available €10 million to Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project Phase II under the terms indicated in the table below: 
    • Loan amount – €10 million 
    • Maturity period – 32 years 
    • Repayment period – 11 years 
    • Grace period – 21 years 

The loan conditions are the usual ones, like getting clearance by the Attorney-General - I do not think I should go through those. I think the rest are readable. 

Committee Observations 
Strategic relevance of the project 
The committee observed that - 
    (i) In the financial year 2018/2019, Parliament, on 4 April 2019, approved a loan of US$ 200 million from the World Bank to support the Uganda Inter-Government Fiscal Transfer Programme to construct and upgrade health centres II to health centres III across all local governments. However, the Karamoja region was left out of this programme as the Ministry of Health was still negotiating for this loan from the Republic of Italy to construct health centres III in every subcounty in the Karamoja region. 

    (ii) The Karamoja Infrastructure Development Phase II Project is part of the Government of Uganda's response to the declining trends in local government financing. The project is highly relevant as it will address the binding constraints of low and inequitable levels of funding for health in the Karamoja region as funding levels for health in most local governments are too low to achieve improvements in outcomes. 

Therefore, the committee recommends the following: 
    (i) The Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Local Government should ensure that all the health interventions as a result of this project are timely and mainstreamed into the budgets of all local governments in Karamoja region, to guarantee the sustainability of the investments due to this project.

    (ii) The Ministry of Health should also ensure the greater involvement of all key stakeholders in determining the quantity, quality and location of health service delivery investments of the project in the disadvantaged areas of Karamoja region.

Local Economic Development in Karamoja Region 
The committee noted that the majority of the special programmes/projects in Karamoja region have had a highly disproportionate investment in social service delivery to the disadvantage of investments aimed at revitalising the local economy and increasing the incomes of the local people in Karamoja region. Even with more investments in social service delivery, Karamoja region continues to post poor socio-economic indicators. Income poverty limits people from seeking health and education services and is synonymous with high rates of child labour and high school dropouts. This requires that all programmes/projects include a component for local economy in Karamoja region.

The committee recommends that future Government service delivery programmes aimed at increasing adequacy and equity in social service delivery in Karamoja region should include a component on local economic development. 

Impact of Institutional Deficiencies in Service Delivery in Local Governments 
The committee recommends the following:
    (i) The beneficiary local governments in Karamoja region due to this project should liaise with the Health Service Commission and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that the required vacancies due to this project are filled in time to guarantee timely realisation of project outcomes on health service delivery in the region.

    (ii) Government develops a more tailored approach to improve persistent poor health service delivery performance in local governments in Karamoja region beyond the increase in health infrastructure investments due to this project.

Quality of Completed Structures 
The committee noted that this project seeks to enhance the functionality of health facilities in Karamoja region by improving health infrastructure to the required basic minimum standard for delivery of quality healthcare services.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should strengthen technical supervision of construction works that will be undertaken under this project to ensure good quality of works is achieved, minimise cases of delayed completion of works, payments for unexecuted works, and paying for works that do not conform to the expected quality specifications.

Unit Cost of Facilities to be Constructed 
The committee noted the high unit cost of some of the facilities to be constructed/upgraded under the infrastructure development component of this project; for example, the construction cost of 75 two bedroomed semi-detached staff houses at selected public and PNFP health centres III in all the districts of Karamoja is estimated at Shs 13.14 billion. This translates into a unit cost of Shs 175,200,000 for one staff house, which the committee felt was very high. 

The committee recommends the following: 
(i) The Ministry of Health should ensure that the construction activities of this project are undertaken in a way that promotes efficiency and economy in the utilisation of public resources while at the same time achieving the objectives of the project.

(ii) The Ministry of Health and the Minster of Karamoja Affairs should ensure that the specifications of the facilities to be constructed/upgraded under the infrastructure development component of this project are well aligned to the costs of the facilities to be constructed/upgraded to guarantee value for money while implementing this project.

Performance of Ongoing Debt Financed Projects Under the Health Sector 
These are many. The committee recommends that Government should expedite the execution of all ongoing debt financed development projects in the health sector approved by Parliament, without recourse to additional financing, in order to meet their respective project objectives, including enhancing health service delivery in the country. 

Dependence of the Health Sector on External Financing 
The committee recommended that Government should follow up on its promise to prioritise the health sector starting in the financial year 2020/2021, with more investment in the health sector infrastructure developments to avoid last minute panic where external resources may not be forthcoming.

Support Supervision and Monitoring 
The committee, in this regard, recommends that the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate adequate funds annually for monitoring and supervision of health facilities as a means of improving the performance of the sector with effect from financial year 2020/2021.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to €10 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Phase II Project under the Health Sector Development Plan be approved, subject to these recommendations.

Thank you. I beg to submit and also lay on the Table the documents I earlier mentioned.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your committee. Honourable members, the report has been duly signed by the necessary minimum numbers. Do you have any comments? 

3.38
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. First, I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee. The mask I have is about women – Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) and United Nations (UN) women. When I saw this item on the Order Paper, I had to get this mask so that we are in tandem with the women and children of Karamoja.

Honourable members, you are aware health services are used mostly by women and children. To be on record, these are some of the few small things the people of Karamoja are getting from this Government. As a senior cadre of the National Resistance Movement (NRM), I know that the people of Karamoja vote well and indeed they are supposed to benefit. Therefore, I request honourable members to help the women and children from Karamoja. 

Madam Speaker, since the acting Prime Minister is also here, I would like to say that usually, when the engineers and the technical people are posted to Karamoja, they even do their supervision on phone. Let people be committed. I heard about the double-cabin cars for the clerks of works; let these people be resident engineers, not just flying engineers. 

I, therefore, would like to request this Parliament to approve the loan request for the people of Karamoja, especially the women and the children. Thank you.

3.40
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I am here also to support the motion for Government to borrow that money.

Madam Speaker, a two-roomed house (staff quarters) costing Shs 175 million - I wonder what type of two-roomed village house would cost all that money. I would have even expected the committee, in their recommendations, to tell us what they think that house should cost. If they realized that it was too much money or the cost was highly inflated, what are we going to do? If we still borrow this €10 million and we make some adjustments, what is going to happen to remaining amount of money?

Lastly, it is good that these people are being thought of in terms of providing health centres IV and III, but what about other constituencies that do not have health centres IV, like Kasambya? Is the Government thinking about us? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the committee will explain to us the real reasons as to why the cost is so high for these two-bedroomed houses? 

3.42
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion to borrow the money, especially in line with Sustainable Development Goal No. 3 -ensuring good health and wellbeing of all Ugandan citizens and in particular for Karamoja. The Sustainable Development Goals advocate for everyone to be inclusive; we should not leave anyone behind. Therefore, I agree with that for Karamoja as a region.  

However, my concern was the cost of a two-bedroomed house; Shs 175 million is a lot of money. Maybe because we are not technical people in that area, but we need justification for Shs 175 million for the construction of a two-bedroomed house. Leaders from Karamoja generally should follow up on this project because we need value for money. We should not leave this project to the local government alone. The Members of Parliament and the Committee on Health should play their oversight role because from the costing of the house, I have reservations - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Committee chair, with that much money, can’t we get two additional houses?

3.43
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand here to support this motion. We all know that Karamoja has one of the worst human development indicators in this county and if we are borrowing in order to ensure equity, in principle I support the loan request.

Madam Speaker, just a few days ago, we were listening to the State of the Nation Address. Point No.5 of the NRM Ten Point Programme talks about an independent, integrated, self-sustaining economy and the President clearly stated that we have actually achieved it. Therefore, I expected us to reduce on borrowing, particularly for sectors like health where we are supporting our people. 

I am surprised that we are going to borrow €10 million to support Karamoja both in terms of development and recurrent expenditure. When you unpack that loan, you will see some of the budget items are going for recurrent expenditure; they are not really for development expenditure, for the long term. Can we consider this, so that we take off some of these lines, which we could fund through local resources? 

We are all aware that our budget for defence and classified expenditure is increasing while we are going to borrow money for the most essential sectors of the economy and for the people of Uganda. Why don’t we reduce on the amount of money that we have allocated - (Member timed out.)

3.46
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for that loan request report. I fully support the motion for the loan request for the good of the people of Karamoja.

However, my area of concern, Madam Speaker, is to do with the loan absorption rate. The country seems to have that as a challenge. Most of the loans we apply for and get create further liability in terms of interest, which we are paying as a country. I urge the Ministry of Health to fully engage the stakeholders because it is very important. This issue of loan absorption has created problems. 

Madam Speaker, the other concern is that it is good for Karamoja to get this but it is almost coming to eight years since Mubende Referral Hospital was elevated and it does not have staff quarters; the ones that are there are dilapidated. I do not know whether the ministry is aware of that concern. I, therefore, urge the ministry to consider Mubende Referral Hospital staff quarters as one of the fundamental issues to be considered in future. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.47
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for this report. We have been waiting for quite a long time for this loan request to be presented to the House. 

I also want thank the Government of Uganda and the Government of Italy for this €10 million loan. Karamoja has faced many challenges, especially in the health sector. We have districts without district hospitals. We have districts which are being run by health centres III in Karamoja. Therefore, this funding will go a long way in supporting the health sector in Karamoja and improve the health infrastructure.

I also support the idea brought by one of the Members that this loan facility should go for infrastructural development and we need to limit its use in terms of consumables. It should target infrastructure development so that the health sector in Karamoja sub-region can somehow move forward.

Madam Speaker, I call upon this House to support this loan request. It is not enough but for us, it is better than nothing. At first, we were left out completely but now we are happy that we have something. I urge this House to continue supporting Karamoja and also to help us to support Karamoja in other sectors. Thank you.

3.49
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report. I also rise to support the motion to borrow for the development of health infrastructure for our people in Karamoja. 

However, I would also like to request that the Government, through the Ministry of Health, comes up with a comprehensive plan that addresses most of these health challenges in other parts of the country. I come from Kibaale, where out of the 13 subcounties, seven do not have any health centre. A case in point is Nyamarunda Subcounty. It has the highest population in the district - 8,000 people – but they do not have even a health centre II. It becomes very challenging, especially for the women and children, to access health facilities.

Therefore, whereas I support the loan request, I pray that Government comes up with a comprehensive plan to address all these health challenges in the country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as hon. Nauwat comes up, I would also like to complement what hon. Basemera has just said. In Kaliro, there is no district hospital; in Luuka, there is no district hospital; and in Namutumba, there is no district hospital. It is a serious issue. The minister should consider those districts.

3.51
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Madam Speaker, in 2018, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development engaged leaders from Karamoja over this loan. The Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs), LC V chairpersons, District Health Officers (DHOs) and Members of Parliament were in that meeting. I also attended that meeting.

The district leadership informed the meeting that the Ministry of Health had told them to identify priorities for this loan, which the districts did. However, in the report presented, some of those priorities have not been captured. Some subcounties have been left out. 

Madam Speaker, we are, however, grateful for the loan. In the case of Amudat, I have been saying on this Floor that we have one health centre IV only but with this loan now, they are going to elevate one health centre III to a health centre IV. It is a good loan for us.

However, Madam Speaker, in that meeting, we got information that the ministry wants to put a caveat on Karamoja in relation to health interventions. They want to say that because we have benefitted from this loan, we will not be having any more interventions, yet to us the loan is not covering all the subcounties. Therefore, I call upon the Government to top up this loan so that a wider area of the sub-region can be covered.

On this high unit cost, it is clear that there is somebody who wants to make money out of Karamoja. It is very unfortunate that – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, for Amudat, conclude in half a minute.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you Madam Speaker. For this Shs 175 million, it is like there is somebody in Kampala, maybe from one of those ministries, who wants to make money out of that. Therefore, the ministry should revisit this and make sure that more facilities come out of the Shs 175 million.

On the contractors, the other time we were talking about local content. If Kampala people do not have interest in this, the contractors for the facilities should be the local contractors from there who have the capacity and a good record. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I take this opportunity to welcome the Leader of the Opposition, who was involved in an accident, but we are happy to see her here. You are welcome. (Applause) 

3.54
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Madam Speaker, allow me to add my voice to those thanking the committee and supporting this motion. I think the saying that the test of a developed nation is not determined by big buildings but by how we treat the lowest member of the society is being reflected in this particular report supporting the loan to develop Karamoja.

Madam Speaker, let this Parliament also be on record debunking the theory that we cannot wait for Karamoja to develop. By supporting this loan request, we would have defeated that fallacy. 

Allow me also to say that while we think of development in this area, other than supervision from a central place, we should also empower the local governments in doing supervision. Karamoja is very far. We have a case of Lapirin Health Centre II in Agago which is supposed to be upgraded to a health centre III but for two years, they have been extending this and a lot of money is spent. It is really not very effective to supervise from very far. Therefore, a local way of supervision should also be looked at, at this point.

Madam Speaker, as neighbours of Karamoja, we cannot be left out. We have shouldered the burdens of Karamoja and most times the spill-over of these problems happens in our areas. Agago does not have a health centre IV and a district hospital. These are things that should be looked at. 

Other than just dealing with the health issues, I think we should also look at production because poverty is also related to health problems. Therefore, a comprehensive or a multi-pronged approach to the problems in Karamoja should be adopted.

Madam Speaker, let us support this loan request to debunk the theory that we cannot wait for Karamoja to develop.

3.56
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to interest the committee, which has been around for some time, to go and do an audit of how many loan requests we have passed since this Parliament started. The reason I am raising this is that on this Order Paper alone, the total number of loans we are going to be working on today amount to $663 million. How many of them have we passed and what impact have they brought?  

The reason I am raising this is that they are giving Karamoja $10 million, and Karamoja is a very big place, but a house is costing Shs 175 million. Those two and three-bedroomed houses are very many in Bugisu but those who own them have never owned even Shs 50 million. Why should a Government facility go for such an amount yet this money could have constructed more houses for Karamoja?

Madam Speaker, Karamoja region is leading in poverty; it is at 61 per cent. How do we take only $10 million there? We should have really decided that Karamoja needs to be developed, as it has been said, and we would have got enough money not only from loans but from the Government budget. I have been looking at the health budget and the little money which has been allocated to Karamoja cannot even cover one district.

Madam Speaker, I would like to plead that one, the committee does the audit and two, since we have raised the issue of the cost of the houses – Karamoja people, we are not saying we are stopping this; you need more houses out of the Shs 175 million. The committee should engage the ministry to agree on the price for each house. Why should we get one house at a cost of Shs 175 million because - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I remember a few years ago, the Government constructed houses for chiefs in Acholi at Shs 50 million.

3.56
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the loan request in order to promote health services in Karamoja, although my district also needs health centres and staff houses.

While I support this loan request, I would like to talk about the two-bedroomed house that is going to be constructed at a cost of Shs 175 million. I am at pains as I hear that Government can construct a two-bedroomed house at Shs 175 million. Every day, the papers are awash with stories of sexual harassment and other offences, yet the Government is everywhere building two-bedroomed houses. Even for the people who were removed from Bududa and taken to Bunambutye, they built for them two-bedroomed houses.

Madam Speaker, what is going to happen to the girl child? You are not separating the children – boys from girls. All the children are given one bedroom. What happens there? Are the people who are going to use the two-bedroomed houses single? Do they have one or more children? What is really going to happen to these children? 
 
Madam Speaker, we cannot support Government in doing that – (Member timed out.)

4.01
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I stand to support this loan request, I would like to make one statement very clear. The districts of Agago, Pader, Otuke and many others neighbour Karamoja. We have been repeatedly speaking on this Floor of Parliament how we are victims of attacks from Karamoja. When you are setting up programmes like these, it is courteous to replicate the same in the region that neighbours the other. 

Like my honourable colleague, hon. Makmot, mentioned here, Agago District does not have a district hospital. We do not even have a health centre IV. Actually, the whole district does not have good health facilities. I would be very grateful if the ministry thought about getting a similar loan to replicate this programme in Agago District. 

However, we support this loan request because when you develop a neighbour, we expect them to begin behaving very well. Recently, I was on this Floor of Parliament talking about attacks. They kill our people and take away our animals. They, in fact, walk with guns in Agago District. So, when we have such a programme, it would be good to show that Government has a cause for us.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. However, before I wind up, I beg that the minister and the chairperson in their response incorporate our plea into this programme, so that in the coming years, we can also see such development coming up. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we shall want to know whether we cannot restructure the cost of these houses. We have identified a problem. Are we going to endorse it?

4.03
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion. 

For many years - 33 years or more - the people of Karamoja have suffered. When you visit that part of the country, you realise it is a very rich area. When you sit in Mbale, you see trucks loaded with granite, marble and lime being ferried from Karamoja, yet in return, Karamoja gets nothing. Madam Speaker, €10 million is no money at all to develop that area! How I wish there was more money to be put in Karamoja.

When you travel and see pictures of Uganda, at times you want to step back because they show Karamoja. Why do they show those pictures? It is because Karamoja has lagged behind. This loan request should have been passed yesterday and a little bit more is needed by the people of Karamoja. Some of the Karimojong are in Mbale and they are our neighbours. Why should we develop other areas of the country, when others have lagged behind, yet we are all the same? 

Madam Speaker, I do not want to talk about discrimination because you have seen what has happened in America recently. We are the same Ugandans and so, why should we develop other areas and forget other parts of the country? If we are to move together, Karamoja must be developed.

Madam Speaker, look at the money. I sit on the Committee of Public Accounts and I saw how money was stolen from the north - those funny buildings that were put up. When you look at the amount spent on those buildings, it is unbelievable. If that money had been given – (Member timed out.)

4.03
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. 

Whereas I agree that Karamoja as a region needs to be developed, I am a bit uncomfortable with the level of borrowing this country is preoccupying itself with, especially now that interest payments and budget support is taking a priority share, to the tune of Shs 12 trillion. 

When the President was delivering his State of the Nation Address to Parliament, he talked about Shs 5 trillion in our budget being seen as wasteful expenditure and that it needs to be realigned to the different sectors. From the simple calculations we have made about the loan requests that have been made by the minister just today, the total comes to about Shs 2.7 trillion. This means that if we realign our budget and relocated that money to those critical sectors and areas like Karamoja, which need a big shot in the health sector, we would still have a balance of money that can be utilised in other sectors.

I am looking at interest payment of Shs 3,600 billion in just one financial year of 2020/2021. I imagine there will be a time when we shall hit the ceiling and not be able to borrow even when there will be a real dire need for the country to borrow. I think – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have taken a lot of time. Let us allow the Leader of the Opposition to say something.

4.05
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I also stand to support the loan but with a caution that we borrow and sometimes, we delay too much in putting the loans to action. At the end of it all, we keep on gathering interest.

For this Shs 175 million for a unit of two rooms; a two-bedroomed house, why not expand it to be either four-bedroomed or three-bedroomed? It should be at least three bedrooms so that we cater for all the children. (Interruption) Thank you, you can give information. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my boss, the Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. We must be fair to the people of Karamoja.

On this phone here, I have a whatsapp group where they are selling assets in Kampala. You can compare a house in Kampala costing Shs 175 million, looking at the cost of land. It is a posh house.

When you go to Karamoja, where the materials are cheap, you cannot tell us that you can construct a house of two rooms at Shs 175 million, as compared to the one of Kampala. Otherwise, the thieves in this country are going to begin rejoicing, getting “differences” out of the Karimojong. That is the information I wanted to give.

Also, let us look at the Auditor-General’s report of those houses that were built in Karamoja, in hon. Remigio Achia’s constituency, which I visited. Let us compare them and see what they did. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the minister to respond? (Ms Ogwal rose_) Honourable members, we need to end this debate.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to say that there is a general consensus on this loan. However, can we give conditional approval, until the ministry comes back to tell us whether they are going to construct three units out of Shs 175 million? Then, we can give our final approval. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no need for us to defer this. We want a decision today and now. We have identified an inflated cost, there is a shortage of housing, Karamoja is hard to reach and hard to stay. Why two houses at the hospital or health centre?

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, let me make two points to clarify. I have crosschecked with the Ministry of Health - technical staff who are not here and also concurred with the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy.

Actually, the house we are referring to is, one unit has four semi-detached houses. There is a unit of one house having four semi-detached houses. In other words, if the committee had explored further, you would have got more details. The Shs 175 million is not constructing a two-bedroomed house; it is bigger than a two-bedroomed house.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, where is that in the loan document? 

MR BAHATI: Since the chairperson interacted with the Ministry of Health, I would like her to make a point on that, if you will allow.

THE SPEAKER: Can the chairperson come and update us on that? - Let us hear from the chairperson. (Members rose_) No, the chairperson is not confused. Please, she has had the opportunity to study thOse things in detail. - Let her tell us.

4.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the ministry made a presentation to us with that figure, we also raised concerns. They clarified and told us that there are four semi-detached two-bedroomed units within a block. The average was coming to about Shs 35 million per unit of two bedrooms. (Interjections)

Madam Speaker, we did not go to the field –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should be social distancing. Do not go near the chairperson.

MS BBUMBA: Because of the current COVID-19 situation, we were unable to go to the field and so, we took what the ministry told us as the truth.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the honourable chairperson is whether they looked at the drawings or the plan to see that actually, it is four in two or two in four. Did you look at that? 

4.13
MR MOSES KAHIMA (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. They ministry is constructing the houses we are referring to in my constituency at Kishaami Health Centre III.

This house contains two units. One unit is composed of two bedrooms, a sitting room and a kitchen. Therefore, it means that in one house, there are two units of two bedrooms. It is really worth it to have it constructed at that cost.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we want what is good for Karamoja. Can we have evidence? Let us have evidence. (Applause) We want to be sure about what we are doing. 

4.14
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I propose that instead of saying the chairperson is saying this - Since the Minister of Health is here, let the technical people bring the drawings and we see them. We can halt this loan for 20 minutes, since we are still here. They can even send the drawings to the Clerk’s email and we get them. That is what I would like to propose. Some of us can also technically look at these drawings. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.15
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, we would like the leaders and the chairperson of the committee to take this feedback in good faith. We have experience and we can testify to this. Before the Government stopped health centres II, Government was building health centres II; those two-bedroomed - They would bring a budget of Shs 70 million for something that costs only Shs 15 million.

What they are going to do here is, after passing the loan, nobody will be in Karamoja to testify whether what they told us is what they built. They can only be taken to court after having them here on the Hansard showing us what we agreed upon.

Otherwise, they are coming here with statements, deceiving us that they agreed on two bedrooms, which mean four or six. Those stories do not operate when it comes to building. Can we have what we are paying for so that we know that if it is going to cost Shs 170 million, this is worth Shs 170 million. If it is for Shs 30 million, let us see what is worth Shs 30 million. That is what we shall use to take people to court.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Clerk to contact the Ministry of Health to bring the plans for the Karamoja health centres? (Applause) 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is, we are here listening to the report. It is the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy who said that two-bedroomed houses are going for Shs 175 million.

Now, the chairperson is turning around, having either been coerced and saying, “No, we were told and we meant this. Now, because of COVID-19, we never went there”. What is this?

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the chairperson of a committee to come and change her own report, which she has just finished reading? Is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, actually, it was the committee that alerted us to this high cost.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House that drawings alone cannot give you the cost of a house. You need the bills of quantities and the specifications. If you really need to know the costs, the drawings will give you the layout but will not give you the bills of quantities and the cost. Therefore, I think the House should consider getting all the Bills of Quantities, drawings and specifications. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we want to be certain about what we are passing for Karamoja. Therefore, we defer this matter until tomorrow. We want all the documentations especially the layout.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $224 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) AND UA37.54 MILLION ($51 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF)TO FINANCE THE KAMPALA CITY ROADS REHABILITATION PROJECT

4.18
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $224 million from the African Development Bank, and UA37.4 million ($51 million) from the African Development Fund to finance the Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project. 

Madam Speaker, before I proceed with the presentation, permit me to lay on Table the following documents:
    1. Report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow the said amounts;
    2. Brief to Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow the above-mentioned amounts;
    3. A letter from His Excellency the President giving assent to the project;
    4. Certificate of Financial Implications confirming the Government of Uganda’s readiness to provide counterpart funding;
    5. Clearance letter by the National Planning Authority;
    6. Loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the African Development Bank;
    7. Loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the African Development Fund;
    8. Negotiated disbursement letter of the loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the African Development Bank;
    9. Negotiated disbursement letter of the loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the African Development Fund;
    10. Appraisal report and annexes;
    11. Summary of records of negotiations;
    12. Aide Memoire on KIIDP 2;
    13. The African Development Bank Aide Memoire on the appraisal mission report for the loan to finance the Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project 
    14. The African Development Bank Aide Memoire on the appraisal mission report for the loan to finance the Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project 
    15. NEMA’s certificate of approval of environmental impact assessment;
    16. Mid-term evaluation of the KIIDP 2
    17. The action plan of the Kampala Capital City Roads Rehabilitation Project;
    18. Minutes of the meetings, which were held by the committee.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay these documents at Table. 

The Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow $224 million from the ADB and $51 million from the ADF to finance Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Projects. In accordance with Rule 166 (2) (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the request was presented and referred to our committee on 20 May 2020, and the committee considered and scrutinised the loan request. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues who participated in the discussion and formulation of this report. 

In methodologies, we held meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Kampala Capital City Authority and Metropolitan Affairs, and the Kampala Capital City Authority. We reviewed documents, which are indicated in paragraph 2.2 running from Roman Numerals (i) to (xxix). 

We also undertook field visit and inspection to some of the proposed implementation sites of the project in Kampala Capital City. 

The committee also inspected the on-going non-motorised traffic pilot project; the corridor running from Bakuli, along Namirembe Road through Luwum Street up to Entebbe Road, where they have established mid-road gardens. 

Background
Uganda's urban areas, especially the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, are characterised by overcrowding and poor infrastructure among others. The absence of an efficient public transport system and adequate road connectivity results in traffic, which all of us experience every day. There are 2.2 million persons using the inadequate and dilapidated infrastructure. 

The growth of Uganda's economy is linked to how efficiently Kampala is managed and how well it is connected to the rest of the country. Once oil production begins, it is expected that Kampala will take on an even more important role in providing core businesses and financial services. Meeting these growing demands is a challenge as the current pace of investment support, institutional development, and policy reform in the city and wider metropolitan area is not keeping pace with the growth.

Kampala has a road network of 2,110 kilometres, out of which only 30 per cent is paved. You can imagine 70 per cent of the city still has marrum roads.

The Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project aims to increase and improve the quality of infrastructure stock to foster transformation of the Uganda's economy.  The project is aimed at tackling congestion in the city through improvement of road networks. 

The project is also part of an earlier project, KIIDP, for which a loan was approved in 2014, and the greater part of this project has been implemented and some of the roads have been handed over to the authority after the defect period.

The Kampala Roads Rehabilitation Project is part of a wider infrastructural improvement programme and seeks to meet Government’s long-term development strategy as envisaged in Vision 2040 and the National Development Plan 2021-2024. It is also linked to the National Development Plan III. 

Madam Speaker, the project is also aligned to other planning frameworks like the 2003 Kampala Urban Transport Improvement Plan, the Road Sector Development Programme, the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area Transport Master Plan, and the Sustainable Development Goals.

Madam Speaker, on the performance of earlier projects, Kampala Capital City has one running loan, which is implemented up to over 60 percent. Its completion was 31 December 2019 but it was extended up to the end of this month. 

The performance of KIIDP 2 overall is on track, and it is, by and large, achieving the set objectives. 

The progress towards the achievement of the project development objective is satisfactory and the overall implementation is rated by the funders as satisfactory.

The project objectives, impacts, outcomes and outputs are as follows:
The development objective of the project is to accelerate Uganda’s competitiveness by shoring up productivity gains from infrastructure development in Kampala and integrating the growth spill-over via efficient transportation networks to the rest of the country.

Objectives
    i. To enhance transport efficiency in the city and;
    ii. To improve air quality in the city through implementation of scheduled eco-bus transit services and promoting active transport by expansion of non-motorised traffic networks-walkways and cycling tracks, in Kampala.

The project impact
The project will contribute to improved economic opportunities and reduced cost of doing business in the City of Kampala.

Project Outcomes
    i. Improved transport efficiency in Kampala.
    ii. Improved air quality in Kampala and
    iii. Creation of job opportunities.

Madam Speaker, the expected outcomes are covered under paragraph (7.4) table (2).  

The Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project area of influence is largely in Central Division of the city of Kampala made up of five divisions - Central, Nakawa, Kawempe, Rubaga and Makindye.

The project component
The Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project is part of a citywide infrastructural development programme which encompasses road network improvements, upgrading, road junction improvements and traffic management. 

Due to the large and growing commuter traffic in Kampala, coupled with the absence of a well-organised public transport system, the proposal by the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) on the provision of eco-bus services was integrated in the city roads. Most capital cities’ transport system is managed by the public but it is only in Kampala where it is in the hands of the private sector.

Madam Speaker, the project components are covered under paragraph (8) table (3) and these are;
    1.  Road construction works, which is going to take 85.49 per cent of the loan;
    2. Project management, which is taking 5.19 per cent of the institutional capacity;
    3. Institutional capacity building, which is taking 1.25 per cent;
    4. Women and Youth Skills Development, which taking 0.09 per cent and;
    5. Provision of eco-bus services, which is going to take 4.17 per cent and;
    6. Compensation and Resettlement action plan will take 3.82 per cent.

Madam Speaker, the roads to be reconstructed and upgraded under the project are covered under table 3 and it is a long list and covers all the divisions of Kampala.

Project and financing agreements
The total project cost net of taxes is estimated at $288 million over a five-year period as shown in tables 4 and 5. 

The project financing by source is as follows;
    1. The ADB Loan will cover 77.78 per cent.
    2. African Development Finance Loan will cover 17.7 per cent.
    3. The grant from Global Environment Fund will cover 0.69 per cent and; 
    4. Government of Uganda Counterpart fund for Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will cover 3.82 per cent and the total is $288 million.

The project details are given under table 5.  The loan terms are indicated in tables 6 and 7.

Madam Speaker, I move to the loan conditions. These are the standard conditions;
    1. Approval by Parliament in accordance with the constitutional provision;
    2. Legal opinion of the Attorney-General on the loan documentation;
    3.  Letter to the Bank authorising persons to sign withdrawal applications;
    4. Submission of evidence of the designation or appointment of the relevant staff;
    5. Submission of works compensation schedule prepared in accordance to the Resettlement Action Plan;
    6. Evidence that all project affected persons/ in respect to civil works in a given lot have been compensated;
    7. Designation of a special account in Bank of Uganda to receive the proceeds; and
    8. Before the date of the loan agreement, Government shall submit a procurement plan to the lender, covering the entire project period.

Madam Speaker, tables 8 and 9 indicate that the tentative interest cost of funds and according to the costing, these are within the grant level and are highly concessional.

Budgetary implication
The project is provided for in the current Budget and looking at the economic return of the project, the economic internal rate of return of the project is projected at 18.9 per cent, which is good for infrastructure projects.

Project implementation arrangements
KCCA shall be the overall executing agency for the project. The team shall work in close consultation with the Ministry of Works and Transport to ensure compliance with the relevant specifications and construction standards.

The project oversight committee shall be instituted, chaired by the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Works and Transport, and comprising of the key stakeholders including; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, NEMA, KCCA, UMEME, Kampala Water and Sewerage Company, UNRA, civil society representatives, and many others. Of course, our current debt situation - we are at 37 per cent of GDP. 

On compliance with parliamentary approval guidelines, KCCA scores 63 per cent, which is fairly good and this is indicated in table 10.

Madam Speaker, I now move to the observations and recommendations. 

The committee noted that 3.82 per cent of the project cost is going to be Government contribution for RAP. However, Government has been the source of delay of implementation of many of the infrastructure projects because they always delay in releasing the counterpart funds. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is hearing and he has given an irrevocable commitment that the money will be provided when it is needed.

The committee recommends that to facilitate timely RAP compensation and acquisition of right of way, Government should ensure the timely release of the required project counterpart funds to expedite right of way acquisition ahead of project commencement for each of the roads, which are shown in table 3.

RAP Implementation 
The committee noted the need to improve on the process of RAP implementation for this project in order to guarantee early acquisition of the right of way before hiring the civil works contractor. We therefore, recommend that KCCA should ensure that all activities needed to ensure compliance with resettlement commitments defined by the RAP and applicable policies are complied with.

KCCA should also ensure that compensation, resettlement and other mitigation measures lead to sustainable restoration of enhancement of the affected persons’ quality of life. We expect better housing and better facilities for people who are going to be displaced. KCCA should continue to engage with the stakeholders through the project cycle. It should not be a forced departure but a negotiated departure. 

Delays in implementation of the infrastructure projects in the city
The committee recommends that KCCA should make all possible effort to coordinate with all ministries, departments and agencies in the implementation of the project in order to plan for these activities in a timely manner and to avoid delays in the implementations of this project.


Kampala Capital City Authority should also develop a map of its utility in the city that will guide their maintenance and other use.

Madam Speaker, we had a problem with the construction of the parliamentary building when KCCA facilities were running into the plot and it took a long time for the contractor to negotiate for their relocation, which caused some delays for our project.

Rigorous KCCA due diligence

The committee recommends that KCCA should ensure that during the implementation of this project, the correct bidders are selected for the contract award by carrying out rigorous due diligence to avoid awarding contracts to firms, which do not have the requisite technical staff, equipment and financial resources to deliver on the job.

Most importantly, local content must be taken into consideration.

Urban Master Plan to decongest Kampala City
 
The committee recommends that Government and KCCA should ensure that the implementation of this intervention avoids the development of public transport monopolies and fosters efficiency gain by separating strategic and operational functions in the delivery of public transport services.

KCCA should further ensure that contracting bus service operations under this project to the private sector entities is procured competitively and transparently. 

KCCA should ensure that the operationalisation and management of the pilot scheduled eco-bus service in Kampala City integrates the existing transport operators into the new public transport system through several actions including encouraging existing public transport operators to buy equity in the bus company system. The boda-bodas could set up, through their little savings, a unitary fund and buy shares in this. 

They should also facilitate training and the upgrading of skills of a good number of the existing taxi operators and boda-boda riders for possible absorption into the operations of the bus system and privatising governance and operation of the eco-bus, among others.

In other words, we want this bus service not to displace but to complement the other operators who are going to get into business when it comes up.

On maintenance of newly rehabilitated roads and streets, in Uganda, we are very good at attracting new things but when it comes to maintenance, we are extremely poor.

Therefore, we recommend that Government should further strengthen the in-house capacity of KCCA to undertake routine maintenance of their infrastructure systems through the provision of road and drainage maintenance equipment and adequate funding.

We see it quite often when garbage and soil are removed from the drainage, it is put on the sides because they do not have enough trucks to take it away immediately. The next day, when rain comes, it is swept back to where it was picked from.

Lack of integrated urban planning in the country
The committee noted the lack of integrated urban planning from design to implementation for all sub-regions in the country for the development of sustainable, inclusive and resilient cities. 

The committee recommends that Government should develop a national urban design manual that will promote integrated urban planning from design to implementation, in order to guide locating and sizing of various facilities or amenities in urban areas in Uganda especially for the new cities and municipalities.

In the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) Project, in some of the areas, the results are glaring. For instance, places like Gulu and Lira, the results are quite impressive. However, when you go to Karamoja, because there was no integrated plan - we are told that Karamoja chose to set up a bus park instead of improving on the facilities in the town.

The committee observed that the procurement in KCCA is generally compliant with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act (PPDA) procedures. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that KCCA should fast track the timely recruitment of the identified critical personnel for this project in order to consolidate the gains achieved in timely procurement management of the projects. We are happy that the staffing has started from the top.

The committee observed that component I of this project will involve the implementation of a number of sub-projects mainly to do with civil works. 

The committee, therefore, recommends the following:
    i)  	KCCA should ensure that civil works contracts under this project are packaged in such a way that they are large enough to attract firms with the capacity and resources to deliver on the assignments in time. Preference should be given to the local firms;
    ii) KCCA should promote local contracting and/or sub-contracting during project execution to maximise benefits to the economy;
    iii) KCCA should work with the Uganda National Association of Building and Civil Engineering Contractors to attract local graduate engineers, first of all to undertake a study on the construction by these people and also to acquire skills to take over in the future; and 
    iv) KCCA should emphasise the use of significant proportion of domestic construction inputs.

The committee further recommends that for effective contract management, KCCA should not only rely on the supervising consultants but also to have an internal capacity to check the performance of both the contractors and supervising consultants. 

The supervising consultants, instead of being subjects of KCCA, are the ones supervising KCCA. This is important especially to mitigate the risk of any possible collusion between the supervising consultants and the contractors.

The committee observed that while Uganda has a national road safety policy, the policy lacks a focal point and an enabling mechanism to champion its effective implementation.

The committee recommends that the establishment of a road safety unit at KCCA be urgently explored by KCCA. For this project, KCCA should ensure that the road safety interventions, which include road safety awareness and educational campaigns and sensitisation programmes to improve communities and stakeholder's awareness on how to safely use the roads during construction and operation phases, are well incorporated into the project. 

The project designs should also include appropriate road safety signs in durable materials that cannot easily be vandalised, road markings and traffic calming measures, to warn drivers of safety hazards and to reduce on the conflicts between vehicle and pedestrians.

On the culture of transparency and accountability in the administration of the city, the committee recommends that KCCA should integrate regular communication and consultation with KCCA leaders throughout the project implementation period to ensure ownership and commitment to the project.

Measures to enhance Information Communication and Education (ICE) and citizen engagement, which promote transparency and accountability, should be strengthened.

On stakeholder and community response to the project, the committee recommends that KCCA should undertake relevant steps to ensure that project designs consider the social implications of stakeholders through consultation and input on issues including community and stakeholder participation, land takes, and civil works implications for HIV/AIDs in a complex urban setting, as is required under the loan agreement. 

The committee further recommends that KCCA should ensure the following during the implementation of this project:
    • Strict adherence to restoration and rehabilitation plans for quarries, barrow sites, camp sites and other areas;
    • Contractors to adhere to a mandatory Environment Management Plan incorporating a comprehensive waste management plan for the construction period developed in consultation with KCCA and NEMA;
    • Enforcement of occupational health and safety laws and regulations;
    • Sensitisation campaigns on gender and HIV/AIDS; and
    • Inclusion of the necessary environmental clauses in works contract documents to ensure compliance with Environmental and Social Management Plans; 

Climate change 
The committee recommends that KCCA ensures the following during the implementation of this project;
    • Optimisation of drainage designs through proper sizing, provision of side drains, culverts and 5kilometres of outflow structures to enhance water management and protect road infrastructure and residential areas from damage;
    • Planting of 10,000 trees along the proposed roads to act as noise abatement measures and for carbon sequestration; and
    • Provision of road maintenance equipment to enhance force account capability needed to timely respond to infrastructure damage from unforeseen climate change impacts.

Lighting of the city roads 
It is a pity that many of the roads in Kampala are not well lit, which is a risk to the people of the area. The committee recommends that KCCA should scale up the installation of lights on all paved roads in the city. Lighting is important as it allows traders to operate for long hours - if there is no curfew - and improves road and public safety. It also makes city roads safer and more secure to move on at night. 

Government Central Bus Terminal 
The committee noted that there is no public bus park in Kampala. Prices, fees and levies in the private parks fluctuate without any control whilst the congestion is a source of insecurity and discomfort for travellers and will not favour the implementation of the Standard Operating Procedures for containment of COVID-19, which were issued by the Ministry of Health.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government acquires land in the Central Business District to set up a Central Bus Terminal, which connects to the major routes out of Kampala. In addition, this Central Bus Terminal should be equipped with adequate facilities like washrooms, restaurants, waiting areas and/or accommodation facilities. This will decongest the various bus terminals in and around the Central Business District and enable Government to control prices/fees/levies and will comply with the Ministry of Health Standard Operating Procedures for containment of COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether some colleagues have been to Kisenyi, where there are several mini bus parks. It is a hazard. It is a risk to travellers, especially those who are not familiar with Kampala and those who are travelling upcountry. Therefore, it is important that we get a central bus park, like we used to have the Buganda Bus Park, where people would go and get buses out of Kampala. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to $ 224 million from the ADB and UA 37.54 million equivalent to $ 51 million from the ADF to finance the Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project be approved subject to the recommendations herein. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members of our committee for a good job done. Members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members. Are there any comments? Please, use two minutes each because it is almost 5.00 p.m.

4.52
MS BETTY AWOR (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for this report. 

Kampala is the face of Uganda. When you go to any country, what tells you about it, is the road structure and network. 

This is a welcome request, now that Uganda is moving towards middle income status. Usually, during traffic jam time, you find ambulances struggling to move to the various hospitals. I do not know whether the committee has considered them. Sometimes, they get stuck with a patient and they cannot move. I hope this project will consider the point that I have put across.

I pray that Government, together with KCCA, implements this project successfully. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

4.54
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for processing this loan. I would like to seek clarification from the committee. 

Whereas I do not have any problem with the loan to finance infrastructural development in our city, I am afraid that sometimes, when we take these types of loans, we do not pay attention to the critical areas that may come back to haunt us. 

For instance, when you come to the real terms of these loans, the committee has remained shy on pronouncing itself on them. On the table, they give conditions and so on but when you look at the real terms of the loan, the committee has remained shy and yet this House is required to critically examine the terms of the loans that we pass before we give approval.

When you look at the report of the Auditor-General of 2018 on these loans, it faults us on a number of areas. For instance, one of the issues raised there is that we normally approve loans on very unfavourable terms. In that report, they cited a few examples. For instance, there are cases where the loans require us to even pay legal fees for the creditors lending us the money. They require us to adopt foreign laws when processing these loans so that when it comes to handling issues, we rely on their laws and not Ugandan laws.   

They also require us – (Member timed out.) 

4.56
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since time is limited, Madam Chairperson, can we know more about the eco-friendly buses? Are they solar or electric and what is the sitting capacity?

The way we wanted to know the design for the loan of Karamoja, can we look at the design of the buses because they might say a bus but we do not know whether it is a 10 or 50-seater.

Secondly, when you look at some of these roads, most of them when they are doing rehabilitation, for example, they are doing rehabilitation on a road near the other hotel. However, you find that the contractor re-heats the materials and reuses them. 

Therefore, may we know the thickness of the road, which they are going to make? Most of the engineers take us for granted and our Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts is aware that we have requested for most of these predesign documents. Some of these technical officers take this Parliament for granted.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, can we know from the chairperson; what are the various thicknesses or the average thickness of these roads for the various components so that we take them? Otherwise, these technical people are just taking us for a ride.

Finally, I would like to request Members, this loan is really necessary, however, without the specifics of what we are going to get, you find that the engineers do not do their work and leave it for the contractors. Whatever they quote, is what they award them with. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to know the seating capacity of the buses, which type - but also the thickness of the various layers of the roads before we approve this loan.

4.58
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine are direct. The committee talks about the sizing of the drainage. Madam Speaker, we lost a lady in Kampala in a drainage and we have failed to find her body because the drainage pipes are small. We want a drainage where someone can walk through and see what exactly is happening. We have to be very serious on that matter.

On the provision for sewerage system, wherever Kampala expands the sewerage system is not expanding and wherever the roads go, development comes with skyscrapers but there is no sewerage system. Therefore, our sewerage coverage should always be hinged on these loans in Kampala.

Please, widen the roads. We do not know the sizes of these roads. We are still doing the other colonial size of nine metres. Kampala now has motorists, bicycles on the same small roads. Please, help us and expand the roads.

The other issue is lighting. Part of Kampala is in darkness. We are living in villages. The moment you leave Kampala roads, you are in a village. I think the roads should have provision for lightening whenever new roads are done. 

I am appealing as a Nansana Member of Parliament. The taxi parks should not be concentrated in Kampala. Land can be bought in the metropolitan area so that we decongest Kampala by putting taxis elsewhere. If I am going to Kamuli, why don’t I start in Mukono? If I am going to Gulu, why isn’t the taxi park situated in Matuuga or Bombo so that -(Member timed out.)

5.01
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the loan. However, my only challenge is the issue of accessibility. In the report, you talk of inclusiveness but when these roads are built, people with disabilities are always left out. On the pavements, they are left out and there is no space for them to move with their wheelchairs maybe if they are blind. This has to be critically looked at and be able to make sure that these people are catered for.

Madam Speaker, the other thing is the issue of the central park when they are built. Our toilets for people with disability are never considered. We are mixed with everybody but you know because of the disability, somebody crawling has to seat as the others are squatting, it is so unhealth.

I hope in this loan, we are going to look at special lanes for bicycles, trailers and special lanes for other cars. Our city is so katogo. It is not like those countries where you go and see that when you are moving, you are given a special lane when in a small car or trailer or bicycle.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of Government contribution, I am happy that the Minister of Finance is here. Sometimes, it is us Government who delay these projects. You find that the donor is ready but we are dillydallying. I sometime ask myself, why then do we bring the loans if we are not ready? We need these loans to be brought and picked up.

If you come back in the next Parliament, you will hear about the same roads and nothing would have been done. That is disappointing on our side.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that quality will not be compromised- (Member timed out.)

5.03
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy for a very good report. I am happy that we have got this loan for Kampala City. I hope this loan will solve Kampala problems once and for all. We are tired of traffic jam. We waste a lot of time on the way. We take two to three hours to reach here and to go back, you reach at night. 

When it rains also, the floods are terrible.  For example, in Kyambogo, Kinawataka, Bwaise; it is mess. When visitors come to Kampala, you really get ashamed of yourself. Let us hope that this money will be used properly to upgrade the standard of Kampala so that it can be suitable to be called a city.

The challenge with these roads - I know Kampala City has been getting a lot of money but do they do the right job when doing the work? I have seen the road to Port Bell, it is repaired every year, what kind of material do you use? Even in  Mulago, there are no good roads. Why don’t you use good quality materials so that the roads can at least stay for five years before they are repaired? 

Please, this money should not be wasted but used properly. I would like to see these roads expanded to cater for us people with disability.

In London or Boston, I move alone for miles because - (Member timed out.)

5.05
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA SENGENDO (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Kampala City Parliamentary Caucus, I am extremely grateful that the Government brought this loan in order to support the road infrastructure in the city.

To many of you, it is your capital city but to a few of us, it is our ancestral area. Therefore, we are extremely grateful.

Madam Speaker, having said that, when you look at the 70-kilometre roads of murram, I do not know how many kilometres of murram road this facility is going to cover.

Secondly, there is the issue of counterpart funding. We appeal to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that the counterpart funding is readily available. We have struggled with many projects in KCCA. We, as leaders, come in to sweet-talk our electorates to give out pieces of land for road expansion under the guise that there is no money for compensation.

Therefore, I waould us to be very – (Member time out.)

5.07
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The traffic jam in Kampala is a serious matter but who is causing it? It is greed for money. There is parking on the roads. A road, which is supposed to be used by cars is for parking. We would love Kampala Capital City Authority, first of all, to deal with traffic in the centre of town.

After dealing with the traffic in the centre of town, the roads they are going to do should be lasting roads. There is duplication. Recently, we passed a supplementary of Shs 10 billion to do Kampala roads. I would like to find out from the chairperson of the committee; of the Shs 10 billion we passed, are those roads to be done included in this loan we are passing? 

Secondly, what is the unit cost of the roads we are going to do in Kampala? It is very important. All of us need Kampala Capital City to be good but at what cost? How much are the roads going to cost per kilometre in Kampala? Kampala is not like Bugisu, which is mountainous, that could be very expensive. This is a plain area and something better could be done.

Thirdly, there is the issue of compensation of the people who stay on the roads. (Applause)  Madam Speaker, the law is very clear that you are not supposed to build on the road but people here build houses near the roads hoping to be compensated. (Laughter) Recently, we passed a law under the Ministry of Works and Transport – I cannot remember the law – (Member timed out.)

5.09
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report. However, I have one issue for which I am seeking clarification, maybe, from the minister. What is the lifespan of these roads that we are planning to build for our city? Whereas I appreciate that we rehabilitate the roads for our city – and for that matter I support the loan – I would like to know that these roads are going to have a lifespan worthy of a city like Kampala.

Some of the loans we are acquiring are going to be paid by our grandchildren. Will they find value for money for the roads that we are constructing? Therefore, I would like that the minister clarifies on the lifespan. It should not be one that is constructed today and after a year or two, you find potholes all over.

Lastly, these roads need to have provisions befitting of city roads: walkways, cyclist lanes, etcetera. We need all these provisions put in place so that the roads tell what kind of city we have. Thank you.


THE SPEAKER: We have hon. Akello on zoom -

5.12
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Akello. She has poor network. Can the technicians help hon. Akello? Let us have hon. Fungaroo.

5.12
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kampala is our capital city and it is growing. Now, we talk about Kampala Metropolitan. 

Madam Speaker, the chairperson of this committee should do the following: one, clearly show us the plan of not only rehabilitating the roads within the centre of the city but also the plan for expanding the city outside to decongest the city and minimise this problem of traffic jam. 

As we go outside from the city centre, there must be a difference in the design and construction of the roads – things to do with road reserves, drainage system and sewage system in the outskirts of Kampala must be better than the ones we see in the centre of the city but we do not see this.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, we see in the same direction, for example, people coming to the city every morning and going out of the city every evening. What is bringing them here? Why don’t we put certain things outside the city in those metropolitan areas so that people have fewer reasons to move towards the centre and get their services from outside? 

For instance, in the area of Matugga, we see warehouses coming up: why don’t we put a modern bus terminal, for example, which can serve the people who are coming from the north and people who are connecting to the east and the warehouses would keep the goods which people want to buy from the centre. This could be one of the ways of decongesting the city.

Madam Speaker, we would also like to see that what comes out from –(Member timed out.)

5.14
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy but I would also like to raise a few concerns. One, I have heard about the component concerning compensation of the affected persons. What has been happening in Kampala is that most of the people who have been affected by these road constructions have not been compensated. I do not know whether this is a different project as far as those constructions in the city are concerned.

Madam Speaker, there is lack of an integrated planning system. A road takes a lot of money but when a road has been constructed, the next day you find that there is a project going on, for example, National Water and Sewerage Corporation installing pipes and you find the road, which has been constructed, being disorganised yet, it had taken a lot of money.

The supervision component of these road constructions is lacking in most cases. In my oversight role, I visited the Masaka-Bukakata Road and I found out that there is a lot of civil works going on but they are not meeting the standards, as far as the road is concerned. They have installed substandard small-sized culverts, which are likely to affect this road in the near future. When you look at what is happening on the Masaka Road – recently, UNRA went on – (Member timed out)

5.17
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Madam Speaker, allow me to join my colleagues in thanking the committee. 

It is true this road will make Kampala City a very comfortable city for all of us and it will help us to access services easily. However, there is one issue that I would like to seek clarification on.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because we have an underground parking here in Parliament. I would like to believe that this road is coming partly to decongest Kampala, among other things. However, I would like to know whether, with a loan like this or with the Government planning, we have an idea of constructing an underground parking just like we have one at Parliament. Otherwise, we are very many in the city. Most times, you find many cars parked on the road sides. We should begin thinking of having underground parking so as to decongest the roads in the city.

Secondly, I would like to know from the minister – the committee mentioned the issue of counterpart funding. Many times, we pass loans but all of sudden, we hear that the Government is not ready and has no money for counterpart funding. Can the minister clarify on this so that when we pass this loan, we see it working straight away?

Thirdly, on the issue of local content, I would like to believe that when we pass this loan – there are many people employed in the boda-boda industry and - (Member timed out.)

5.19
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the report. However, I would like to find out whether there is a masterplan for Kampala City. Since 1986, when this Government took over, a lot of construction has taken place in Kampala but without a master plan, which will be very expensive to bring about.

Madam Speaker, for example, Salaama Road to Munyonyo - I come from Kalungu, a new district but why does the Committee on National Economy hate Kalungu District? There is no loan that has been brought here for Kalungu District. These new districts do not have any single tarmac road. When you go to Obongi, there is nothing. When shall we ever get a loan for Kalungu District so that that small town also changes into a new district? 
Otherwise, all loans are coming to Kampala. Whether you rule for another 50 years, NRM can never change Kampala City or even to beautify it because you have been making mistakes on it since 1986 that you will never change. Go and see how Rwanda changed its city and how it has been growing because of its masterplan. 

Madam Speaker, people are constructing without any guidance or legislation on the creation of access roads. Can we get a master plan for this country, so that when for example, Ssewungu is selling a plot of land in Kalungu, there is where the Government can say “No, you cannot sell here; this is an access road or this area is reserved for a sewerage line?” We need all this.

I would like to find out from the chairperson of the committee and the responsible minister why they hate all these new districts. All our roads are given politically.

Madam Speaker, I pray that we get a masterplan and I also want to know when Kalungu will get – (Member timed out.)

5.21
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to add my voice to the cry for a master plan. It is good the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here.
Honourable minister, these many loans we are passing are not going to deliver the results that we expect as enumerated by the committee chair. We demand better strategies to manage the traffic because we waste a lot of time in the traffic jam. We also demand connectivity. Alternatives in this plan would be the importance on reducing on the cars vis-a-vis the buses and the train system. Why aren’t you fast-tracking the train system instead of only championing road construction?

We will not have a clean city, if just slightly outside Kampala, most of the roads are murram and the division having the worst roads.

On the repairs of the roads, during the last quarter, you did not send money to the District Road Fund, on the argument that the roads of Kampala were given priority to do repairs. How can we verify this?

Madam Speaker, the road between Mukwano Industries and Daily Monitor Offices was maintained less than a year ago but it is already in shambles. The roads that are repaired take between six months and – (Member timed out.)

5.23
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting this loan request.
This is the second loan for Kampala within a month. The first was the one of Shs 10 billion. The concern, however, is that when they are applying for loans, they emphasise a lot, including traffic lights.

In few sections like Bakuli, where the traffic lights were installed, you can see that the traffic is a bit clear.  We are not talking about coming up with new roads. They are only going to rehabilitate the old ones but where these roads had traffic lights, they are no longer functional.  
My prayer is that they should implement this loan fully so that Ugandans can benefit. 
Secondly, they have a habit of conniving with few developers when it comes to compensation. Honourable minister, get interested in that. A complainant comes demanding Shs 10 million but they are told to wait on until the works start. The deal is that at that time, they can hike the compensations because they will be constrained by time. That is what normally happens in Kampala and that is how we end up having shoddy works instead of getting real works. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Finally, let us hear from the Leader of the Opposition.

5.25
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. However, today, I would like to ask about Government counterpart funding. Is there any way Parliament can push the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to first have this counterpart funding in place? Otherwise, this 3.82 per cent is a lot and you can see how our interest is building up. 

The second issue is about compensation for the people. When you make a provision for compensation, why it is not implemented? I am talking in reference to roads like Olwiyo and some Kitgum roads. We still have people complaining about compensation. My prayer is that when we make provisions for compensation, that should be put in place.

Madam Speaker, they work on these roads but in two or three years, they are again working on the same road. Why can’t we have quality work? In addition, roads, which have been planned, should not re-planned immediately. I have seen it with some projects in Gulu. They say, this is JICA coming up but it was another project. They then destroy and start work. It is too much on the population of Uganda. People need these resources.

Therefore, this emphasis of a masterplan and proper planning is very important but also, quality work is very –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a question raised about what we passed in the supplementary. I would like to confirm that there were different roads. This is Upper Kololo Terrace, Kingsway, Wilson Street, Sikh Road, Channel Street, Johnson road, Lubiri Ring Road, Sir Apollo Kaggwa, Naguru, Katalima, Kisaasi, Bukoto-Ntinda, Ntinda-Kiwatule.

It was, among others, to do with roads and street lights and road markings. So, they are different from this group of roads.

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the interest of time, I wanted to respond to two issues. The first one is the issue of counterpart funding.

Since the assumption of the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, hon. Syda Bbumba, it is now a requirement. The committee does not even consider a loan without the provision of counterpart funding. Therefore, I would like to confirm that the loans that we are bringing here have counterpart funding.

The issue has been when it comes to compensation and we have issues of citizens of Uganda appealing - Some of them refusing the value that Government has offered them, according to the Chief Government Valuer. That has delayed us, taking us to court and all that. 

Also, the other delay has come out of procurement processes and I would like to thank this House that we passed the amendment. However, sometimes there are administrative reviews, which never end. Those are the things that are delaying our projects. However, we have counterpart funding. 

I would also like to confirm that actually, the loans that we are now taking on are within our Debt Sustainability Strategy. We have committed ourselves that we are not going beyond 50 per cent, as we agreed in the East African Community. 

As we speak, we are at 37.6 per cent. However, the most important thing is, when we get these loans, we always tell the sectors to implement them and on time. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank Members who have supported this loan. I request Members that we pass this loan so that we can develop Kampala City. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chairperson, your final words?

5.30
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba) : Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for the very good contributions. I am going to respond to hon. Othieno who was wondering whether these are not expensive loans.

By world standards, the money we are borrowing from the ADB, where Uganda is a shareholder, is highly concessional. Therefore, both loans are highly concessional. 

On the issue raised by hon. Asamo on facilities for persons with disabilities, these roads are going to provide for walkways and riders’ lanes such that if there is an ambulance and it cannot fit in this road – because they cannot be expanded much. These are not new roads; these are rehabilitation of existing roads, which have limited space. However, there are facilities to take care of that.

The total cover of this loan is 70 kilometres. If you divide that by Shs 288 million, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you can get the result, which is about $ 4.01 million. The lifespan expected is not less than 20 years for these roads.

The roads cover the entire spectrum of the divisions in Kampala District; Nakawa, Rubaga, Makindye, Kawempe and Central.  All of them are covered without exception and it is a very long list of these roads. It is provided.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you because with your support, we have forced Government to improve on provision of counterpart funding. We hope they will remain religious and meet their commitments.

Before we start on a project, we must ensure that the money for counterpart funding is provided for in the Budget. We must follow it up to see that it is ringfenced and we should also make them write an irrevocable undertaking to that effect.

Somebody was wondering whether there is any planning framework for Kampala. Regarding what we are discussing today, there is a transportation masterplan of Kampala, which was done last year and the Kampala Urban Improvement Plan, which was done in 2013.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of parking, I think Kampala Capital City Authority has a problem with enforcement. According to the building requirements, all the buildings in the Central Business District are supposed to have underground parking but this is not enforced. 

There is also an environmental problem. Kampala was built on a river. If they go a few floors down, they hit the water. That is a problem but most importantly, even where that water is not there, enforcement is quite weak.

Madam Speaker, with that, I would like to thank you and honourable colleagues for supporting this loan. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this loan be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Loan approved.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I would like to encourage you to go for loans, which will ensure that our roads last longer. My counterpart invited me to Ghana for the golden jubilee celebrations of the independence of Ghana.

He told me that the roads I was travelling on in the entire city were built by Kwame Nkrumah  - If you go to Accra today, those are Nkrumah’s roads! It means in 20 years, we shall have to look for more money. 

Honourable members, thank you very much for the work done. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 June 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)






