Friday, 25th June, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in the Uganda International Conference Centre, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, H.E. Y.K. Museveni in the Chair).

The House was called to order.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning to move his Motion.

THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. J. Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Chairman, hon. Members, Ladies and Gentlemen.  I beg to move that the National Resistance Council do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of: 

	(i)	The revised Revenue and Expenditure estimates for the year 1992/93;

    (ii) The Budgetary Proposals for the fiscal year 1993/94 Estimates of Revenue and 
             Expenditure.

Mr. Chairman, as you may recall the main objectives of the 1992/93 budget proposals were the following:

-         achieve a GDP, growth of domestic product rate of at least 5 per cent;

-         reduce the inflation rate to 15 per cent by end June 1993, and stabilise the 
          exchange rate;

-        strengthen the Balance of Payments position by increasing foreign exchange earnings and    
          reducing our external debt arrears;

-         widen the tax bas; and

-        increase savings and investment so as to foster greater economic activity.

I am glad to report that these objectives have been achieved.  Government’s economic strategy will continue to emphasise promotion of exports and efficient import substitution, prudent budget management and mobilisation of domestic and external resources for development.  The need to achieve high economic growth, raising per capita income whilst sustaining both internal and external equilibrium will continue to constitute the main challenge ahead for Government as we move from rehabilitation to development.

Let me begin by reviewing some of the key indicators of macro-economic performance.

INFLATION AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE 1992/93 FINANCIAL YEAR

The performance of inflation in 1992/93 has been the most outstanding economic success of the financial year.  A year ago I reported to you an annual rate of inflation of 63 per cent, with only the beginnings of a downward trend in sight.  At the end of last month, the annual growth in the consumer price index amounted to minus 1.3 per cent, well below the inflation target of 15 per cent for 1992/93.  Indeed according to the combined consumer price index for Kampala, Jinja, Mbale, Masaka, and Mbarara Town for the eleven months since July 1993 just last year the monthly change in prices has been negative (in August, November, December 1992, and also January 1993, February 1993, and March 1993) it has also been below 1 per cent per month (for September, 1992, April 1993 and May 1993).  In this period only October 1992 saw a monthly inflation rate of over 1 per cent per month.  This below the inflation target I have just indicated of 15 per cent which we had set ourselves in last year’s budget.

The evidence available to us so far suggests that this rapid fall in inflation has not been accompanied by any major adverse impact on economic activity.  Preliminary date indicate a GDP growth of approximately 7 per cent for 1992/93, reflecting recovery from the drought constrained growth of just under 2 per cent last year.  Growth of the agricultural sector in 1992/93 is estimated to amount to just over 9 per cent compared to a fall of 1.5 per cent during the previous year.  This was because of the drought.  

The Bank of Uganda has maintained broad exchange rate stability over the last fifteen months or so since the introduction of the auction market and the operation of open markets for all foreign exchange transactions.  The bureau exchange rate, measured in foreign exchange terms depreciated marginally by about 2 per cent during the first 9 months of 1992/93.

The monetary food crops showed a more dramatic recovery as rising production levels allowed the surplus to be marketed.  The industrial sector is expected to show only a modest growth of 3.8 per cent for 1992/93 in contrast to the 19.4 per cent for 1991/92.  The construction industry itself is estimated to have grown by about 6.0 per cent in 1992/93 compared to 1.7 per cent in 1991/92.

Ministers of Finance, Mr. Chairman, Sir, do not often get the opportunity to report a successful stabilisation exercise accompanied by renewed economic growth, so I beg your indulgence to allow me to make some commentary on these basic indicators.

We recognise that attaining economic stability is only the beginning of the more difficult task of sustaining it.  However, I do not believe that our battle with inflation has met with only transitory success.  Improved fiscal control was not achieved by the stroke of a pen in one round of unrepeated draconian expenditure cuts.  Fiscal and monetary control has come from fundamental improvements in the systems of economic management -consistent and regular cash flow management on the fiscal side, closer scrutiny of expenditure decisions, greater coordination between the central bank and Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and the restructuring of the management of monetary control.  For the Ministry and the Bank of Uganda this has been a year of intensive restructuring and overhaul of our systems and I believe that the consequences will be enduring.

I think it may be helpful to expand a little on the date on inflation.  We have recently developed a composite price index for Uganda, composed as a weighted average of prices in five centres.  This index demonstrates a fall in inflation from 66 per cent at the end of June 1992 to a rate of Minus 1.3 per cent p.a. for the 11 months up to May 1993.  The trend is identical therefore to the frequently quoted Kampala price index and, indeed, the evidence from regional data shows that the pattern is remarkably similar throughout the whole country as hon. Members will see from gaps which are being published in the Background To The Budget 1993/94.

It is also important to note that the fall in food prices has been particularly steep, owing to the strong recovery in food production after last year’s drought.  Food crop prices have fallen by about 20 per cent over the financial year that has contributed significantly to the overall decline in the rate of inflation.  Assuming that the relative price of food crops has now stabilised, we can say that the underlying rate of inflation currently stands at 7.7 per cent p.a. which is half the target we set ourselves in the last Budget.

Many of you in this House will recall some remarks which our President, President Museveni, made on the occasion of the last budget and I quote: ‘There will be no inflation.  If there is no money, let us walk or close down some Ministries until we get the money.  Inflation is indiscipline....’

This commitment, Mr. Chairman, Sir, remains unaffected by the present favourable state of the price index.  This is not to pursue our inflation objective for its own sake at the expense of all other concerns.  Rather, we are impressed by the evidence from comparative economic development that the rapid growth and poverty reduction that these two which are central to our objectives are most likely to be attained in an environment of modest inflation and a stable competitive exchange rate.  It is above all our commitment to long-term economic development that has motivated the new seriousness with which we have tackled short-term stabilisation problems. 

The benefits of low inflation are many.  It increases savers’ and investors’ confidence in an economy.  It has implications for the level of interest rates and therefore implications for investment.  You recall that in November 1992, interest rates were about 40 per cent but have now fallen to around 25 per cent.  This encourages business to take out loans for new investment. 

I must add that even this 25 per cent our objective is to take it lower because I think it is still a bit high for long term investment and I am now looking for a banking system to reduce interest rate on loans and I am really hoping that we can do this soon by reducing their overheads.  For the future, the Government will continue to follow prudent policies to keep inflation under control.  The prize of low, stable inflation is too valuable for us to let it go.  Accordingly, the Government will maintain control over its own spending and money supply to keep inflation in check.  This will lead to lower interest rates, a stable exchange rate and sustainable economic growth.

Economic growth is not sufficient of course to ensure significant poverty reduction, yet without substantial high growth, efforts to reduce poverty are doomed to fail.  Government’s strategy is to stimulate rapid private sector-led growth through an appropriate policy environment and provision of economic and social infrastructure while focusing public expenditure towards provision of basic social services of maximum impact for the poor.  Implementation of priorities for public expenditure is underway, as I shall shortly explain.

The distribution of gains from economic growth so far has not been uniform throughout the whole country.  Households dependent on production of non-tradable goods have benefited lees than producers of export or import substitutes.  Retrenchment and demobilisation have affected some people.  However, while some have benefited less than others so far from renewed economic growth and the investment that is beginning to be attracted by the new economic stability, Government has not doubt that perseverance with the present strategy represents the best hope for improved welfare for all of us in this country in the long run.

I want now, Mr. Chairman, to address you and the hon. Members on Monetary Policies.

Broad money (excluding foreign currency deposits) is estimated to have increased by some 30 per cent over the fiscal year as against our original target of 21 per cent.  The larger than targeted growth is due to the strong performance in net foreign assets, and the increased demand for Uganda shillings as inflation has fallen and exchange rates stabilised.  Underlying this is a stronger than anticipated repayment to the banking system by Government.

Interest rates were liberalised in November, 1992 and since then have declined as I have just indicated over 40 per cent around 25 to 20 per cent range, reflecting in part the reduction in inflation.

Liquidity management in 1992/93 has been active and has centred on Bank of Uganda’s rediscount policy, weekly Treasury Bills auctions, and adjusting the reserve requirement on commercial bank deposits through the Bank.  This active management has been facilitated by improved surveillance of the banking system by Bank of Uganda, and improved co-ordination between the central bank and the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning.

FISCAL POLICIES

On fiscal policies I have this to say.  Within a highly budget we have nevertheless maintained budget support to the priority expenditure areas identified in the Public Expenditure Review.  These areas are the following; primary education, primary health, feeder roads maintenance, agricultural research and water for the rural areas.  Starting with this budget, we want to add to these priority areas support for the following areas: police, the Auditor General’s Office, the Judiciary and the Office of the Inspector General of Government and I think the implication is quite clear to everyone.  The domestic arrears of Shs. 32 billion identified at the beginning of the fiscal year have been paid in full.  During the financial year now ending, we financed retrenchment settlements for approximately 14,000 civil servants and about 23,000 demobilised soldiers.  We estimate that domestic revenue collection rose by slightly over 50 per cent in normal terms in 1992/93 compared to last year.  This is a little below the target we had set for the Uganda Revenue Authority but nevertheless offers some evidence of the improvements in tax collection which are underway.  We will ensure that these improvements continue, while we explore other ways expanding the tax base, as we shall see later when I am turning on the revenue measures.  

Now, concerning out External Debt, we have met our obligations I am glad to say, of external debt servicing of about US$ 100 million in the fiscal year just ending to day.  Last year I reported to you on the very critical external debt payments we faced.  Our external debt stock has remained however at around US$ 2.6 billion or 100 per cent of our GDP.  I think I better repeat this.  The debt servicing requirement obligations on our Government on our country and this debt I have just read out is 100 per cent of everything we produce.  This is really the position you should bear in mind when I come to talk about taxes this afternoon.  Our arrears position is projected to drop dramatically to a level of about US$ 300 million as at the end of June 1993.  Scheduled debt service reduced to about US $148 million for 1992/93 and is projected at US$ 157 million for 1993/94, representing a 90 per cent debt service ration.  This improvement has, to large extent, been the result of our implementation of a comprehensive debt strategy in which we received enhanced Toronto terms on our eligible Paris Club debt and, a short-term deferral of our post cut off date in the Paris Club debt.  It means that any debt which we incurred after 1981 that one we pay but something before that we only pay 60 per cent addition we implemented a debt buy-back of over US$ 150 million of commercial debt arrears in which every dollar was bought for 12 Cts at a discount therefore of 88 per cent which means that if we owed a commercial debt of one dollar we pay US 12 Cts to that one dollar when the debt was extinguished.  We are grateful to all those donors who assisted us with this highly successful buy-back programme.  Our major problem of the coming financial year is that US$ 68 million of our debt service is due to multilaterals alone and an additional US$ 48 million of non re-schedulable arrears that is to say, arrears of debt service must be paid within the year.  These arrears and maturities are due to the Paris Club countries such as France, Britain, Germany, Italy - that is Paris Club group.  Together, these two amounts represent a debt service ratio of approximately 60 per cent, even before we include moratorium interest on re-scheduling we agree with other creditors.  What does this mean!  It means that of all export proceeds in a year, we have to pay around 60 per cent of that, spend it on debt servicing and that leaves about 40 per cent if you like to spend on the roads, education, health, whatever, defence, etc.  This is the position in which we are, Mr. Chairman, Sir.  It is of course - I am sorry to say the situation for most of sub-Saharan Africa.  That is the situation.


PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT PROMOTION

Now, concerning the Private Sector Investment Promotion.  Further progress is being made to encourage an environment for vigorous private sector development.  Financial sector development is progressing, and in this respect, I am grateful that you hon. Members, recently passed the Bank of Uganda Bill which is now a Statute and Financial Institutions Acts.  The IDA has also approved a $ 125 million Financial Sector Adjustment Credit.  The Transfer of Custodian Board Properties has been greatly accelerated and Government has now set a deadline of 30th October 1993 for repossession applications to be lodged.  Nine parastatals have now been offered for sale and we expect further parastatals to be presented for divestiture following the enactment of the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Bill presently under consideration by this House.

Mr. Chairman, Sir, I cannot improve on what you said on this matter yesterday and I know that every Member of Parliament took your word more seriously.

How about the 1992/93 Budget Out-Turn?  A review, if you like of last year’s performance.  Mr. Chairman, the summary of the Budget-Out-Turn is as follows:

The revenue out-turn is estimated at Shs. 287 billion, which is about 99 per cent of what we expected.  Of this, tax revenue was only Shs. 266 billion, 97 per cent therefore of the expected; while non-tax revenue was about Shs. 21 billion.  Tax revenue was 3 per cent below target mainly as a result of the month long unilateral closure of Uganda’s border with Kenya; and a brief interruption in the supply of petroleum earlier on this year.

Grants contributions amounted to Shs. 281 billion, which is 93 per cent of the expected level, while financing from external loans amounted to Shs. 205 billion, which is 94 per cent of the target.  The expenditure out-turn for the year is shs. 728 billion, again 94 per cent of the planned expenditure.  Of this, recurrent expenditure amounted to Shs. 350 billion, which is 95 per cent of the total, while development expenditure was Shs. 380 billion, which is 96 per cent of the total.

The overall budget deficit is estimated at 11.9 per cent of GDP.  Net repayment to the banking system is estimated to be around Shs. 13.4 billion against the target of net repayment to the banking system of Shs. 4 billion.  

Now, let us look forward.  I am pretty sure that everyone is waiting for this part of the speech.

THE 1993/94 BUDGET FORECAST

The budget outlook for 1993/94 is determined by anticipated developments in the budget resource envelope as to how much money will be available to the Treasury or to the country and in particular the projected path of the national revenue effort.  In past budgets and this includes 1992/93 Budget - there has been a marked tendency to over state the level of budget resources that will be available to finance budget expenditures.  The costs of failing to adjust during the financial year to the consequent shortfall in budget resources were abundantly evident in 1991/92.  Even when appropriate adjustments to expenditure are made during the year, as was the case this year, the process of enforced adjustments to expenditure levels, in response to resource shortfalls in the budget cash flow, has a major cost in terms of inefficiencies arising from unplanned and unpredictable variations in the allocations to public expenditure programmes.

Consequently, a determined effort has been made in the current budget to base expenditure decisions on a legalistic projection of the prospective budget resource envelope.  This in turn has required a detailed assessment of the revenue potential for the year 1993/94, the potential for mobilising domestic savings to finance the budget and the availability (and capacity to absorb) external assistance, particularly import support, have also been taken into consideration in the determination of the overall resource envelope.  Consistent with such concerns budgetary reliance an import support has been reduced in 1993/94.  The ratio of import support to recurrent expenditure is projected to decline from 50% in 1992/93 to 46% in this coming financial year.  Government aims to reduce this dependency ratio further over the years in step with progress made to increase the revenue effort.

The allocation of resources must balance the competing claims on resources arising from domestic and external obligations (for example debt service), other non-discretionary amounts of expenditure (e.g. Statutory Recurrent Expenditure, Counterpart funds for donor projects), existing Government policy commitments (for example wages and priority expenditure areas) as well as specific expenditure proposals submitted by individual Ministries.

In 1993/94, Government is expected to collect Shs. 384 billion in revenue of which Shs. 360 billion will be from tax revenue and Shs. 24 billion from non tax revenue.  Grants from external sources are expected to yield Shs. 266 billion of which Shs. 74 billion will be import support and Shs. 192 billion will be project aid.

The Government intends to spend Shs. 430 billion on recurrent expenditure.  This includes Shs. 89 billion on wages and salaries, Shs. 105 billion for interest payments of debts of which Shs. 27 billion is interest on domestic debt and Shs. 78 billion is interest on external debt, and Shs. 192 billion on non wage recurrent expenditure.  The balance represents expenditure under statutory expenditure requirement (Shs. 19 billion); a provision for the issuance of Treasury Credit Notes amounting to Shs. 11 billion and a transfer to the Uganda Revenue authority of Shs. 14 billion.

Total expenditure on the development budget is estimated to be Shs. 419 billion of which Shs. 369 billion is externally funded and Shs. 50 billion is domestically funded.  I think, I better read this again for one to understand.  Having planning for development budget funding for the projects to make our country well developed, I am saying that the total budgeted for the developing plan comes to Shs. 419 billion.  Of this we in Uganda can only now contribute Shs. 50 billion.  Shs. 369 billion is expected to come from abroad.  This implication is quite clear to everyone.  It is a state of affairs, of course, which we do not really relish, it is a state of affairs I think we have to tolerate for the time being and you will have to work hard now to keep on persisting to make sure that our economic fortunes improve from year to year.

A provision of Shs. 2.8 billion has been made under net lending to provide for the retrenchment costs of the Uganda Commercial Bank.

The deficit for the year is estimated to be Shs. 201 billion.  External financing of the deficit is projected to be Shs. 215 billion, comprising foreign borrowings of Shs. 303 billion and external debt payments of Shs. 125 billion.  A net domestic repayment of Shs. 14 billion is projected for the year 1993/94.

In 1992/93 Government made payments of Shs. 33 billion to reduce its indebtedness as I have just indicated to our own domestic creditors. This year Government intends to reduce its indebtedness to domestic creditors by a further Shs. 22 billion.

Concerning salaries and wages, it is proposed that Shs. 89 billion will be allocated to salaries and wages in 1993/94.  This compares with Shs. 65 billion in the last financial year and represents an increase of 37%.  This is expected to yield an increase of approximately 33% in real terms.

The increase in wage levels achieved in 1993/94 is expected to be higher than this as a result of continuing reductions in civil service numbers.  The hon. Minister of Public Service proposed to implement a reduction of 68,000 in the combined teaching service and traditional civil service this year.

Implementation of this retrenchment programme will require substantial external funding to finance the proposed retrenchment costs.  An amount of Shs. 5 billion has been included within statutory recurrent expenditure to cover a Government of Uganda contribution to these costs, but this will cover only the group employee programme and part of the cost of overdue leavers in the teaching service.  The balance of Uganda Shs. 32.4 billion will have to be found from donor financing.  An appeal for such funding was made at the Consultative Group meeting recently in May in Paris and some preliminary indications of support were received, especially for an initial tranche of retrenchments scheduled up to December, which will cost approximately $.15 million.  This will be followed up with a more focused meeting with donors in Kampala shortly.  Whatever the eventual level of donor support which is received, it is likely that delays in obtaining funds may cause some slippage from the programme indicated above.  

It therefore appears necessary to exercise some caution in implementation of the wage increase. An initial wage increase should be implemented on very conservative assumptions regarding retrenchment (i.e. no more than can be funded from the provision of Shs. 5 billion which we have just included in the budget which is our own Government of Uganda contribution to the exercise).

A further increase in wage levels could be made later in the year, depending on the pace and depth of retrenchment actually achieved.  Total financing for the year would be constrained to remain within the ceiling of Shs. 89 billion, but successful implementation of the retrenchment programme would permit a substantial additional pay increase in the second half of this financial year.

Detailed proposals for the first phase of the wage increases will be announced shortly by the hon. Minister for Public Service.

Turning now to development expenditure, the total expenditure on the development budget for the coming financial year is expected to be Shs. 419.5 billion.  Whereas over the last year, high priority has been given to counterpart funding of donor supported projects and automatic funding focused towards the already agreed on priority areas of agricultural research and extension, feeder roads rehabilitation and maintenance, primary health care, primary education and rural water, a greater effort to focus and to improve on the efficiency of utilisation of limited development resources is to be implemented in 1993/94 financial year.  Building on the above priority areas and incorporating programmes and activities expected to improve on public expenditure efficiency and to support the economy’s movement forward, a ‘Core Programme’ so to speak of some 160 high priority projects has been identified and agreed on by Cabinet.  This ‘Core Development Budget Programme’ will account for at least 60 per cent of the entire development budget and will always have first call on development resources.

Other RDP projects (Recovery Development Programme projects) for implementation during the year with the exception of small components in projects in the agricultural sector will be categorised as “Non-Core”.  Government’s contribution to these non-core projects, estimated at 20 per cent, will be released depending on the monthly cash flow positions.  Over the next year, the Public Investment Review (PIR) exercise started this year will continue, jointly with donors, to concretise the Core Programme and to identify projects for restructuring/re-designing, project components for elimination and projects for postponement or total elimination.

The Government development activities in Part B of the Budget expected to account for the remaining 20 per cent, will continue to be processed on priority requisition and as permitted by the monthly cash flow position of the revenue.

Within the “Core Budget Programme” both in the recurrent and development budget, additional priority areas have been added to enhance observance of law and order, proper management and accounting for public funds and prosecution of offenders.  These include the Police force, the Prisons Service, the Judiciary, the Auditor General’s Office and the Office of the Inspector of Government.  The establishment of proper monitoring and accounting systems in Government is to be undertaken under the Budget Reform Component of the Economic and Financial Management project, to commence in August this year.

The final report on the three to five year Luwero Triangle Reconstruction Programme (LUTREP) has been submitted to Government and will soon be considered by Cabinet.  The major objective of this programme is to restore the capacity of the communities there to engage in normal economic and social activities as well as to catalyse the process of economic recovery and growth in the Luwero triangle.  It is also expected that the Programme will be presented to the donor community with a request for funding.

In the meantime in the 1993/94 Budget, I have provided additional resources to priority recurrent activities and to ongoing Core projects covering the Luwero Triangle in the areas of health, education, agricultural research, rural water and road rehabilitation and maintenance. Early in the new financial year, I will convene a meeting to discuss with the various implementing ministries how to increase the effectiveness of these resources in Luwero Triangle.

In addition a new multi-sectoral project, the Masulita Development Project, within the ‘Core Programme’, will start in August this year, under International Labour Organisation (ILO) assistance of almost $ 700,000.  The project has components for community capacity building, rural water and sanitation, primary health care and rehabilitation of feeder roads.

Turning to Financial Sector Policies, it is vital for the economic development of Uganda that the financial sector is strong and vibrant. An efficient financial sector will mobilise internal resources to finance new investment, thus creating jobs in the economy and stimulating growth.  Without effective intermediation, savings will remain unused, business will be starved of capital and economic growth will be greatly impaired.

The Government has given strong support to the financial sector.  This has boosted confidence in the financial sector and led to positive real interest rates prevailing in the economy. Thus the public is increasingly willing to deposit their savings with the commercial banks because they will receive a high rate of return and because their savings will not be eroded by inflation in the future.  In turn, the commercial banks have increased funds to finance new investment opportunities.

The Government has also strengthened the financial sector by using market based interest rates to allocate credit efficiently in the economy.  The reference interest rate is now determined in the weekly caution of Government Treasury Bills.  Thus it changes automatically to reflect fluctuations in the demand for supply of liquidity.  This provides a signal to commercial banks to alter their own interest rates structure in line with market conditions and so they can attract deposits and undertake new lending more effectively.

Institutional reforms have also been undertaken by the Government to deepen the financial sector in Uganda.  Using the Financial Sector Adjustment Credit that has been secured from the World Bank, the Government has initiated the restructuring of Uganda Commercial Bank and of Uganda Co-operative Bank.  The changes in UCB are very large and will have major implications for the performance of the financial sector in the future. UCB is now being recapitalised and its non-performing loans will be removed from its books.  In the first stage, some Shs. 32.2 billion of bad and doubtful debts will be transferred from UCB to a Trust set up solely for the purpose of loan recovery.  To compensate UCB for the loss of loan income, government will issue a long-term bond to UCB in an equivalent amount.  In addition, government will inject new paid up capital of Shs. 4.3 billion.  There have also been management changes in UCB and there is now a new focus on operating costs.  Drastic action is also being taken to bring staff loans under control.  With UCB becoming profitable again, other commercial banks will be forced to improve their own efficiency in order to compete successfully with UCB.

The Co-operative Bank will also undergo a programme of restructuring.  It is hoped that financial assistance from USAID will meet the capitalization costs.  These are estimated to be around Shs. 14 to 16 billion.

As part of efforts to restructure the financial system and encourage efficiency, the government will offer its equity shares, in part or in whole, in privately owned banks for sale to potential investors before the end of the 1993/94 fiscal year.

The restructuring of the Bank of Uganda has also been initiated.  The Central Bank is being recapitalised and has been on granted autonomy.  Thus the credibility of the Bank of Uganda to pursue sound monetary policies independently of the Government has been enhanced.

The Government has also taken an active interest in the establishment of a stock market in Kampala.  While the main initiative in setting up a stock exchange has come from the private sector, the Government has played a complementary role in supporting this effort.  

Confidence, trust and integrity are crucial if a stock market is to be successful. Thus the Government is pursuing an evolutionary approach in which all the necessary pre-requisites for a smoothly functioning market are in place before the stock exchange is fully operational.

A successful stock market requires special legislation to cover the workings of the exchange, the rules of transferring share ownership, the floatation of enterprises on the market, the licensing brokers and dealers and the protection of individual investors.  On behalf of the Government, the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation in the United Kingdom has drafted the necessary legislation and this will be used to cover the legal aspects of the proposed stock exchange.

To give brokers some experience in dealing with securities, the Bank of Uganda is in the process of setting up a secondary market in Government Treasury Bills.  Thus brokers will have an opportunity to compete for issues of securities, to sell securities for a profit and to build up extensive client lists.  Thus when the stock market becomes operational there will already be experienced brokers who can act on behalf of existing customers and participate actively in share dealing.

It is envisaged that dealing in shares will initially be carried out through Over-The-Counter-trading operations.  In this interim arrangement dealers and brokers will conduct business at their own premises rather than in a centralised Stock Exchange. When the volume of transactions increases sufficiently, dealers will undertake trading in one location that will be a physical Stock Exchange.  This evolutionary approach will allow dealers times to gain more experience and give the public time to familiarise itself with securities dealing. 

The Government has also been addressing technical issues that are vital to a successful stock market.  These include possible fiscal incentives to issuers and investors, reforming the existing company law, upgrading accounting standards and strengthening the Registry Department in the Ministry of Justice.

To encourage leasing in the economy, leasers will be entitled to claim wear and tear allowances, regardless of who bears the burden of the upkeep of assets that have been leased.  The tax laws will be amended so as to encourage the formation of leasing companies in Uganda.  Leasing has become a significant source of finance in many other countries in Africa and will provide much needed medium and long-term asset finance to businesses.

Under the Income Tax Decree, a Finance Lease Agreement will be defined as an agreement whereby a leaser undertakes to acquire a movable asset and lease it to a lessee who will use it for his own purposes against mutually agreed lease results over a specified period; the leaser retains legal ownership until the period of the lease has expired.  Sales tax on the resale value of leased assets at the end of the lease period will be based on the book value of such assets.  Leasing transactions and payments will not be subject to CTL.  For leasers who have qualified for incentives under the Investment Code, leased assets will be entitled to the same exemptions as assets directly purchased.  Insurance of leased vehicles will be the responsibility of the lease.

How about the Insurance Industry.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, currently, the Insurance Industry is operating under a 1978 Insurance Law which clearly is out of step with the present economic realities in the country.  In recognition of the relation between financial growth and real growth, the NRC has recently passed up-dated laws on financial institutions and Bank of Uganda.  During the coming financial year, Government will table before the NRC its proposals to amend and consolidate the laws relating to the operation of the Insurance Industry in this country.  Under the new law, the function of supervising insurance will be transferred to a self-accounting Insurance Commission that will be accountable to the Central Bank, although Government will retain residual powers to issue policy guidelines.  This should bring the insurance sector in line with regard to supervision and control of financial institutions by the Central Bank that is the Bank of Uganda.  By doing this we hope to achieve the following: 

    (a)       Development of a strong and responsive insurance industry 		
             runs along sound lines;

    (a) Promotion of investment opportunities in insurance market for foreigners and Ugandans;

    (b) Creation of a reasonable retention base in national interest and 
             capacity building to ease over dependence on foreign insurers;

    (c) Ensure sustainability of solvency levels of insurance 		
             companies;
 
    (d) Investment of insurance funds in viable economic 		
             development projects in the country;

    (e) Ensure smooth professional insurance activities in the 		
             country; and 

    (f) Allow for fair insurance pricing and reasonable profit 		
             margins without eliminating the element of fair competition.

The net effect of this will be to have the Insurance Industry perform better and boost the national economy overall.


MONETARY POLICIES
 
Now, the monetary programme for the coming fiscal year in this programme, the key parameters are an end of year inflation target of 7.5 per cent, Mr. Chairman, Sir, I am not saying we are courting inflation, I am simply saying we are just hoping it has to occur at this point of 7.5 per cent rather than 15 per cent as it was last year.  Consistent with these, the broad money (M2) growth will be restricted to 13 per cent.  The monetary programme allows for the build-up of official foreign exchange reserves of around US$ 30 million, and an increase in private sector credit of around 13 per cent.  To ensure consistency, however, the programme requires that there be no change in net Government borrowing from the banking system, if not borrowed from the Bank last year.

On foreign exchange reserves, our medium term objective is to increase the central bank’s foreign currency holdings to four months of imports from the current level of only three months.

In order to promote efficient monetary management, the Bank of Uganda will continue to actively promote the development of money markets and other financial instruments.  I have already alluded to the development of the insurance sector, leasing and hire purchase finance and the Kampala stock exchange.

Whilst these markets are being promoted, the key financial market for the present is still the Treasury bill.  Further deepening of the Treasury bill market, including development of a secondary market, in these bills is essential to facilitate monetary policy, and is, therefore, a priority area for us.  In this context, the Bank of Uganda is in the process of raising public awareness of the full transferability of Treasury bill certificates between owners.  The Bank of Uganda will also consider measures to promote an inter-bank money market.

Given the strong performance on inflation and the expectation that prices will continue to be stable, interest rates should drift lower over the coming year.  The restructuring of problem banks will support this decline in interest rates as their financial viability is restored.

Furthermore, the Bank of Uganda will take steps to allow vault cash to be an eligible reserve asset for the Bank.  The Bank of Uganda will also, after careful evaluation of its own financial position, consider paying a rate of return on reserves held by the banks at the Central Bank.  These measures should improve the liquidity and lower the costs of the financial sector, and thereby contribute to a decline in interest rates.  As efficiency in the system improves, Bank of Uganda will consider removing the remaining limits set on interest rates with reference to the Treasury bill market.

Turning now to Exchange Rate Policy, Mr. Chairman, as you and hon. Members of this House are well aware, this Government has largely completed a major programme of reform of foreign exchange management in this country.  This programme is now widely regarded as highly successful and of some relevance to other developing countries pursuing economic reform.  The stability in the open market exchange rate over this financial year is a remarkable tribute to the viability of our reforms in this area. The central measures within the programme, such as the introduction of the forex bureaux and of the auction by the Bank of Uganda were designed and implemented by this Government at its own initiative without the constraint of donor conditionally, formal or informal.  Donors have supported and continue to support adjustment programmes in several other countries in Africa, where more tentative exchange rate reforms are being pursued at a much slower pace.

A final step is needed to complete our reforms in this area and achieve a fully unified market system of foreign exchange management. Government will shortly introduce measures to achieve this unification by termination of the existing foreign exchange auction in the Bank of Uganda and introduction of a unified inter-bank market in foreign exchange.  A smooth transition to the new system with uninterrupted support from donors, balance of payment financing will require significant improvement in the present procedures for import monitoring, especially in Customs administration.  Under the new system we will be relying primarily on Customs administration for appropriate documentation of imports, rather than the existing controls associated with foreign exchange auction.  I shall announce later this afternoon the specific administrative measures to be implemented now, which should improve revenue collection as well as ensuring adequate documentation of imports as a basis for donors’ disbursement of the balance of payments support.

In order to minimise the costs of adjustment to the new system, the existing foreign exchange auction will be retained until Government is convinced that these measures have been satisfactorily implemented, as evidenced by approximately two months of successful operation of the revised customs procedures.

PETROLEUM IMPORTS

Mr. Chairman, Sir, the Government intends on the import side only of the Petroleum Products to encourage greater competition between the oil companies. Now, before embarking on a discussion of revenue measures, I wish to propose that a debate on these matters should precede the resolutions of this House in expenditure.  Hon. Members will recall that in our Budget debate last year, a number of modifications to the proposed revenue measures were agreed after expenditure proposals had already been debated. The consequent shortfall on revenue necessitated subsequent administrative adjustment of the expenditure proposals.  I am sure that hon. Members will agree that it is preferable that the consequences of any modifications on revenue should be fully considered by this House in our debate on expenditure and I therefore urge that revenue proposals be discussed first.

Hon. Members will recall that, last year, I promised to review the whole system and structure of taxation.  I am pleased to say that we have benefited from a large number of studies this year, which have made a significant contribution to the design of taxation policy in the 1993/94 Budget.

The revenue effort in the economy remains a major source of concern.  It is clear that, despite the strong performance for revenue projected in 1993/94, Uganda’s revenue performance will still be relatively weak.

Clearly, the taxable capacity of any economy is a function of the structure of that economy.  This structure materially determines both the absolute level of taxable income and the ease with which it can be accessed for purposes of taxation.  The presence of large retail establishment, large manufacturing units and high percentage of the labour force in formal employment considerably enhances the taxable capacity of the economy. Similarly, the presence of a large, predominantly small-holder agriculture sector reduces the taxable capacity of the economy, particularly if a large percentage of the economic activity is of a non-monetary nature, consists in beans, in simsim and things like that which are not sold to many markets at all although, of course they account for the GDP.  What I am saying is that the degree of monetisation of an economy is crucial also for purposes of taxation!  If the structure of other sectors of the economy is also biased towards small-scale activity, with a larger percentage of the labour force being self-employed, the problems are obviously compounded.  Unfortunately, these features currently beset our economy.

But while all this is true, there are a number of countries which do have significantly higher revenue collections as a proportion of the GDP than Uganda, therefore, it is naive that the question of the strength of an economy than Uganda, can’t obviously be discounted either on grounds of peculiarities in their revenue or differences in the structure of their economy.  Countries such as Tanzania, Kenya, Malawi and Ethiopia have all managed to achieve high ratios of revenue of their GDP despite having the disadvantages of low levels of per capita income and relatively large agriculture sectors.  Obviously, therefore, such features of the economy do not constitute an absolute prohibition on achieving much higher ratios of revenue to GDP than Uganda is currently achieving.  What is the problem in our case?  It is the lack of a positive tax culture and worse still, the tendency to corruption on the part of both of some of the tax collectors and some of the tax payers.  We shall not lament these; we shall fight them.  I am now talking particularly to those members of our society who have tendency to want to corrupt our tax collectors much more directly, those members of the Uganda Revenue Authority who for any reason at all, cannot do without corruption or tend to ask for bribes in order to perform their functions, this cannot be countenanced with, we cannot have this going on any more.  

Mr. Chairman, therefore, determined and persistent efforts will continue to he made in 1993/94 to effect a material improvement in our revenue effort.  A number of measures for boosting the economy’s revenue effort have already been implemented and these have resulted in a rising percentage of revenues to GDP since 1986 when the NRM assumed power.  In 1986/87 the ratio of revenue to GDP was around 5.1% before that it was 3.4% of GDP and this was excluding import taxes on coffee, which as you know have lost now because of the International Coffee Market.  This year, the ratio of revenue to GDP again excluding coffee export receipts will be approximately 8% of GDP; this percentage gives no comfort of course, but the situation is improving.  The main reasons for the increase in the ration of revenue to GDP have been the taxation of petroleum mainly (in 1986/87 there was no tax on petroleum), also the elimination of an overvalued exchange rate which boosted the import tax base and the increase in revenue from ‘excise’ products such as beer and cigarettes.

In the coming financial year further measures will be taken.  Tax rates on excise products, after the reductions in November, are still below their revenue maximising potential.  The loopholes in the tax of rental income have effectively eliminated any revenue from this source. Tax exemptions in the customs tax base have not only undermined the development of potential domestic industries producing raw materials, but have also undermined the revenue base.  The cost of these exemptions in 1992/93 has been estimated to exceed Shs. 50 billion, approximately 2.5% of GDP.  Obviously, not all of this revenue would be recoverable if all exemptions were abolished, but the figure serves to illustrate the magnitude of the problem.  I shall soon indicate the specific measures in this regard.

Furthermore, there is need to rehabilitate the tax system as a whole and this will be undertaken.  This appears to be the crucial difference between Uganda and other countries with higher revenue effort. Our base and system of taxation were destroyed over a period of two decades, undermining not only the then growing industrial base but also the institutional infrastructure for collecting taxes and more importantly the development of a tax culture as I have just indicated especially in the private sector.  This is why the smuggling and other forms of tax evasion are still endemic and are increasing the cost of tax administration.  But the struggle continues.

The primary objective of the strategy to increase the economy’s revenue effort will be to broaden the tax base to reduce the current reliance on a very narrow range of products.  Currently revenue collected on the five products namely, petroleum, beer, cigarettes, soft drinks and spirits account for close to 50% of the total revenue collections.  The essence of the strategy will be to expand the direct tax base, improve administration (Including rationalisation of exemptions) of the taxation of imported goods and develop a broad based tax on consumption.  The success of the strategy will depend to a significant degree on the rehabilitation of the culture of ‘voluntary compliance’ to the process of taxation.

REVENUE PROPOSALS

Personal Income Tax

The objective of the Government’s long term strategy for taxation is to create a broad based system of direct taxation with relatively low rates of income tax in order to increase the take home pay of individual tax payers and to minimise any distortions to labour/consumption/saving decisions in the economy.

The government’s strategy to broaden the tax base will focus on the following key areas:

    (a) improved administration to increase the effective coverage of the 
PAYE tax base.  Pertinent measures include intensified auditing of 
             major institutions and the development of a Tax Identification 
             Number (TIN) system;

(b)	measures to increase the coverage of the income tax base. Currently a large percentage received by wage earners is effectively untaxed.  The treatment of allowances as part of taxable income has not be enforced adequately in the past.  As employers have been encouraged to devise elaborate and inefficient schemes to pay their employees, using a wide assortment of allowances and benefits, in order to reduce their labour costs by eliminating the tax liability of their employees.

Henceforth the statutory requirement to incorporate as part of taxable income all allowances and benefits accruing by virtue of employment will be rigorously enforced.  This is not a new law; it is an existing law, and it has been on the country statute books for a number of years now.  Time has come for it to be enforced.

To ensure consistency with the Government’s Civil Service reform and salary enhancement strategy, a transition period will be allowed to complete the process of converting civil service compensation to a fully monetised basis.  In other words, the allowances and benefits given to civil servants will be excluded from what I have just been saying.

(c)        reduction in the burden of taxation to encourage the development of a widespread culture of tax compliance and to reduce the aforementioned incidence of economic distortions is yet another way we are trying to introduce to encourage the compliance of tax payment.

Consistent with all these, we are proposing the following measures:

    (a)  all allowances and benefits accruing by virtue of employment will be taxed as part of personal income;

 (b) the threshold for personal income tax will be raised from Shs. 600,000 to 
      Shs. 800,000.  The increase in threshold has taken into consideration the   
            Government’s commitment to alleviate the tax burden on a number of                  
             allowances, for example as housing, lunch and transport allowances,  
             provided to workers especially at the lower end of the income scale.

      (c)	a reduction in the number of tax brackets from four (4) to three(3); and

    (d) a reduction in the top marginal rate of tax from 40% down to 30% for income above Shs. 4,200,000 a year.

Further details are provided as usual in the Finance Bill. 

Tax on Rental Income

I am talking about houses on rent.  The new tax law for rental income passed by the NRC in July last year provided for a 20% tax on net rental income, with complete exemption from taxation during the first five years completion of the building.  As it currently stands the law has effectively eliminated tax on rental income as a source of revenue for the budget.  In the first 9 months of the financial year total revenue collections from this source only amounted to Shs. 0.2 billion.

In principle the tax on net rental income should be assessed on the same basis as income from any other source.  It would also be desirable to retain the principle of vertical equity in the taxation of income, i.e. the principle that those with larger incomes contribute a larger share of tax than those lower incomes.

Exemptions and consequently the introduction of distortions into the taxation system should only be considered as a last resort, in those instances where Government wishes to promote activities that will bring significant economic (or social) benefits.  The construction of luxury housing, the main beneficiary of the current exemption, does not fall into this category.  Moreover by severely complicating the administration of the tax it has contributed significantly to the current erosion of the tax base.

As it stand, therefore, the tax on rental income flouts nearly all the major principles of a sound taxation system; rental income is currently effectively untaxed, the incentive provided (and consequently the revenue foregone) is not encouraging an activity with major economic or social benefits, the administration of the tax is complex and the beneficiaries of the untaxed income are property owners who generally speaking fall in the higher income brackets.

In order to introduce more equitable and effective tax on rental income, the tax on income from properties rented out by individuals will continue to be desegregated from the personal income tax schedule.  However, the tax levied will be applied at a flat rate of 20% on the 80% of gross rent paid in excess of Shs. 840,000.  The 20% deduction provides an allowance for any expenses incurred.  I also propose to abolish the tax exemption on properties that are less than five years old.  The rent on all properties, irrespective of age, will now be liable to the above uniform tax.

Now, concerning property or other forms of property, though the taxation of property is a local government tax, it is important for the budget because if local government revenues can be enhanced, they will be able to undertake their responsibilities more effectively and this reducing some of the strain on the budget because if you do not have sufficient funds you have for of course to provide for them in a fixed grant.  In the context of the decentralisation process the capacity of local government to increase its revenue generating capacity takes on an added importance.

Property rates represent a potentially large source of revenue for local government.  Currently this source of revenue is severely undermined by the fact that the present property rates are based on seriously outdated valuations.

To generate this source of income for local government the following is proposed:

    (a) a quick valuation exercise will be undertaken in the near future to ensure that 
      the valuation of all urban property is adjusted to a single base period.

    (b) the tax law will be amended to allow for annual adjustments to valuations to 
      take in inflation and other general factors.

Agricultural Income

One of the reasons why the revenue effort in Uganda is so low is that the coverage of the direct tax base is very limited.  It is particularly limited by the fact that income from the agriculture sector, which represents over 50% of total output of the economy, is effectively not taxed.

The application of the traditional income tax system to the agriculture sector has a number of particularly intransigent administrative problems.  Accordingly it is proposed that agricultural income be taxed via a number of proxies that have the advantage of combining administrative simplicity with Government’s overall objectives of efficiency and equity of taxation.

Specifically the following is proposed to enhance the taxation of the agricultural sector:

(a) The maximum graduated tax levied by the local authorities will be increase 
from Shs. 40,000 to Shs. 80,000 a year I hear whistling but the fact of the matter is that however capable of paying higher taxes one is now, in the countryside, by law, can only pay Shs. 40,000.  But we are saying if you are strong carry the greater burden, we are just doubling this.  I have been informed on authority that one, for instance, can see one cow for about Shs. 150,000 we are only saying shs. 80,000.  Now, the difference between Shs. 40,000 and Shs. 80,000 now being proposed will be collected by local authorities under the auspices of the Ministry of Local Government and the proceeds will be shared upon an agreed ration between the Treasury and the Ministry of Local Government. Any payments made by 	taxpayers under this scheme will be the result of joint assessments made by the Ministry of Local Government and the Uganda Revenue authority.  What I mean by this, is that as of now, the Local Government cost to a taxpayer’s homestead and expenses is tax liability.  Now, 	we do not want to have another authority yet coming in from the Central Government to carry out another assessment, it is annoying, it is time wasting.  So it is much better we have the two authorities combined to carry out urgent assessment so that the burden of having assessment, if you like, which is suffered by the tax payer is endured only once. The Ministry of Local Government will be responsible for remitting the portion of central government funds to the Treasury. Appropriate mechanisms are being put in place for this purpose.  The measures will take effect from October, 1,1993 in order to coincide with the accounting year of local authorities.

 (b) A 10% customs import duty will be imposed on agricultural inputs, including agricultural machinery and tools, but excluding fertilizers, pesticides and seeds.  For this reason, Mr. Chairman, is that we really want to encourage efficient import substitution in the agricultural and, of course, the manufacturing industry.  As long as our economy depends on imports only there will be to that extent no incentives for anyone to invest locally in the production of such intermediate inputs.  It is therefore necessary that we put a modest 10% duty to try and encourage domestic production in these areas.

Corporation Tax and the Investment Code

Turning now to Cooperation Tax and the operation of the Investment Code, Government provides a range of incentives intended to smooth or reduce a company’s tax liability.  The incentives currently provided under the Finance Bills and the Investment Code includes: (i) carry-over of losses; (ii) accelerated depreciation; (iii) tax holidays on both corporate profits and dividends.

These incentives bring a number of benefits to the investor.  They remove the bias against risky projects inherent in standard corporate taxation, they increase the post-tax returns on individual investments and they improve the liquidity situation of enterprises.

There are, however, a number of problems with the current system on incentives provided by Government.

First, the effectiveness of the system of incentives may be more limited than had originally been thought.  It is now clear that in the absence of any complementary tax holidays with the home countries of foreign investors, the revenue foregone by reducing a company’s tax liability in Uganda represents a revenue gain by the Ministry of Finance in the investors home country.  The incentive provided by tax holidays is also limited by the fact that most serious ventures do not make profits in the early years of their investments.  The incentive may therefore only be attractive to investors seeking to make ‘quick’ profits in the first and the second years possibly of an investment.  For serious long-term investors, the post-tax rate of return obtained over the life of the investment is the important criteria when judging the impossibilities of an investment.

Second, the current design of the incentive system makes it very expensive relative to the benefits that can be expected from it.  The main reasons why the system is so expensive is that as it currently stands the tax holidays are extended not just to new investments but also to additional investments made by existing enterprises.  In principle the incentive is only meant to apply to the additional profits generated by the additional investment.  In practice, of course, it is administratively impossible to distinguish between normal profits and additional profits that accrue to the additional investment for expansion.  As a result of this loophole, not only is Government foregoing potential revenue from new investments, there is also a risk that it will also lose corporate tax from ongoing (and profitable) enterprises.

Despite the problems with the system of incentives provided under the 1992 Finance Bill and the Investment Code, the incentives however do play an important role to compensate the investor for some of the additional costs of investment in Uganda.  Nevertheless, the system of incentives needs to be rationalised and made more effective.

Accordingly I propose as follows:

 (a) The tax holiday provided under the Investment Code will be limited to new investment. Henceforth applications for incentives for additional investments will no longer be eligible; however, consideration is being given for allowing such investor a lower rate of corporate taxation instead of a tax holiday. In other words, an investor expanding preparation by an investment will be given the option either of enjoying a tax holiday as it is under the Investment Code or foregoing that and however being given a lower rate of corporate taxation on the profit attributable to the new investment.

(b) the resources saved as a result of the above proposal will be used to provide a more durable incentive to serious long term investors through a reduction in the rate of corporation tax from 35% to 30%. I am proposing that the current corporation tax rate be reduced from 35%, to all corporate companies, from 35% to a new rate of 30%.

(c) To ensure that the effectiveness of the current incentives is not eroded by the absence of complementary tax credits in the home countries I have just indicated, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning will embark on negotiating double taxation agreements with identified major trading partners.  Mr. Chairman, Sir and hon. Members may recall that we recently signed such agreement with the Government of the United Kingdom.

There has been concern, for some time now, that foreign exchange losses incurred by companies on loans used to procure various capital assets have not been an allowable income tax deduction.  After careful review, the Government has decided that these foreign exchange losses will now be capitalised and will qualify as depreciation dome for deduction before tax liability will be computed.  However, it must be stated that proof of the losses having been incurred on the financing of capital assets rests solely and property I think, with the taxpayer who is claiming it.

Concerning now Trade Taxes, I want to advance to Customs Duty.  A number of recent duties commissioned by Government to analyse the investment climate in Uganda have revealed some disturbing findings.  The main thrust of the reports is that the combined impact of the tariff structure, import bans, exemptions and poor customs administration has resulted in an investment climate which is highly distorted, thus encouraging inefficiency, with a strong anti-export bias and a discrimination against activities that seek to further the horizontal integration of the economy in accordance with the Government’s policy of creating an integrated, self sustaining and independent national economy.

The distortion in incentives has resulted in some sectors of the economy being provided with very high levels of protection, indeed so high in some instances that we are likely to be supporting productive activities which are grossly inefficient, even value subtracting in that the value of the output produced is less than the value of the foreign exchange inputs used in the process of production.  Other sectors, on the other hand, have negative protection, because their output is relatively lightly protected whilst their costs are significantly increased as a result of the protection afforded to other producers.

Furthermore, because the effects of tariff protection, import bans and exemptions interact with each other and affect each sector differently, the structure of incentives implicit in the investment climate is less than transparent and not always fully consistent with our basic economic objectives.

The bias against export and agriculture, the two areas of economic activity most important for the progressive development of the economy and the improvement of the welfare of the population this bias works through a number of channels.

Exporters get negative protection because there is no tariff protection on their output to offset the inflated input costs they have to bear as a result of the protection afforded to other domestic industries.  Secondly, because protection of the domestic market raises both domestic price of both importables and non-tradables relative to price obtained by producers in an export market, protection acts as an implicit tax on exports.  Lastly, by increasing the price of a good in the domestic market, relative to the price that same good would get in an export market, production for export markets tend to be discouraged so that the investors tend therefore to turn to try other forms of export markets and tend to invest in the protected markets.

The combination of relatively high levels of protection on the output on consumer goods combined with very low (or zero) tariffs on imported inputs discourages the development of a horizontally integrated economy.  The present structure of tariffs has a number of effects.  First, it favours those producers who have a relatively imported dependent production process. Second, it encourages producers to use an imported input rather than domestic substitute.  Third, it discourages those producers or investors who are trying to develop a domestic capacity to supply intermediate goods and raw materials.

Apart from these unproductive distortions in the investment climate, the presence of widespread exemptions in the tariff structure, by undermining the revenue base, severely constrains the ability of Government to tackle the fundamental causes undermining the competitiveness of the domestic industrial sector.  The major obstacles encountered by manufacturers trying to establish competitive enterprises are: (i) inadequate infrastructure and basic utilities; (ii) inadequate investment in the development of Uganda’s human resources through poor education and health facilities and; (iii) the cost of working capital.  The responsibility for tackling these obstacles lie clearly within the Government’s domain.  Public investment infrastructure, basic utilities and human capital will reduce obstacles from those sources.  The restructuring and recapitalisation of institutions in the financial sector combined with a reduced public sector borrowing requirement will enable interest rates to decline from their current levels and so reduce the borrowing costs of manufacturers.  However, all of these Government activities depend on the ability of Government to raise its revenue effort.  Tackling the web of exemptions that currently undermine the revenue base is a major element of the strategy for this year’s budget.

Accordingly, we are proposing the following amendments to the structure of Customs tariffs and exemptions in the economy to ensure that they are consistent with the Government’s strategy to create a dynamic, integrated, export oriented economy:

(a) the tariff structure for Customs duty is being rationalised from the present rates which starts from 0%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 40% to 50% about six steps reducing these to only four rate structure of 0%, 10%, 20%, and 30% we are cutting now 40% to 50%.  In other words, all goods that have attracted rates above 30% will now attract duty of 30%.

However, luxury goods that had previously been subject to a high tariff rate will now be subject to a compensating surtax.  I do not think anyone should really weep for these luxury goods - by our definition 	these luxury goods are not necessarily really for proper operation of anyone. For example, a motor vehicle with an engine capacity exceeding 3000 cc that currently is subject to a Customs duty rate of 50% and a Sales Tax of 100% will now be subject to a Customs duty rate of 30%, a Sales tax rate of 30% and a surtax of 50%.  Why surtax?  It is to discourage importing luxury goods and I think misapplying the country’s foreign exchange that is so scarce.  Further details will be found in the Finance Bill.

 (b) We shall also impose a 10% Customs duty on all raw material imports.  This was removed during the last year’s budget but it was there before, it is being re-imposed.  The reasons again is to encourage emergency growth of domestic substitution industries because you should imagine a day when you cannot think you will be able to import these raw materials and if the building industry is basing them on the possibilities of importing them from day today, that cannot be really 	sustainable and we must encourage our own development in industrial manufacturing.

(c) The exemption of Customs duty on construction materials which is provided under the Investment Code will be abolished.  Why is this, because we found, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, that some people who have enjoyed this privilege according to the present Code, because it is not paid for, have abused it.  They import cement, for instance or they import paint and they off load these on the market but with no tax being paid. So, this abuse of the privileges going on the Investment Code, the Government is saying that enough should be enough, it is being withdrawn.  I must, however, emphasise that it remains for importation of capital goods, machinery or other type of investment.  We are talking about construction materials only.

(d) To ensure that exporters, who do not benefit from any protection on their output, are not adversely affected by the increase in duty on their inputs, all manufacturers registered for Sales Tax with the Customs and Excise Department of the Uganda Revenue Authority, who export their finished product will have the Customs Duty paid on materials reimbursed to them using the duty draw-back system.  Raw materials in this context refers to those inputs which are converted either singly or in a mixture with others into an intermediate or final product.

(e) In February this year, Government applied a temporary surcharge of 18% on Kenyan imports that is to say, imports from Kenya, while it was investigating claims by local manufacturers that the Kenya Government was unfair subsidizing the Kenyan exports to Uganda via their export, that is Kenya Government export rebate system.  It is not now believed that the Kenyan export rebate system, which is similar in impact to our own rebate system, fell into this category.  Either way, the Kenyan Government recently announced in its recent Budget that their export rebate system was to be abolished.  So there is no reason now for us to continue maintaining the surtax of 18% that was imposed on certain imports of goods from Kenya.  It is, therefore, being abolished forthwith.

Nevertheless, Government will continue its policy of protecting local industries from unfair competition. This is necessary and imperative. Government, therefore, reserves the right to re-impose surcharges on imports where necessary to ensure that the trading community plays on a level field.

Petroleum Taxes

We are not touching this too much; we are just putting a little increase in one product, that is to say, the diesel.  We are leaving intact kerosene, and we are leaving intact petrol because we believe that the tax on petroleum at 175% is close to the maximum that can currently be levied.  However, the rationale for a differential tax on diesel, on equity grounds, is weaker in Uganda than in many other countries because of the predominance of petrol fuelled public transport vehicles.  Accordingly, it is proposed that the tax on diesel be raised from the current level of 115% to 130%.  

Domestic Taxes

One of the priority objectives of Government as I have said, it is to improve the economy’s revenue performance, is to develop a broad based system of taxation on goods and services.  The main elements of the strategy are to develop a two-tier system of system of taxation that will be applied equally to both imports and domestic production - the differential tax treatment of imports and local products will be the function of customs duty taxes.  The first tier will aim to provide a broad based tax, with a relatively uniform rate of taxation.  In this respect, we are monitoring with interest the initiatives by our neighbours in the region to develop VAT (value added tax) system to taxation.  The second tier will seek t apply a surtax on a limited range of commodities either because those commodities are consumed disproportionately by the wealthy in society or because their consumption should be discouraged on economic or social grounds.  This function will be taken up essentially by applying excise taxes to those goods or services.  

In the process of transition to a simplified structure of taxation on goods and services, a third factor will have to be taken into consideration.  The taxation on petroleum and products liable to excise tax account for almost 50% of current revenue collections.  It is clear therefore that these products will need to continue to bear a disproportionate burden of taxation, just as the coffee before he tragedy of falling of the prices on international market used to do for many years, these we will have to do until a broader based system of taxation is in place and fully operational.  This means that for the time being the tax on these products will have to be based on revenue maximising principles, in preference to broader economic or social considerations.

Sales Tax

Turning now to Sales Tax, in accordance with the above principles, the sales tax structure is also being rationalised and reviewed from the present 0%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, and 100% to a four rate structure of 0%, 10%, 20% and 30%.  All items that have had rates of sales tax above 30% will now attract 30% rate.  This measure applies to both locally manufactured and imported goods.  As an example, the sales tax rate on cigarettes is being revised downwards from 40% to 30%.  Other changes in the sales tax rates appear in the Finance Bill.

Secondly, the following basic rules will apply to sales tax paid by manufacturers who are registered for sales tax.

(a) the sales tax on inputs will be charged but not collected.  This means that the sales tax will be remitted or waived.  For this purpose inputs will be defined to include industrial packaging materials;

(b) It will be a requirement for the manufacturer to record the movement and use of inputs on which sales tax has been remitted and to account periodically to the Uganda Revenue Authority for their use in the manufacture of sales taxable outputs;

(c) The sales tax paid on disposition or sale of the manufactured output shall not be less than that remitted on the material inputs;

(d) The remitted sales tax on materials which are used for purposes other than making sales taxable outputs or for manufacturing exports shall be payable by the registered manufacturer at the end of the accounting period in which they are so used.

In order to gain from these measures, all manufacturers in whatever category are urged to register or renew their registration with the Uganda Revenue Authority and to maintain books and stock records in order to gain meaningfully from this measure.

Excise Tax

As for the Excise Tax mentioned above, the tax on excise products must, for an interim period, be based on revenue-maximizing principles.  In December this year, we reduced the tax on beer, cigarettes and soft drinks in the hope, encouraged by the manufacturers, that as result of the decrease in rates there would be a sufficient increase in sales to ensure that budgeted revenues from these areas would not be affected. Unfortunately, these developments since December in both the trend in sales and domestic prices of the affected goods have not lived up to expectations. As a result revenue collection on these products is expected to be some Shs. 9.3 billion below the budgeted level.

As a result of this shortfall in revenue and because of the rationalisation of the Customs tariff and Sales Tax schedules it has been necessary to review the Excise Tax to ensure that they are consistent with the both the Government’s revenue objectives and its broader economic and social objectives.

Accordingly, the following measures are proposed:

(a) the excise duty rate structure is being revised from the current 0%, 30% and 50% to a five rate structure of 0%, 10%, 30%, 50% and 70%;

 (b) the excise duty on cigarettes, beer and spirits, is being raised to a new rate of 100%;

(c) the excise duty on soft drinks will be raised to 50%.

Furthermore, as mentioned above, the Customs tariff on a number of luxury goods has been reduced in order to rationalise the system of protection.  The sales tax rate on some products has also been reduced under the new rationalised Sales Tax structure.

In order to ensure that domestic consumption of luxury goods is taxed at an appropriate rate a compensating Excise Tax will be applied to these luxury products.  As with any domestic tax, the Excise tax rates will apply equally to both imported and domestic luxury goods.  The law is being amended to provide for this.  Details can be found in the Finance Bill.

I now turn, Mr. Chairman, Sir to the Commercial Transactions Levy. In the financial year 1992/93, the CTL on drinks in bars, restaurants and other eating and entertainment establishments was placed at the ex-factory point.  However, given the reforms that are taking place in the taxation system, and the need to place the levy at its proper point of catchment, CTL on drinks is being reintroduced in all bars, restaurants and eating-houses and at entertainment establishments.  CTL will also apply to those shops-turned-bars that should actually be off-licensed establishments.  Further, in order to give explicit cognisance to the service element provided by construction companies, the CTL charge on construction is being limited to all other items in the construction bill other than the materials used for construction.  In other words, there will be no CTL for construction companies on materials used for construction activities.

Fees and Licences

In the 1992/93 financial year, the schedule for motor vehicle fees and licences was rationalized.  Revenue collection from this area was dealt a blow when the NRC revised the charges from a gross base of taxation to a net weight base.  That is to say, if you are assessing a tax charge fee on a lorry because the situation is that you just take away, the Government is now saying that this really is not an accurate measure of the damage which that lorry can do to the road when it is carrying its proper load and, therefore, we are proposing that we go back now to assessing tax on the gross weight of motor vehicles and this will take effect from mid-night tonight.

The rate of transfer fees for motor vehicles however, this is good news, is being reduced from 3% to 2% in recognition of the concern that most people are buying vehicles but are not transferring them into their names because they consider the transfer fee rather high.  Administrative measures are being taken within Uganda Revenue Authority to enforce compliance for transfer of vehicles and Uganda Revenue Authority will announce the details. The law is also being amended to impose better control on garage number plate owners effective from midnight tonight.

I am also proposing to reduce Stamp Duty on land transfer, for instances, from 3% to 1% with effect from midnight tonight.  You might ask why reducing this when you need revenue.  My answer is the exigencies of the situation.  I think it is probably true that because of this 3% some people are becoming adept in avoiding paying this tax.  So let us try and reduce the tax rate and see whether there will be no compliance.

Everyone knows that we have had the National Lottery Board.  Honourable Members will recall that last year, Government declared its intention to license private agencies to operate lottery schemes.  The progress so far made will enable the identified private agency together with the National Lottery Board to start operations in the very near future.  Uganda Revenue Authority has already identified some private agencies to deal with.

Now, Exemption.  It has been noted with concern that the issuance of exemptions from duty and sales tax using various statutes, some of which are out-of-date, has deprived the country of much needed revenue.  In order to stem the tide and abuse of the exemption facility, all exemptions except those that are under bilateral agreements with foreign countries and agreements with accredited international institutions are abolished herewith.  However, granted to investors under the Investment Code will still continue to be honoured.

The case of any institution or individual wishing to apply for exemption will have to be presented in the first instance, to a committee to be set up in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning for consideration.  Anyone not satisfied with the committee’s decision can always appeal to the Minister of Finance.  I wish to make clear however that the Committee will not consider exemptions for the following items:

(a)	Mineral waters and alcoholic beverages;

(b)	Tobacco goods;

(c)	Petroleum products;

    (d)     Toiletry and cosmetic goods;

    (e) Woven fabrics- this does not include textiles, women fabrics 
including carpets and textile floor coverings;

(f) Television receivers, both coloured and black and white and satellite dishes;

(g) Motor vehicles of cylinder capacity of 2,000 c.c. and above.

In the case of exemptions granted under the provisions of the Investment Code, the Uganda Investment Authority will present the case of individual investors, as is the practice now in the law. They will deal with them.

In those instances where approvals for exemptions are granted, the approved exemption will be provided in the form of a treasury credit note.  The treasury will issue the applicant with a credit note as if to say you have paid the tax.

To reinforce Government commitment to the control of exemptions we are also proposing the following measures:

    (a) Government will abolish the duty free status of the army shop.  Those exemptions currently being enjoyed by the army are however being     rationalised into the army’s wage bill, so what they are loosing, Mr. Chairman, is the thing they are getting on the round about.

(b) Government will pay tax on all project imports;

(c) The Uganda Investment Authority will be putting in place measures to restrict the importation 
of luxury goods which would otherwise be imported under the incentive schemes but which do not have a major bearing on the investment project proposals.

General Administrative Measures

Mr. Chairman, Sir, I am now turning to the General Administrative Measures and I am sorry to keep you there for a long time but I have to tell you this today.


Taxpayer Identification Numbers (TINs)

The Government has decided to introduce a Tax Payer Identification Number (TIN) system.  The Ministry of Local Government and the Uganda Revenue Authority are embarking on an exercise to put in place a comprehensive taxpayer’s database in which each business enterprise, institution, and every individual taxpayer and this includes taxpayers also of course in Kikuubo, will be allocated a permanent unique identification number.  Behind this number, which is really an account number, there will be details of the business/institution or individual referring, amongst other things, to business/institution or individual name, physical location, business/professional activity, employer, in the case of individuals, and taxes the taxpayer is eligible to pay.

When the TIN system has been established, the Taxpayer will be referred to by mainly quoting their TIN number, and with this system in place it will be easier to run the taxpayers ledger and keep track of different economic activities a taxpayer may be involved in.  An initial batch of TINs will be issued to limited liability companies by September 1,1993.  All businesses and institutions will be required to produce their TINs on demand by end-March, 1994, and all graduated taxpayers by end-June, 1994, the intervening period being used for voluntary registration.  Modalities for putting these systems in place as at an advanced stage and will be published through the Ministry of Local Government in the very near future.

In order to facilitate the implementation of this exercise, and the need to make local authorities the control centre for the update of taxpayers, the law is being amended to require all operating entities, whether Government, NGO, professional or any organisation to obtain operating permits from the local authorities within whose geographical area they happen to operate.

Payment of Taxes by Installments

There has been an outcry from the tax paying public, especially those paying deposits, that although they would like to pay their taxes, it is not always possible to clear the amounts in one installment.  Provisions do exist in the law for the Commissioner General of the Uganda Revenue Authority to allow payment of taxes in installments.  In order to ease the cash-flow problems of taxpayers, therefore I have instructed the Uganda Revenue Authority to invoke the provisions of payment of taxes on an installment basis.  Any abuse of this provision by taxpayers will necessarily lead to severe sanctions being imposed.

Customs and Excise

In the Budget pronouncement of 1992/93, Government announced the intention of introducing competition in the pre-shipment inspection services.  The Government will soon announce another company that is to say in addition to SGS-Societe Generale de Surveillance (SGS), will carry out pre-shipment inspection services in Uganda on a contractual basis under the management of the Bank of Uganda.  As a result of this measure, and for the purpose of strengthening Customs administration, all goods consigned to Uganda in excess of US$ 2,500 will require pre-shipment inspection.  Goods that arrive at the border without pre-shipment inspection will be required to undergo post shipment inspection.  Effective August 1,1993, no goods will be cleared through Customs unless this requirement has been complied with.  Furthermore, effective same date, the following documentation will be required for Customs purposes before goods are cleared:

	(a)	Bank of Uganda Form E;

	(b)	Pre-shipment Inspection Clean Report of Findings;

	(c)	Certified Final Invoice or Certified Proof of Payment;

	(d)	Bill of Lading;
	
	(e)	Certificate of Origin; and

	(f)	Customs Bill of Entry.

The Uganda Revenue Authority will publish details of the modalities to be followed and all importers are asked to take heed.

With the introduction of the new Customs arrangements, I propose that the limit on the sale of foreign exchange for imports by the foreign exchange bureaux will be eliminated subject to the requirement that the purchaser fills out a Form E to be used for Customs clearance.

In this Financial Year, 1993/94, further measures are being taken to strengthen revenue collections on customs goods.  A computerized system of customs accounting and control called ASYCUDA will be introduced with the objective of proper control and accounting of goods passing through the various customs regimes, and speeding up the process of clearance of goods through Customs.

Further, effective July 1, 1993, a new customs description and coding system called ‘The Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System’, commonly called the Harmonized System is replacing the Customs Co-operation Council Nomenclature (CCCN).  Details of the new coding system are in the Finance Bill, and arrangements have been finalised to produce and sell enough copies of the new code of the affected users.

In the same vein of the introduction of a new coding system, effective September 1, 1993, a new Customs Bill of Entry is being introduced.  This bill of entry rationalizes and combines a number of Customs Bills of Entry that have been in use.  This document will be printed and controlled by the Uganda Revenue Authority given the widespread abuse of the existing documents by some importers. In effect, these documents will be value document traceable to specific importers or clearing agents.  The Uganda Revenue authority will hold seminars and briefing sessions for the importing public to explain the use of these new documents. Great emphasis is being placed on improved administration of Customs and Excise given its pivotal role in our economy.

Hon. Members are aware that Uganda is losing revenue through rampant smuggling. Some measures have already been put in place to combat smuggling and these have met with some success.  I must, however, say that it would appear that some of our citizens are becoming adept with devising ways of evading tax but they cannot surpass it.  I appeal to their public spirit to realise that this country, it is their country and the responsibilities for development fall equally upon their shoulders as much as the shoulders of any other citizens.  However, in order to strengthen the law regarding Customs offenses, a number of provisions are being introduced and they are the following:

(a) Introduction of a grade of penalties, which would increase in severity; and 

(b) Introduction of a provision to detain a vehicle or vessel for a period of time as penalty to the owner of that vehicle or vessel for having carried uncustomed goods with repeated violations leading to confiscation.  		

Mr. Chairman, it has come to my attention that some taxi drivers may be by design or innocently they carry goods between Malaba or Busia and a place called Kineme over there.  So these goods, first they are loaded on the lorry then the owners sit on these pick-	ups, on these vehicles.  So when the Uganda Revenue Authority meet these people, they assume they are normal passengers so they are not taxed, they are not checked, so they drive off all the way to the Kiyembe there and of course they take their goods without paying the tax.  But if anybody thought we do not know, I am sure they are within our notice that we know.  We know and so if anyone is found stealing this tax like that, the vehicle, the losses, he cannot be allowed to plead ignorance of the law.  

(c) Now, we shall also introduce other measures including the introduction of boats for customs enforcement on Lake Victoria.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, this is another heaven for smugglers.  I have been told that there is an Island there where you can find anything but missiles, but we are watching.  As you know, Sir, there is an anti-smuggling squad although currently under equipped but it is being equipped and it is going to improve on its performance against smugglers.

Now, again the details of these amendments are to be found in the Finance Bill.

The law is also being amended to allow the Uganda Revenue Authority to purchase, that is pay goods from importers at the declared value plus interest, in the opinion of the Uganda Revenue Authority, the goods have been undervalued and could be sold inclusive of taxes at a price much higher than the valuation.  So, if they are importing something, a Rolex watch for instance, costing US$ 2,000 you come and say to the customs official that it is only worth US$ 200.  He will say, fine, you will be given US$ 200 plus interest if any and the Authority will go and sell it for $ 2,000 plus.  It is fair, is it not?

Complaints Unit

Hon. Members will agree that in all taxation matters, the taxpayer must be treated fairly.  Accordingly, I have instructed the Commissioner-General of the Uganda Revenue Authority to set up a unit to handle complaints from the general public.  If of course the general public might feel that they will rather come to the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, we can put that in it thereto.  That unit will be for complaints.  Please come and tell us go and tell the Commissioner General of your complaints against the administration of taxation. Taxation implementation is not meant to be a punishment to tax payers.  It is a duty of Uganda Revenue Authority to be both civil but effective in this job of collecting taxes.  So, with effect from today, any taxpayer who has his/her papers delayed by officials of Uganda Revenue Authority for more than four (4) days at the Customs and Excise Department or at the motor vehicle licensing section of the Internal Revenue Department he or she will be encouraged to send a complaint to that unit.  

Mr. Chairman, Sir, I am sorry to say that I have been informed on authority that some tax payers go to the Inland Revenue to buy their licenses for motor vehicles and sometimes they walk once, twice, three times, they have the money to pay and they are not really attended to. You imagine someone coming from Kabale for instance that time and expense, what am I saying?  I am saying that these officials must really pull up their socks in doing their duty.  Furthermore, in this respect, if any staff of the Uganda Revenue Authority is found to be in direction neglecting his or her duty, that member of staff will be severely disciplined but those found courting favours in return for prompt action, you know sort of saying if you want these papers to go through, if you do not want to stay here three or four days, give me something - that sort of thing which is actually corruption, that person will be dismissed, he will also be prosecuted in accordance with the law of corruption.  I would urge members of the public to take this opportunity to assist us to ensure that Uganda Revenue authority Staff give a level of service which is commensurate with the enhanced remuneration and conditions that we have given them.

Overall Revenue Position

Where do I think they are going to collect all this?  Budget Estimates are by definition budget estimates and on the face of it, I think this is what is going to happen.  As a result of the above measures I hope to raise the following revenue:


Revenue Item                          Estimates 1993/94  (Shs. Billion)
Income Tax                                          	  52.3
Export Taxes (Coffee) 			    0.0
Customs Duty                                           158.3
Excise Duty                                                19.5
Sales Tax on Imported Goods                    57.2
Sales Tax on Local Goods                          59.3
Other Taxes (e.g. CTL)                               13.6
Non Tax Revenue                                        24.5
Total of Estimated Revenue                       384.6

Now, Mr. Chairman, Sir, if this is actually realised twelve months from now, we shall have catered for about almost 80% from our internal revenue for our projected recurrent expenditure this Financial Year.  It was much less last year as you know but still it is 80% or so we spend the 20% to some other tax payers in foreign land and actually we have no right really to expect foreign tax payers to pay for the loans, to pay for the services in their own countries and also to pay our own as well and therefore, I am urging as you had done Sir, yesterday that each one of us really take it as our responsible to rise up to the task of really helping to push forward this country’s development through contentious observance of our tax liabilities.


OTHER POLICIES

Mr. Chairman, I am about to finish Sir.  Other following measures are being taken to promote efficiency in the management of the economy.

(a) Given that there has been a general improvement in the administration of taxes by the Revenue Authority, I am abolishing the requirement for income tax clearance before traveling outside Uganda as from 1st July 1993. (Applause)

(b) In order to reduce delays in the process of administration, I have instructed again the Uganda Revenue Authority to establish for processing inputs at the border to enable the system of escorting inputs to its inland facility for clearance to be phased out.

(c) Hon. Members will remember that it was the original intention of the Investment Code to establish the Uganda Investment Authority as a one-stop centre for intending investors.  With this in view, all existing laws that are in conflict with this objective will be amended during this year.  The reason is that investors do come from abroad, we asks them to come or we beg them to come, if you like, they spend here sometime, several weeks, paying so highly in the Uganda Hotels because they are waiting for some sort of bureaucratic grants of a license, we make them pay beyond their will and I think if we really want investment - to attract investment, we should make sure that we behave in a better way by attending to these people when they come as soon as possible.

 (d) Requirements under the Exchange Control (Forex Bureaux) Order 1991 that visitors residing in hotels must settle their accommodation costs in foreign currency are hereby abolished.  I think we can afford to do this because the shilling is appreciating even against, shall I say, the dollar so we can afford it.

(f) In 1993/94, Government will review the present monopoly exercised with regard to the clearance of Government imports with a view to the early implementation of more competitive arrangements.  I am saying ‘review’; I am not saying for sure, that it will be abolished.

(g) To avoid inconvenience to travelers at Entebbe Airport, the number of checks carried out this time they are many, will only be reduced to only two (2), covering Immigration/Health and Customs/Security.  All the other checks are hereby abolished.  We want to encourage tourism.

(h) Government vehicle purchases in 1993/94 will be restricted to critical or emergency cases, approved only on the basis of detailed justification.  The co-ownership scheme will be reviewed with the objective of moving towards re-introduction of a hire-purchase scheme instead.

(i) The abolition of road tolls in the last Budget was not I guess well understood.  That abolition was meant to cover not only roadblocks that we removed.  For instance, those who used to go along Entebbe road but to cover also roadblocks mounted by local authorities. The Government now say not even the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, the whole lot of the Government is saying the local authorities should cease forthwith to mount these inconveniences especially to people. (Applause)

(j) From midnight tonight, in order to simplify handling of passengers passing through the Airport at Entebbe, CTL Airport tax is hereby abolished.

(k) Finally, Mr. Chairman, Sir, the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning has been considering the bureaucratic delays and impediments to economic activity arising from the Fish and Crocodiles Act and with the full agreement and authority from my hon. Lady, hon. Victoria Ssekitoleko, we are going together with her to review this Act, the Fish and Crocodiles Act, in order to streamline the existing licensing purchasing arrangements.

Mr. Chairman, Sir, hon. Members, I am sorry to have kept you for long.  Sir, I beg to move now.

FOR GOD AND MY COUNTRY

THE CHAIRMAN (His Excellency Y.K. Museveni): Well, hon. Members, I would like to conclude today’s proceedings by making three points.  First of all, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance and his staff for having helped the country to control inflation.  You remember last year inflation had gone up to sixty (60) something percent.  In the previous two years we had brought it down to about 23%.  However, by last year, it had gone back to 60%.  I remember we had to have an emergency cabinet meeting in Gulu when I was there in order to put in place emergency measures to cope with the crisis created by that upsurge of inflation last year.  It is therefore, good to see that we have been able to control inflation and as I said I thank the Minister of Finance and his staff.

Secondly, as I said yesterday, one of the confusions in Uganda but I guess also in other African countries is the failure to notice the linkage between taxation and services and development.  I would like to repeat this point.  Many people including the elite, including elements of the elite do not know that money for development in other countries and money for maintaining services comes from taxation.  People do not seem to know this.  When you talk about taxes, ears stand up.  When you talk about services everybody welcomes these services.  Now, where are they going to come from, or we do not know, somehow the Government has got magic, it will get money somehow.  Of course, as I said, yesterday the implication is that we should borrow from others and we should beg from others.  

As you heard the Minister of Finance, he was saying that taxpayers in foreign lands are expected to run our line here.  We will just sit here, we do not want to tax ourselves, we want other taxpayers to be the ones to pay taxes so that we get water, so that we get electricity, so that we get whatever we need.  This may be alright if it goes on for about five to six years, it can be treated as a transitional time that a certain country was so disadvantaged by previous events that its tax payers could not generate enough money to pay for their services and for their development.  However, when it becomes a way of life that tax payers in other lands in other countries are going to keep on paying tax in order to enable us to get services, in order to enable us to get development, I think that is what we call parasitism, we will becoming parasites and fortunately we do not have free parasites in a modern world, we have slaves.  If you want to be a parasite, you become a slave of other people.  

Therefore, in the Budget Speech of the Minister, he mentioned something about taxing houses; that those who are getting rent should pay tax.  I am told that Parliament here had rejected this, that you should get rent but you should not pay part of it as tax -(Interjection)- I do not know the details, but you will sort it out.  However, my own view is that, if I am getting income, I would like to share it with my country.  So, my own view is that if you are getting money from houses, you should be ready to pay tax.

The Minister also talked about taxing wealthy in the rural areas; putting up the ceiling of Graduated Tax from Shs. 40,000/= to Shs. 80,000/=.  That is still low but it is a beginning.  Some of the communities in the rural areas have got considerable wealth in the form of shambas, in the form of cattle and other forms of livestock, they can make a contribution to their country.  Unfortunately a large part of the North East, Teso, Karamoja, Lango, Eastern Acholi, had their wealth destroyed during these troubles.  I, however, think we could have raised a lot of money from taxing that type of wealth, taxing cows, taxing shambas, so that we can be able to support the budget.

The Minister also talked about taxing land in the urban areas because land has not been taxed.  You find somebody has got a very big chunk of land but he does not pay tax yet we expect foreigners to come and pay taxes to run our country.  

May I also inform you that this morning I was listening to the BBC and the West Europeans have told Russia that they do not have money to give them.  I heard it on BBC this morning, I am a regular listener of BBC, I had also got it from some of my European friends that they do not have all that money to keep on supporting us.  So, I think we shall have to really utilise our resources in order to support ourselves.  

Now, on the question of land, it seems in this budget the Minister will do some taxation on some land in the towns, he will not do anything yet on the rural land for the simple reason that there is no uniform land tenure yet.  In some of the areas, land is held communally, in the other areas you have got squatters on the land, so there is a lot of confusion in the rural areas and one cannot easily put tax there yet.  However, in town, I think land should be taxed so that we can raise more money.

May be I do not know whether it is pointed out in any other documents, maybe the background to the Budget or whatever, I am informed that the structure of our GDP is; agriculture 50 per cent, public works 20 per cent, public works meaning roads, dams and so on which cannot pay tax.  You cannot charge Masaka Road any tax and the others, manufacturing and commerce sharing the remaining 30 per cent.  You, therefore, see that if you are going to raise any significant level of taxes we must tax this 50 per cent agriculture because when we talk of Uganda’s Gross Domestic Product, we talk of mainly agriculture, yet much of the taxation which the Minister has been reading here has been dealing only with some little commerce and manufacturing.  There are no significant taxes from agriculture that forms 50 per cent of our GDP.  In the past there used to be an indirect tax on agriculture in the form of export tax on coffee.  That tax on coffee was indirectly taxing agriculture.  However, this tax was removed because the coffee price went very low.  So, now we do not have very many taxes on agriculture apart from the indirect on inputs into agriculture and so on.  This I leave to the Minister because the Minister should be the one to make proposals but I would like to sensitize us about these problems.  

First of all understand the structure of our GDP may be the Minister could give us a hand out at some later stage analysing for us the structure of our GDP, like you look at the human body, you see this is the brain, this is the heart, these are the intestines then you see what to do about them.  Now, what is the structure of Uganda’s GDP and how can we get tax from the head, how can we get tax from the heart?  But we talk about these things just in ignorance all tax generally without a detailed understanding.  From what I have heard much of the money he is talking about that he is going to raise is all from commerce and from manufacturing which are not more than 30 per cent of the GDP of the whole country.  So the remaining 70 per cent is not taxed.  It is not for you to make proposals, it is for him but you should also be sensitised, you should all be aware that this is where the problem sis that much of the agriculture itself is in peasants hands, not much production going on, some little scratching here and there but the Banyankole have got a word when the food is not enough in the pot, when the food is finished in the pot, you get a piece of a calabash which they call ‘Enkogoso’ and you scrap the bottom and you eat -(Laughter)- the Banyankole call it ‘Okukogota Omunyongu’, that is to scrap the bottom.  

Now, if our GDP is like that how do we scrap the bottom to get something, so that we have a structure of taxation that can support our development projects.  Whenever I go up country, I face a demand, we want a road here, this road should be tarmacked, we want electricity here, and we want telephones.  With our present taxation system this is not easy.  Even when we want to male a project in an area we must come back and start negotiations with the World Bank because we do not have our own money, we would like to build a road to West Nile on! but is it economically viable?  Well, let us make a study because the World Bank have got their own time table, they are traveling on tarmac roads in Washington, they are not in the same hurry as we are here so when they come back here in Kampala, then they say okay, let us first make a study, then we go to make a study, there are all sorts of romantics in Western Europe, there are people with romantic ideas, they say no, we do not build a road, what we need here is, for instance, I had a problem with the EEC in Karamoja, they gave me some money in 1986 when I went there, 6 million dollars for Karamoja but when we came to use it, some of these romantic young boys whom they sent here had an idea that my plan for Karamoja was the dams, I wanted water dams for cattle because if you want to settle the Karimojong, you need dams for them, but these young romantic boys from EEC said no, dams are dangerous, they will cause environmental degradation, there will be some snails in them, in the dams -(Laughter)- and snails can cause bilharzia and some of the cows may fall in the water.  So as a consequence, the dam programme collapsed.  They said, now what Karamoja needs is first of all to plant trees and to hold seminars to tell the Karimojong how they should behave.  

Of course, the other weakness is that our own people are not very firm in their convictions.  That is also another problem.  Our negotiators are not very firm in their convictions so when they tell them like that, they abandon their original positions and say by the way, I think that is it.  Before I knew what was happening, the idea of valley dams had been completely abandoned so, I had to come again and contact the Commissioner, Mr. Marine, the Commissioner for Development of EEC and tell him that if you do not want to dig valley dams in Karamoja, take the money away, I am not interested in anything other than dams.  So, Mr. Marine was convinced and he told these people but although they now accepted my line which is ‘water is priority’ for Karamoja, priority is water, later on we shall plant trees, we shall hold seminars but let us first have dams, then they went again and they accepted the idea of water as a priority but then they said it must be small ponds not big dams because they were against the whole idea of big dams - you know they have got an idea that in big dams there will be snails there, you know the snails which cause bilharzia and so on, they say because in Aswan Dam - Abdul Nasser built the Aswan Dam and there were snails and some forty people were infected and this therefore is very bad, it should not happen anywhere.  So they started now digging something that they call ‘Atapary’. These are just shallow points containing water of six thousand litres only but in a dam you can have six million litres or it can even be more so before we realise what was happening the problem was off the rails.  I had to come in again, I have come in again, we are back to the dams but this has taken seven years now of implementation yet the money is there but the decision to use the money is not in my hands although I am Excellency and all these very powerful -(Laughter)- I am just a paper tiger I must say. (Laughter)  If that six million dollars was money raised by the Uganda Government, the dams in Karamoja would have been finished six years ago because I would have said ‘build the dams’ finish.  That is the real excellency now.  

So, collecting taxes in our country is a must.  Those who do not understand this will have to be educated that taxes are the life blood of development, they are the life blood of services, they are the life blood of independence, and of sovereignty.  If we do not pay taxes, we shall not be sovereign and we shall not even develop because we shall waste a lot of time haggling over a small point; because we are now like a province of the World Bank - that is how it is now because in order to tender, you must go to Washington, come back, so you cannot develop in this way.  Thank you very much.

Hon. Members, I now adjourn the Council until Tuesday the 6th of July 1993 at 2.30 p.m. in the Council’s Chamber, Parliament House.


(The Council rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned till Tuesday, 6th July, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.).



              
