Thursday 22nd June, 2000.

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair).

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Hon. Members, after the completion of today’s business on the Order Paper, the House will adjourn and then after this, Members will be free to constitute themselves in an informal meeting to discuss informally the amendments to our Rules of Procedure which have been prepared and are being proposed by the Rules Committee.  So, I appeal to all of you to stay behind and hear what the Committee is proposing to our Rules.  Let us proceed.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MR. RUZINDANA  (Ruhama County, Ntungamo):   Mr. Speaker, may I lay the report of the Auditor General for the Public Accounts Committee of the Government of Uganda for the Financial year ended June 1999.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, the programme is reading 'Report of the Auditor General for the Public Accounts Committee of the Government of Republic of Uganda'.  Is the Public Accounts Committee a  Committee of the Government of Uganda or a Committee of this Parliament?  I want to know whether the chairman is now an employee of the Government of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think the mistake is not his, the mistake is that of my office which prepared this Order Paper.  So, it is corrected accordingly.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker, and I did not read as it is written on the Order Paper.  Mr. Speaker, may I lay on the Table the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor General's report for the year ended 30th June 1997?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2000/2001.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND IVESTMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio):   Thank you Mr. Speaker.  The resolution is as follows. Whereas Clause 4 of Article154 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the consolidated fund account for  the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of Government, until the expiration of four months from  the beginning of  the financial year or the coming into operation of Appropriation Act whichever is earlier; and whereas Government financial year will end on 30th June 2000 and it is the belief of the President that by that date, this House will not have approved the estimates of revenue and the expenditure of Government for the Financial year 2000/2001; and whereas it is necessary that the President authorises the issue of monies from the consolidated fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditures necessary to carry on the services of Government; and whereas Clause 5 (a) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorisation of the issue of funds from the consolidated fund account for the purposes of Clause 4 has to be approved by a resolution of Parliament; now therefore be it resolved that Parliament approves vote-on-account allocated to the various votes and the heads attached to this resolution. I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Motion seconded.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I do not know about the others, but I have not received that resolution.  We have the consideration of the figures but we do not have the resolution which the Minister has read.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The figures?

MR. KARUHANGA:  We have the figures, but the resolution itself, we do not have it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, I think I will suggest that we proceed with the business and meanwhile the arrangements be made to give the Members the copies of the resolution.

MR. OPIO:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to make  just two corrections which is only under the summary of the recurrent expenditure vote on account for the year 2000/2001 and vote 301 which is Inspectorate of Government since it is a self accounting body and the practice and the law says that this is handled different and this item was inadvertently put here. The effect of my correction is to delete that line which is vote 031 Inspectorate of Government and that makes  - that is the only change I would like to make and that, gives us – another change I would like to change under development account under districts. I do not know why but they had put a smaller figure under which it should have been under vote under local government should be 484,782 that is under the summary of development expenditure vote on account. 

I would like to state that the vote-on-account does not take into account those bodies which we call self accounting and this is in conformity with the Article 155 of the Constitution which provides on the treatment of the self accounting bodies.  Now the question would be how would they be getting money for the next three months.  The procedure will be that this will be charged directly not on the consolidated fund. We shall receive requests from these self accounting bodies and we shall charge these on the consolidated fund where we are negotiating with the various bodies.

  By the time we come to the appropriation time we shall have negotiated and reached amicable solutions on these areas and what will be at that time will be the amount which will be appropriated.  That is the reason why I have even removed that account under the Inspector of Government. 

With these comments I would request that the House approves this Vote-on-Account because we must operate from July first.  We must be continuing with Government activities, and we cannot continue with Government activities unless we accepted this Resolution to allow us to continue from July first until we pass the Budget before the end of October.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I am really at a loss.  Because according to our Constitution and according to our laws, no moneys can be spent without the approval of Parliament.  Now, what the Hon. Minister has done is, he has brought for us a Vote-on-Account for all Government Departments except those Government department which are self-accounting.

In effect we are approving money for Government departments that are not self-accounting.  But for the Government departments which are self accounting, they will not spend money until such a time that we approve their accounts.  Now, this is going to make it very difficult for these organisations to operate.  And I would like the Minister to assist me to understand how he is going now to approve any amount of money, on what basis?  Is it going to be a discretional basis?  Is it going to be based on the same principles of Vote-on-Account, namely; a third of their budget? Can he approve all of the money?  What is the criteria?  What is the discretion he is going to do?  And what authority is he going to get if he has decided to delete these bodies from this?  And for me, this is the first time I have seen anything like this happen since I became a Member of this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think Hon. Karuhanga, maybe you address yourself to Article 156.  First exhaust that, then see how we proceed. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I was asking for a clarification from the Minister.  But now you have helped me to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let the Minister proceed then. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you.

MR. RUZINDANA:  But Mr. Speaker, before the Minister explains,  unfortunately I do not have that Article before me.  But I am sure it also requires that the budgets of the self-accounting departments come before Parliament with comment of the President, and then we look at those comments and approve.  And I should think that rather than Vote 31 being here in error, actually it is here rightly.

The presentation should show us all the departments that are going to get public funds, and then they make comments to us, and after listening to the comments, we approve them.  But now, we actually do not have the total picture.  The whole budget is not before us.  All the figures are not before us. We are without the figures of the self-accounting departments.  And I think rather than delete the item, Vote 31, I think it should be there and then we get comments from the Minister about Vote 31.  And the other votes should also be there, and the comments which he made should actually have been made with figures before us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this Vote-on-Account we do not envisage a serious debate on Vote-on-Account.  Because this Parliament will deal with a budget in detail and simply say consider the comments of the President on self-accounting bodies.  So I think this is an interim measure to enable departments of Government to run until such a time that Parliament itself considers the Budget Estimates.

We may at the end of the day reduce the estimates and that will be final, and then we shall have the Appropriation Bill, which will appropriate the money.  But when you look at Article 156, you realise that there are certain bodies, which spend money not under the Appropriation Bill, but under a different arrangement.  I think that is what the Minister is thinking in time being.  And you see, further you should know, that because we have not finalised the estimates for the self-accounting bodies, we may not know the formula we are going to use for the first quarter of the financial year.  But for the other bodies where the Government decided and determined the figures, we know what will be the Vote-on-Account.  I think the Minister is saying that the others can have their expenditures since they are directly charged on the Consolidated fund without having a Bill to back it up. 

MS BABIHUGA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The perplexity I have Mr. Speaker is that, we are in a new financial year.  Who authorises the expenditure of those bodies which draw their moneys from the Consolidated Fund?  Are they going to spend until the time that we authorise the overall Budget? Are they going to spend without authority or do they have enough reserves that they will hold on to until such a time when we have authorised? 

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Speaker, I thought you had answered this question.  But maybe to read it if the Members do not have the constitution.  I would say that “the heads of expenditure contained in the estimates other than the expenditure charged on the Consolidated fund by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament shall be included in a Bill to be known as Appropriation Bill, which shall be introduced into Parliament to provide for the issue from the Consolidated fund of the sums necessary to meet the expenditure and appropriation of those sums for purposes specified in the Bill.”  

This clause is giving two answers. First, those which are going to be appropriated here, and those which are charged directly to the Consolidated fund.  Those, which are charged directly to the Consolidated fund, are those self-accounting bodies.  And as far as we are concerned, they are going to be charged on the Consolidated account as they request the Ministry to spend.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I do not want to be very difficult to the Minister, because at this juncture I do not want to be seen to be standing in the way of his life.  But, can he just say that, that which is to be charged on the Consolidated Fund can be charged without the approval of Parliament?  And once he can satisfy me on that, I will be very happy. 

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Speaker, the budgets were laid before Parliament as the Minister was giving his budget he specifically handed to Parliament the budgets for the Self-Accounting.  So the Parliament has got those budgets plus the comments. They are property of Parliament as we speak now.  So the Speaker has got them and as far the law is concerned we did our part.  We presented this document, the budgets of self-accounting to Parliament and those are from where we are going to get money to pay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any further clarification? 

MS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you, Sir.  The Hon. Minister has really confused me further because the provision within the Constitution that he has quoted precisely really warrants our question.  It legitimises our question because not until we have passed that which is mentioned, can we say that Parliament has authorised expenditure and now that we have not passed the Appropriations Bill, who authorises the expenditure for those bodies Hon. Minister Sir?  I thank you Mr. Speaker. 

MR. OPIO: Mr. Speaker, I will read slowly. It says, ‘the heads of expenditure contained in the estimates other than the expenditures charged on the Consolidated Fund.’  ‘Other than’  that means that those which are going to be appropriated are those other than charged on the Consolidated Account. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, to help you, for instance, if you look at Article 55 of the Constitution, it reads as follows; ‘the Commission shall be self-accounting in all administrative expenses of the Commission including salary, allowances and pension payable to the person serving in the commission shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.’  I do not know what you understand by that provision. So it is directly charged on the Consolidated Fund and that is what the Minister is saying that those self-accounting bodies will requisition their fund and it will be paid from the Consolidated Fund until you look through the Budget; because at the moment we are not looking through the estimates of these bodies.  Today we are just only providing funds to enable government to run until the estimates are approved.  I do not know but for me I am just reading the Constitution . 

MR. KUTESA: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I think the problem is not whether this fund should not be charged on the Consolidated Fund.  The issue is whether even if they are going to be charge on the Consolidated Fund, they shall be charged there without the approval or authority of Parliament. That is the crisis of the matter and I think that maybe, there is no harm for the Minister in bringing them here and we have the same proportion as we have for the other votes so that he can utilise that when he is paying on Vote-on-Account and then we shall look at the Budgets because it is quite right that the Minister of Finance did lay them before Parliament just like he made the Budget Speech but that is not authority and I think that he can also bring it here to seek authority to spend for four months or whatever they have put across, and then we do not approve the full amount, then we reduce it.  If we approve the full amount, then it continues that way.  Otherwise, the fact that they are charged from Consolidated Fund does not exempt them from authority of Parliament. 

MR. RUZINDANA:  In addition, Mr. Speaker, this problem is arising because of a faulty procedure. At least these figures should have passed through some committee and all these arguments would have been argued in committee and disposed of but there has been no committee that has seen this, unless I am informed otherwise and all these questions are now arising on the Floor mainly because we are all surprised by getting figures just now and now questions which should have been disposed of before are now coming here and I think that should not be repeated.  

And to buttress the argument of the Hon. Kutesa, I do think that the Minister must bring before Parliament the figures for the self-accounting department.  No public funds can be spent without approval of Parliament. The other one is a procedure.  Once we have approved then they do not have to go through the normal bureaucratic procedures of Ministry of Finance and so on but Parliament must approve all public funds before they are spent. 

MR. OPIO: Mr. Speaker, it is not true that we do not spend money before they are approved.  We have the Item of supplementary.  We can spend money and bring here under supplementary.  So I would like to correct that impression, that no money can be spent without approval because we spend and then we bring here for supplementary and that is under Article 156.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But partly, Hon. Members, if you read Article 156 – please, address also yourself to Article 154 that, there certain expenditures which need no approval.  They are there because Article 154 provides as follows; ‘No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except to meet expenditure charged on the fund by the Constitution or by an Act of Parliament.’  So, definitely there are expenditures, which are charged on the Consolidated Fund which are not approved by Parliament. This is what it says.  I am not interpreting but I am just reading the little interpretation, So there are certain expenditures that can go without this approval.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I propose that since the Minister has laid on the Table and made a Resolution which we hope to get circulated and I hope it will be signed by the relevant committee but even if it is not, maybe, we can go ahead and approve the Vote-on-Account as proposed but with a promise to us that he is going to lay on the Table facts and figures with a Vote-on-Account on self-accounting which would have gone through the relevant committees for scrutiny in order to satisfy the requirements  that Parliament should approve all public expenditure and if the minister is so willing then we can make that a compromise. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So that we deal with what has been presented to us and subsequently you come up with an answer to these queries. 

MR. OPIO: Mr. Speaker, as suggested by the Hon. Member from Nyabushozi, we are going to comply according to the Constitution. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think what he is saying, is that he views that there is some doubt.  I think we could go back and look at various provisions and see whether it is necessary to do what some Members are suggesting. If he finds it is not necessary, he may not come back. (Interjection) Yes. 

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. We are behaving as if we have just come to this Parliament.  We are in the Fifth year of parliament.  We had been passing this Vote-on-Account, what Procedure were we using?  Can we not go back and see how we had been passing instead of wasting time arguing with the Minister?  Thank you very much (Laughter).

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:Hon. Members, according to our rules of procedure, the Vote-on-Account must be dealt with just one day.  Because of this I do not intend to read various votes.  I will be dealing with just block sum for the Ministries, for the districts and from the Municipal authorities.  

Hon. Members, I now propose that the total sum of shillings  206,513,221,000/=  be provided as vote on account for the current expenditure for the line Ministries and Department for fiscal year 2000/2001.  I now put the question that the total sum of shillings –(Interruption)- 

MR. RWAKOOJO: Mr. Chairman I am kind of lost.  The figure that I have here is not the same that is being read.  I do not know whether there is an item that is not in. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I think you came late.  There was a correction on the figures.  There was a deletion, which reduced the figure from 207 billion to 206 billion.  I now put the question that the total sum of Sh. 206,513,221,000/= be approved as a vote-on-Account for recurrent expenditure for the 48 line Ministries for the Fiscal year 2000/2001. 

(Question put and agreed to)

LINE MINISTRIES DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I propose that a sum of shs.135,574,085,000/= now be approved as a vote on account for Development Expenditure for the 48 Ministries and Departments for Fiscal Year 2000/2001.  I now put the question that the sum of Shs. 135,574,085/= be approved as a vote on account for Development Expenditure for the 48 line Ministry and Department for Fiscal Year 2000/2001. 

(Question put and agreed to)

DISTRICTS RECURRENT EXPENDUTURE:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now propose that a total sum of Shs. 129,777,421,000/= be approved as a vote on account for Recurrent expenditure for the 45 districts for the Fiscal Year 2000/2001.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I want the Minister to help me to understand how all the Districts of Uganda none of them has any appropriation aid.   How can that be when Defence has, when Ministry of Planning has, how can it be that all the districts here none of them can make AIA.  How does that happen?  How do you achieve it? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND IVESTMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio):   Thank you Mr. Speaker.  As we stated in our budget, we are working very hard to explore into this area of Appropriation Aid so that we also tackle the districts.  But at this moment, we are not getting money to the Central government, we are not having this item which is declared to the central government, which would be part of what Hon. Karuhanga is saying.  But we need to look into this to widen may be our base so that this could be another area for getting money.  As we speak now, the Appropriate Aid is 1 per cent whereas Kenya is about  3 per cent of our revenue.  So this is a concern we should look into and I will start with Mbarara I think.  

MS WINNIE BABIHUGA:  Further clarification.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Hon. Minister whether he has found any correlation with the denial of the development fund to the district to be the root cause of the absence of the appropriations in aid.  Has he correlated those two?  Thank you Mr. Chairman. 

MR. KEN LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like the Minister to justify the statement he made just now that he would begin with Mbarara among all the districts.

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Speaker, Hon. Member for Rukungiri is asking whether there is a correlation between lack of Appropriation in Aid to development funds.   I do not think there is any statistical data, which shows that there is a correlation.  But what we are doing in the future budget starting from this year is that we are beginning to expand development funds to all districts.  And those, which did not get are going to get this year.  So there is no correlation between Appropriation in Aid and Development Fund, which is going to the districts.  As the Minister in his budget speech stated that we are starting even to make sure that development funds does not only stop at the districts but also they go to the level of L.C III of every subcounty in this county.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question -(Interruption)

MR. OPIO:  Sorry I did not respond to Hon. Lukyamuzi's last question.  Well, we know that Appropriation-in-Aid is going to be part income and revenue for every district and therefore Rubaga must be an area where they need income and revenue and I am sure that will be part of our concern as well. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of shs. 129,777,421,000/= be approved as a vote on account for current expenditure under the 45 districts for the Fiscal Year 2000/2001.  

(Question put and agreed to)

DISTRICTS DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 32,109,659,000/= be approved a Vote-on-Account for Development Expenditure for the 45 districts for the fiscal year 2000/2001.

(Question put and agreed to)

MUNICIPAL COUNCILS – RECURRENT EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shillings 1,021,434,000/= be approved as a Vote-on-Account for Recurrent Expenditure for the 13 Municipal Councils for fiscal year 2000/2001.

(Question put and agreed to)

MUNICIPAL COUNCILS – DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 2,853,068,000/= be approved as a Vote-on-Account for Development Expenditure for 13 Municipal  Councils for fiscal year 2000/2001.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND IVESTMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio):   Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply to report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND IVESTMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio):   Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered and approved the Vote-on-Account for the 49 line ministries, 45 districts and 13 Municipalities.  I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND IVESTMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio):   Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, the Vote-on-Account has been approved. (Applause) Hon. Members, we come to the end of today’s business, and we adjourn the House until Tuesday, 4th July, 2000, to enable you to go to your Constituencies to mobilise the people to exercise their right under Article 271.  The House is adjourned.  

(The House rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until 4th July, 2000, at 2.30 p.m.)
