Thursday, 25 June 2009 

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I have just two small matters. One is that I will adjust the Order Paper to permit the Minister of State for Environment to make a statement and the clerk will announce when. 

The second one is to ask you to join me in welcoming students and teachers of Mukono Parents’ High School, Mukono District, represented by hon. Bakaluba Mukasa. They are up there. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.42 
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and it concerns the health of the citizens of this country. I was here yesterday when I received a call that one of my relatives had fallen sick and I told them to go to Jinja Regional Referral Hospital which is in Busoga. When I went back, I took the trouble to pass by and check on the patient but what I found in the regional hospital was pathetic. 

In the regional hospital, there is total lack of drugs such as Panadol, Septrin and other drugs which are essential to the lives of Ugandans. But what perturbed me most was that even the medical officers, the doctors do not have gloves to use in theatre! What this implies is that we are putting the lives of many of our citizens at risk. If there are no essential drugs to be used by the medical doctors and yet we have few doctors around, then I think something needs to be done.

I want to ask government to tell us why we are having all this because when I rang other areas in the Eastern region, they told me the same problem; that there are no drugs and essentials used by the medical doctors. Where do we intend to go as Government, and more so the party in power? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.45 
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Dear colleagues, this is a matter regarding the Police of Uganda. Of late, you cannot tell who a member of the Uganda Police Force is. 

On Sunday when I was coming from my constituency at a place called Kingo in Masaka District, I found a roadblock at about 7.30 p.m. and it was manned by people in uniform similar to that of the army. We call it madoadoa. I wondered why the army had put a roadblock in my constituency without informing me –(Laughter)- and they told me that they were the police. 

Normally, they always put roadblocks to check against criminals and I am not against them but the problem is that today you will find a section of the police in a blue uniform; another section is in Khaki, another section is in white, others are in black and maroon. 

With the recent killings in the country, we have private security companies that have also got uniforms. Can the government tell us whether the Uganda Police Force has a gazetted uniform? If not, isn’t it time that we had a known uniform such that when you see that kind of uniform, you know it is for the Uganda Police Force? That is my concern – (Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. Further to that concern, there so many guns with the population and with that concern, there are members who are not in any of those uniforms mentioned but are in civilian attire. Some of them are so smart that you cannot believe they have a gun. 

You remember what happened at Garden City; we saw a man and you could think he was going for a wedding but he pulled out an assault rifle. Recently in Nangabo when the drivers fought, the police that came were not in uniform. Yesterday on TV when they were uprooting Marijuana somewhere in Masaka, some of the so-called policemen were not in uniform. They were in blue trousers and white shirts. So, like my colleague said, I think some action should be taken. We do not know who is legitimate to carry around these assault rifles and what kind of uniform should be looked at especially when it comes to the civilian attire. 

Madam Speaker, there are certain uniforms that come with these second hand bales in Owino and when they are opened, there are people who put them on. When they go for their fetes or while enjoying their weekends in some of these nightclubs, some of the civilians put on these clothes and they pretend to be security officers. I think it is high time we prevented such kind of murders that are taking place. It is high time we arraigned these people and Government comes out to give a clear picture of who should carry the gun and what kind of uniform should be allowed.

MR KAWUMA: Thank you colleague for giving way. With the rate of increased murders and criminality in the city, I think this matter needs to be addressed with the necessity it deserves. Besides uniform and the using of guns unnecessarily, unknown persons, sometimes in plain clothes, use vehicles with private number plates and move on the streets and arrest people.

I will give a reference. In my constituency, vehicles with private number plates and tinted windows come and make arrests anyhow. You cannot know whether these are legitimate law enforcement officers or criminals. I think the right ministry needs to address and respond to this issue with a lot of seriousness. Thank you.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: So, Madam Speaker, I am concerned especially because we now have several private security companies and we have recently seen that these security companies are also killing people they are supposed to guard. So, I think it is high time this country had a gazetted or a known uniform. 

When you visit any country in the world and you see their police, you are able to tell that that is the police of that country. I do not mind the secret police but the police that are supposed to be in public should be in a uniform that is well known like we used to have after independence. It is only in this regime that I have seen people belonging to Uganda Police in various uniforms. 

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national concern and importance. It is in The Red Pepper, volume 8, No.368, Thursday, June 18 2009. The story, “Six MPs face arrest over new rebel group”, is on the front page and the details are on page 2.

Madam Speaker, we are worried. When you read through this article you find that they have put it “exclusive” and then “shocking details”, “international front” and “concept paper”. We are now forced to behave like the Lord Jesus Christ’s disciples who asked him, “Is it I?” when things were hot. So, six MPs face arrest over a new rebel group whose name is the Uganda People’s Front (UPF).

The concern is: who are these six MPs? There is also one high profile chairperson and all are from the Acholi sub-region. When it comes to analysing the story, my concern is that Apac District in Lango sub-region is mentioned alongside other districts. So we want to know, is this how the government is operating? And then, is there real rebel activity in this country? 

MR KYANJO: Thank you dear colleague for giving way. I thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give my colleague is that the matter he is raising is taking diverse dimensions and these are exceedingly worrying. 

Yesterday, information was available all over radio to the effect that the constituencies of the Speaker of this House, Edward Ssekandi, and the hon. Minister of ICT, Alintuma Nsambu, are infested with rebels whose name I was not able to write down. It is important for the Minister of Defence and the one of internal affairs to come out and clear the air including, but not limited to, specifics of the questions my colleague is raising. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I am giving is that about two months ago, the Woman MP of Gulu, hon. Betty Aol went to address students of National Teacher’s Colleague Ogunyama in my constituency. While she was addressing these students, the RDC of Gulu, Lt Col Walter Ochora, ordered soldiers who went there and surrounded her. They blocked her from addressing the students on allegations that she was recruiting rebels in that NTC. 

Since that time, this allegation of rebel recruitment has been publicly pronounced by the RDC of Gulu and I think Government knows because this is not a Red Pepper thing only. The Red Pepper is alluding to statements by Government officials and I think it is important that the Leader of Government Business comes up and clarifies this matter because as we head to 2011, rebel groups should not be manufactured as a political approach to address the 2011 elections. 

You remember, Madam Speaker, that I was a victim in 2005 of these close allegations. In 2003/2004, there was also a creation of a rebel group in Lango called the Citizen’s Army. So, I think this element of rebels being created and rebels coming up must really be clarified on the Floor of this House. I can speak for the people of Acholi and say that we will never be taken for granted again. You will be playing with fire that you will fail to put out should you abuse the people and their leaders.

Why should you create something that does not exist? If somebody is involved in rebellion, why must you go to the newspaper or the radio? Why don’t you use the state machinery to get hold of these people, produce them in court and let the law take its own course instead of going to radio, talk shows and talking about allegations of rebel groups and even threatening members of Parliament and blocking them from addressing students of National Teacher’s Colleges? I think this is really unbecoming. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gutmoi, I thought you were going to ask the government whether they are aware about that but it appears as if the government is the one which is - you ask your question: “Is the government aware about that?” If you want them to make a statement –

MR GUTMOI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The question is: considering the allegation that the training bases are near Bweyale in Masindi and then Lutanya hills in Pader District, is government aware of this new rebel group called the UPF? The training activities have been going on and no arrests have been made and yet it has been mentioned that the training activities are right here in Uganda. We now want to implicate our neighbouring country Kenya in the harbouring of the rebel headquarters in Nairobi. So, can government clarify whether the training grounds are in Nairobi or in Uganda? Also clarify on the six MPs who are alleged to be involved and who they are. 

I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, that government does this in a specified time. Otherwise, this kind of rebel activities caused the loss of lives under what was called the Campaign Against Multi-Party Politics, which also led to the death of the late Brig. Opon Ocaka; and we are up to date disappointed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you should limit yourself to asking whether the Government is aware or not. Government Chief Whip, can you tell us what is happening?

2.59
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A number of issues have been raised on top of the allegations regarding rebel recruitment.

Maybe let me start with the issue raised by hon. Gutmoi regarding the newspaper story. I would like to say that I am going to take up this matter with the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Security. I am sure next week on Thursday we shall be in a position to comment on what you have read in the newspapers. 

However, I would also like to caution that newspapers sometimes just tend to come up with stories; it is always better that you give investigations a chance –(Mr Okupa rose_)- really I cannot clarify anything save for the fact that I will be in a position –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. I would like to provide further information so that as Government responds to the concerns of hon. Gutmoi, it also responds to ours. I am saying this because the same allegations have been made against the people of Teso sub-region to the effect that there is a rebel outfit in that area. The allegations also say that the said rebel outfit is operating in Soroti District. 

But for the record, I would like to inform this House that the people of Teso abandoned rebellion ages ago; none of them wants to rebel again.

Therefore, as government responds to hon. Gutmoi concerns, they should reassure the people of Teso; we are so certain as leaders that there are no rebels in Teso. You will recall very well that when the LRA infiltrated Teso, the first people to inform government that there were rebels playing football in Obalang were us, the Members of Parliament though government at the time had been denying that. This shows we are a group of people who still believe that there is no need for rebellion in Teso because we know when and how to use our ballot paper to display our anger if we are angry. 

It is on the basis on this that I am now calling upon the honourable minister to reassure the people of Teso because it is not a mere joke to say –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, can you please call hon. Kabwegyere to order –(Laughter)– he is trivialising a very serious issue that has to do with the lives of the many people -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Alaso who has just said that there was a rebel group in Teso and that she stood on this Floor and said that the rebels were playing football, to now tell us that it is impossible for such a thing to happen again? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think let us give the Government Chief Whip time to assure us on when the statement will be brought.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you for that wise ruling -(Mr Okupa rose_)- I am also just giving information, hon. Okupa. Just hold on for a minute. 

What I was saying is that we are concerned particularly because the people propagating these allegations are actually the people in authority in Soroti District and to be specific, they are from the Office of the Resident District Commissioner. I can understand hon. Kabwegyere’s positions because when there is a disaster we will definitely need his services. I can now take information from hon. Okupa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, I want to go to the Order Paper. Government Chief Whip, please respond.

MR MIGEREKO: I have given the necessary assurances. Much as I know that some thugs were arrested from that area, I know that the NRM way of doing things is to first study the situation by carrying out investigations before taking prompt action.

On the issue –(Interjections)- really let the minister responsible for internal affairs come with an authoritative statement; you will be in a position to provide more information. Otherwise, I will also communicate that you happen to have some vital information, which can be taken advantage of by the State.

On the issue of uniform for the security agencies, I would like to say that is a matter that we shall also take up so that Members and the country at large can be assured by the Minister of Internal Affairs regarding the issue of standardising uniform for the police -(Mr Okupa rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, Hon. Members. Minister, please continue.

MR MIGEREKO: And regarding the issue of drugs and the state of affairs in our health sector, I would like to say that I also will be taking it up with the hon. Minister of Health later because all the sector ministers are currently out of station.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Finance.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, MICROFINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to present government’s request to borrow UA 35 million from the African Development Fund (ADF) of the African Development Bank Group to support the Kampala Sanitation Programme, Phase I. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The request is committed to the relevant commit for perusal and report back.

STATEMENT BY THE HON. MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank my colleagues.

I rise here to present a very brief statement to Parliament on attacks made yesterday on staff and property of the National Forestry Authority in Bufumbe Central Forest Reserve in Mukono District. 

Yesterday, on 24 June 2009, illegal timber cutting and charcoal burning were detected in Bufumbe Central Forest Reserve in Buikwe Mukono District by the Resident District Commissioner and NFA field staff. The field staff immediately arrested three suspects; two ferrying timber and one cultivating in the reserve. The other people doing illegal activities had run away. 

Before the law enforcement team from the headquarters could arrive to the site to beef up security, the culprits plus other community members attacked the field staff, set them into disarray and an NFA vehicle UAA 481F Suzuki Baruti was set ablaze. The NFA driver Mr Ambrose Tibarimu was severely hacked; he was left for the dead. But Police from Kiyindi landing site who quickly responded to a call from a village councillor came and took him to a clinic in the same area. Mr Ambrose Tibarimu has been transferred to Nsambya Hospital where he is being treated for very severe cuts. 

The sector manager with a law enforcement unit made an effort to locate the other four missing NFA staff through phone calls and thank God they managed to pick them from their hideouts last evening. So far, no arrests have been done yet on the attackers but they are being hunted by the Police.   

It is very important to note that the NFA staff are always on routine patrol and by yesterday they had gone to Bufumbe Central Forest Reserve on their routine patrol. It is also important to note that people in this particular area had not been involved in such acts of violence before. 

We, therefore, ask for support from all of you colleagues, the Police, district and other local leaders in the communities, particularly in Mukono and all parts of the country in addressing such issues of lawlessness.

In January this year, Madam Speaker, you remember that in Masaka, two NFA staff were hacked to death: Ezati Alfred and Emmanuel Asimwe were completely hacked to death. And one other staff was severely hurt too. 

Government is currying out consultations on establishment of environmental Police and law enforcement in the environment sector. So I call upon you colleagues to support us to educate out people so that they can stop such illegal activities. And if they want to participate in activities in the central forest reserve, we always have collaborative arrangements in the communities. So they should know this and desist from killing innocent civilians. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.10
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard the minister appeal to the House for support. But she was not clear about what kind of support she would like this House to give. This is a criminal act and given the incidents that have happened before, I would have expected her to seek support from the Inspector General of Police for them to arm the enforcement staff. Now that she wants support from us, let her be specific. In such a situation, what kind of support would you like this House to give you? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.13
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is an issue that we should not take lightly; it happened in Butamira, it happened in Mukono and it recently happened in Masaka. My request is that the minister should go out there – there are some incidences that happen and when not handled well, they refuel this illegal wood cutting. 

In June 2008, a lorry belonging to Sarah Nkonge, one of the top officials of NFA Board, who is also attached to the Office of the Vice-President, was impounded. It was ferrying timber after midnight from Rwamwanda and Buto-Buvuma central forest reserves. 

She put a lot of pressure on the NFA staff to release her vehicle. In fact I feel that since this incident was in Mukono, she could even have a hand in it. So deal with her quickly because she is a board member and the evidence is there that she did this act. These are the people who support such things because I do not see how ordinary people can get the authority and the power to hack NFA enforcement who are some times armed. This means they have authority and have backing of high ranked people like Sarah Nkonge who is a board member and is also attached to the Office of the Vice-President.  

3.14
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The statement from the minister raises a lot of concern on the behaviour of the people who are out to destroy the environment in this country. Like hon. Kigyagi has said, this issue is spreading almost in every part of our forests. 

But the other point I want to make is about the behaviour of the people charged with keeping the forest areas. For example in my own area, last week, I spent along time refraining people from coming into direct confrontation with the rangers on Mt. Elgon National Park. 

Earlier on, these staff had agreed with the people to allow them plant their crops along the boundary. The maize had grown up to flowering stage, and then the same people came and started cutting down all the maize along the same area. So the people became so infuriated; they had spent their money to dig and buy seeds, and now it was destroyed. So the minister needs to tell these people to try and collaborate with the locals –(Interruptions)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give additional information on the behaviour of some of the officials of National Forestry Authority. 

In my constituency in Unyama close to Abera forest, people have lived there for over 20 years but when they got displaced by war and went to Unyama camps, the forestry authorities went and planted trees in their homesteads. When people wanted to go back to where they were originally from when the war was over, they had nowhere to go and the forestry authority was extremely arrogant, although we helped them negotiate and talk to the people who were not hostile. The authority continued putting sign posts in places, which are not theirs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Toskin, please wind up.

MR TOSKIN: Madam Speaker, the point I wanted to bring forward is that there should be a relationship especially with people who live along forest areas and there is also need for a lot of education. Relationship with the people would also help curtail those who come to cut and ferry away timber. This is very important if we are going to establish peace in the area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please just elucidate, don’t debate.

3.18
MR JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What the Minister of Environment has told us is a pathetic situation and I would like to give the minister a tip. 

I used to work with Uganda Wildlife Authority and we also used to have a lot of problems with the national parks. The way we managed it was by involving communities in policing or patrolling those areas. 

My advice to the minister is to borrow a leaf from Uganda Wildlife Authority and involve the communities in carrying out intelligence and policing of the forest so that information gets to you as soon as possible. In the national parks, the intensity of illegal poaching has gone down as a result of this.

Secondly, I also advise the minister that the National Forestry Authority should work very closely with Uganda Wildlife Authority. In case the rate of violence is going up, National Forestry Authority can also ask for services in terms of patrol rangers from Uganda Wildlife Authority and they will be able to curb this. Thank you.

3.19
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Central): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The good thing is that we are no longer amateur MPs; we have had the opportunity to go to the field and see what goes on there. 

About six months ago, Members of the Committee on Equal Opportunities visited Kisoro and met people we call the Batwa. We also visited Bundibugyo and met the pygmies. In both cases, we were told that their relationship with the National Forestry Authority can be likened to that of a lion and dog. The local community especially the Batwa and pygmies believe that National Forestry Authority’s objective is to deny them a living. They look at them as a group of terrorists who are not making any contribution to the development of this country but exploiting the two communities. 

Therefore, while I appreciate the statement given by the hon. minister, I urge her to please go on the ground and understand the relationship otherwise if you keep on assuming that things are in order when you have not understood the actual situation on the ground, things will not work out. These people are marginalised, they are minorities and they are poor but when you push them too far to the wall, they will do everything they can to preserve themselves. This is the law of nature and you cannot change it. Therefore I beg that you go and find out the relationship between your officials and the local communities and then we shall have a long term resolution. Thank you so much.

3.22
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for the quick statement to this Parliament of what happened yesterday. As I go through the statement, I find two things outstanding. One is that I think that the entire truth has not been told. There is something that is still lacking and some information has been withheld from this House.

Secondly, I find the situation, as it happened, a bit confusing and baffling. This is because yesterday as this event happened, the staff of NFA were with the Resident District Commissioner. These RDCs don’t walk like us civilians but have some armed security with them. I am wondering how this happened and the story of how the RDC helped the situation has not come out. Probably I would like my colleague to give more light on that. 

In the same breath, the minister states that there is routine checking in these places and yet they discovered farming taking place in this forest. I don’t know how routine the checking is and she should give more light on that because if routine patrol is on and farming has also been going on, how long ago –(Member timed out_)

3.24
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This incident happened in my constituency in Najja sub-county in Buikwe South constituency and I know the forest very well. There are a number of issues I want to address specifically about the illegal lumberjacks within the forest in the constituency and the consequences they have caused to the environment; and the danger to the lives; and their empowerment by the people in the army and other big people elsewhere.

There had been community collaboration with NFA staff before. Some of these people would even risk their lives to try and arrest those whom they caught in the illegal acts. One person whom I have seen had his thumb cut off and part of his limb too. He has not received any redress from government despite the fact that he had been contracted as a local person to collaborate with those staff of NFA in Mukono District to ensure that this illegal practice is curbed. 

Not taking responsibility on the part of NFA staff has reduced the collaboration between them and the people on the ground who otherwise would have alerted the NFA staff so as to ensure that illegal lumbering does not take place. 

The second issue is about the licensing of those who go and clear these forests by NFA at the district level. Many of these guys are very rich men and they licence for those who are powerful enough and they have big men who send them out. Their timber is never confiscated, and yet those who harvest some of the trees have their timber seized. I can see that this is something that is brewing discontent to the extent of meting violence towards the NFA staff. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke and then the Minister will come in to answer. But do not debate; just ask elucidatory questions. If you debate you will spend too much time.

3.27
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you. Madam Speaker, my intervention is very brief and I am just saying that I am very sympathetic with the hon. Jessica Eriyo because it is one thing being minister and it is another knowing how the system you are serving works. 

In the past 23 years, for the first time in the history of Uganda, we saw cattle keepers herding their cattle not with long sticks but with guns. And when you go to many forests in Uganda and you look at the people doing lumbering and illegal tree cutting, they have guns. Where do these guns come from? Who is giving cattle keepers and illegal lumberjacks guns? Hon. Jessica Eriyo, you have come to a wrong forum. You know where these guns are coming from; you know who is arming these fellows. Please go back to that person and tell him to stop doing that; stop militarising everything. I want to thank you.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Mabikke was trying to make a point for me to join his party but I think I am in the best party and in the best government. 

Those who are holding illegal guns; I think you know very well that this government is disarming them and if you have clear information on those who are holding illegal guns, I think you know the relevant department to report to. If you have known this and you have not reported to the relevant department and then you just rise up to give the information on the Floor of Parliament, I think this is not sufficient in dealing with the problem. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues for the issues that they have raised. First of all, hon. Dombo, the support that I seek from colleagues in Parliament is quite a lot. One is for you to condemn this kind of act, the illegal acts; for you to mobilise your constituencies to understand how to work with government to benefit from the natural resources that we have; for you to support my sector in the budgeting process; for you to support my sector in identifying these kind of bad activities that are going on in this country so that they can be resolved. The list goes on and on. And in this matter, I appeal to my colleagues from Mukono to first of all go and calm the situation in their areas but to also work closely with the RDC’s office. 

My colleague, hon. Beatrice Anywar, asked about the RDC. The RDC was invited to a meeting in the nearby village where the illegal activity was taking place. He was not with the NFA staff. After getting the information, he called the Range Manager who also called the Sector Manager, who had already got information from those patrolling. So, the Resident District Commissioner and the NFA staff then worked together to handle the situation and arrest those people. There was also a funeral in that same area. 

But what I did not say here is that as the illegal activity takes place, there are those who are stationed to wait by the roadside. So when those at the roadside saw the NFA vehicle coming, they made an alarm. When they alarmed, those who were doing the illegal activity started to run; but they also came and surrounded the vehicle. As I said, they were just four people in this vehicle; the law enforcement team was very far away in Kampala. 

On the issue of collaboration; the law is clear about collaboration. Fifteen percent of the central forest reserve is supposed to be managed with the communities and in many areas where the communities have collaborated, they have benefited. Unfortunately, in some areas, the communities think that they should do whatever they want in the forest reserve: settle there, build houses, cultivate and yet there are activities that they can do and benefit from even much more than the illegal activities that they are doing there. 

What hon. Okumu raised will be confirmed. But there are 506 central forest reserves in this country. Some of these have been encroached on over the years. For 20 years or more, some of these people have settled in these forest reserves due to the double production system that government introduced. So, people took it for granted that this was their land. Now as NFA moves around systematically, from one forest reserve to another opening the boundaries, people claim that NFA is chasing them away from the land. 

We need to appeal to these kind of people to understand what NFA is doing because we are also verifying the people who have over the years settled in the forest reserves so that government can bring to this Parliament a proposal on what should be done on encroachment in the forest reserves. 

So let us not stop NFA from opening the boundaries and verifying the number of people who are there; and verifying the kind of developments that have taken place in those areas so that we can have meaningful resolution to the problem of encroachment. 

On the issue of the Batwa; I am very aware about this and hon. Ndeezi should know that there is an association of the Batwa. We have had several meetings with them and in some parts we are even collaborating with them on how to sustainably manage the forest reserves. And this collaboration is still going on but as you have suggested, I will also make a personal visit to these areas in Kisiro and Bundibugyo. But we have had a number of collaborations with them. 

You should also know that some of these people are settled in forest reserves which are national parks or game reserves. So these areas are either managed by NFA or Uganda Wildlife Authority or both and so if they also carry out activities that will threaten the rest of the biodiversity in the forest reserves that will not be allowed. But we are working with them to see how we can co-exist because they are used to living in the reserves and we are working to conserve the reserves which are their homes.  

I think it is not true to say that NFA is licensing or is allowing illegal activities to go on or is confiscating timber from the communities. What is being confiscated in the illegally logged timbre? If your timber is legally logged, stamped and marked, it is not confiscated. You should know that there is collaboration with the communities or individuals who do legal timber logging in specific forest reserves and not all of them. But people take it for granted; they see these activities going on and they also want to go and do their own logging illegally. So it is only the illegal timber that is being confiscated. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very Minister. I think Members will follow up with the general debate and the debate on the budget. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 54/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

3.37
MR MOSES KABUUSU (FDC, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): “In 1990, BABUS Ship which used to dock at Bufumira Island, Bukasa Island, Bukebe Island, Kome Island and Port-Bell, Luzira was discontinued. After 16 years of neglect, in 2006 Government launched a modern and secure Kalangala Ship to prevent inter island transport and communication. And during the said launch, it docked at all the above mentioned islands to the excitement of the islanders. Unfortunately, after the launch the routes were changed and today the ship, under private operations, operates only one route from Kalangala Main Island to Nakiwogo, Entebbe.

Can the Minister inform the House when government intends to provide the islanders with a ship that will facilitate inter island connectivity?”

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Simon Ejua):  I think there is some bit of omission in that question. Thank you very much but you know when I arrived, I found the Order Papers finished and therefore –(Laughter)

MV BABUS Ship belonged to and was operated by URC up to 1998 to provide the transport services to Kalangala District. The ship operated between Port-Bell and Lutokoba via Entebbe Pier, Kome Island, Bukebe Island, Kingu Pier and Bufumira Island. The services of this vessel were terminated in 1998 because of low traffic volumes and long voyage that was not attractive to passengers especially those terminating at Lutokoba that is the main destination. This had resulted into an uneconomical operation of the ship and hence URC decided to terminate the service.

MV Kalangala was procured in 2005 to provide transport services for the people of Kalangala to safely travel to the mainland. Initially the ministry constructed landing sites at Nakiwogo and Lutokoba where a study had estimated viability of operating the ship. During the trial run before commissioning, the ship sailed adjacent to many islands in Kalangala District but did not dock due to unavailable facilities. The ship only docked at Lutokoba on Bugala Island.

The route through all the islands was not considered immediately feasible due to the absence of suitable landing facilities for safe decking, long sailing time to reach the terminal landing, that is, Lutokoba and non-availability of charts navigation aids for safe navigation and low traffic volumes to and fro most islands. 

In view of the above constraints, the most feasible route was, therefore, Nakiwogo–Lutokoba where landing facilities had been constructed and most of the above operational requirements. 

The MV Kalangala operations are, however, under review with the view to change the timetable and the routing to cover additional islands. Additional ships for Kalangala District will be provided for when funds are available. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR KABUUSU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the hon. Minister for the response. However, I wanted to ask a supplementary question to the minister whether he is aware that Kyamuswa constituency is highly populated and has more economic activities related to transport than Bujumba where the ship docks. 

Earlier before the procurement of the ship, the Minister for Transport had given assurance to the people of Kalangala and Kyamuswa that there would be ships. One to link inter-island local governments for the four counties of Kyamuswa which are not accessible at all and promotion of tourism and development in general. 

Three years down the road, MV Kalangala is working; the people of Kyamuswa are demanding for the ship which they saw docking, hon. Minister. The ship docked, so I wanted to hon. Minister to give me an answer. Three years down the road, the ship has been working from Lutoboka to Nakiwogo excluding the people of Kyamuswa who were assured of a ship.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kabuusu, please ask supplementary questions.

MR KABUUSU: Yes. Why not Kyamuswa? (Laughter)

3.45
MR MUHAMAD KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for attempting to respond to the question. The supplementary question I want to ask the Minister is in relation to what is happening in Kampala of recent especially in regard to the bus operators.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. I said that I will be rigorous on supplementaries; they must relate to the subject. Talk about the water and leave the buses; talk about water transport. 

MR KAWUMA: Yes, Madam Speaker. I am making a reference. Why? Because in my constituency in Entebbe where that ship docks, government issued a freehold land title to a private person. In relation to what is happening in Kampala, there is a crisis in bus management because this is a private facility. When you entrust it in the hands of a private sector, what is going to happen?

Secondly, there is a ferry operating from –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now I do not know whether the Minister is in position to answer that one. Why don’t you raise your own substantive question on that matter because it is your municipality? 

3.49
MR FRED BAADA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, I have a few supplementary questions. I want first of all to inform the House that my constituency is the direct beneficiary of this ship because it goes to my constituency.

Hon. Minister, are you aware that according to the contract of this ship it is due to be taken for service for the safety of its users and it has been working daily for three years without service?

Secondly, how long will it stay when it is taken for service and what will be the fallback position for the daily users of this ship? And when is it being taken in order for me to assure my people of safety?

Are you aware that there are light houses that are supposed to be on the lake to enable this ship travel even at night and these light houses were demolished so this ship cannot travel at night? What is the ministry doing about it?

Lastly, are you aware that this was supposed to be a multi-purpose ship supposed to be for passengers and cargo but currently the cargo area is moving empty because the loading machinery is not user friendly. What is government doing in order to rectify the problem? Thank you.

3.49
MR HENRY BALIKOWA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the statement. Related to water transport, on the 11 December 2008 the Ministry of Works and Transport ran an advert for procuring consultant services to provide a ferry on Lake Kyoga. When we interacted with the Minister, he really informed us and informed the country that they were in the process of procuring the consultancy service and the designing would take only nine months. 

On the same matter, on Tuesday, 23 June 2009, the same ministry ran the same advert. Now the question is: can the Minister inform this House how long it takes to procure consultancy services to establish a ferry? 

And two, can the Prime Minister help and tell us how much money has been transferred from his department to the Ministry of Works and Transport in relation to this ferry? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.50
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to differ from the rest; this is water transport and I am grateful to the Ministry of Works that against all odds they procured a ferry between Kayunga and Kamuli. You excited all our people, Madam Speaker, inclusive. But when are you going to commission this ferry to help our people use it? We are desperately waiting for you to inaugurate it. Thank you. (Laughter)
 
3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Simon Ejua):  I think there is indeed a high demand for ferries all over the country and we are aware that on most islands there is dire need for ferries. Even those which are already there operating. Like recently I was in Panyamur and Wanseko; they are in dire need of a ship. So as I concluded the other answer to you, I said it all depends on the availability of money but it is a good thing. As you have told us, we will take it up and see how best we can address it.

Otherwise, I have just learnt from the honourable member about the issue of the landing sites’ title being issued. So I wish to get in touch with him for more details so that we can work together.   

Hon. Badda, I am aware about the service of the ship. I have already told the Director of Transport to communicate to the private operators of the ship and actually what is important is that we need to give the public notice so that they prepare. It is estimated that the service of this ship may take up to one month, and well, it is not possible to get an immediate alternative transport. I really don’t want to lie to you -(Applause and Laughter)- but we can.

On the issue of lighting the lake, we are working on a big project under the East African Community, which is in advanced stages. It is hoped that there will be navigation lights put in strategic positions soon.

And the multi-purpose aspect that the Kalangala ship is supposed to have, I will take this up; and the procurement of consultancy. I think I need to crosscheck whether this is a true statement or not, but I could also help the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister’s Office gave us Shs 2.8 billion – I stand to be corrected. That money is intact. We realised that there was need to have a bigger ship for Lake Kyoga islands, so that is why there was a delay. It was not good enough because the plan at that stage was meant for very small ships or ferries if you like, but we had to change to make it a bit big. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope for the record the minister should note that the Speaker is interested in both the ferry between Kayunga and Kamuli and the ferry which hon. Balikowa talked about. So, I hope you will come with an answer. (Laughter)

QUESTION 58/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

3.56
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): “In 2007, Uganda spent US$1 million to procure and distribute 800,000 energy saving bulbs to households. This intervention yielded an energy consumption reduction by 30 mega watts. 
•	Given the substantial saving, what plans are in place to expand the scheme of distributing free energy saving bulbs to cover the whole country? 
•	Further given the huge saving with energy saving bulbs, is the government considering putting a complete ban on incandescent bulbs?
ii)	In light of the current energy deficit, is the minister considering “a fed-in-tariff’ policy to stimulate private investments in renewable energy industry thereby guaranteeing that all privately generated electricity from solar, wind and other sources shall be sold to the electricity grid at a favourable price?
iii)	What plans are in place to exploit the massive potential for geothermal energy given the abundance of non-polluting geothermal energy in Uganda’s valley?”

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Question 58/1/08 by hon. Kigyagi has three parts. To part (i), the first bullet, we respond as follows:

Giving out free energy savers in perpetuity is not sustainable. Energy savers were distributed and the target was to cover pilot centres as a means of creating public awareness. With awareness created, a number of distributors and agents are selling these bulbs now and this has been ongoing and the public can now access these bulbs at reasonable prices. In other words, there is no intention in the near future to expand this scheme.

In bullet two, we respond that government has not considered the ban on incandescent bulbs because the market of energy savers is still growing. As I said earlier on, the marketing structure is not fully developed throughout the country. However, there is physical policy of taxation in place. Tax has been removed from energy savers and these measures have brought down the price from around Shs 15,000 to about Shs 5,000 now.

The second part of this question, we have the following response. The “fed-in-tariff” policy is already in place and it is provided for in a renewable energy policy in Uganda and this policy has been in place since 2007 and these tariffs are now being revised to address the concern by private developers. Some projects have already taken advantage of in this “fed-in-tariff.” 

The third part of the question, allow me to define geothermal as the heat from under the ground in some places especially in the Western Rift Valley where there are hot springs, which come from underground, and technology is now available to harness this energy to generate electricity. 

So, our answer is that exploration for geothermal energy in Uganda has been in progress since 1993 and most recently, between 2005 and 2007, surface exploration of three major geothermal areas and these are Katwe, Kigorongo, this is in Katwe area, Kasese District, Buranga and Kibiro, and all these are located in the Western Rift Valley in Uganda.

The recent study results show good potential for harnessing geothermal resources and drilling of six shallow boreholes to the depth of 300 metres for temperature gradient in Katwe and Kibiro geothermal prospects were completed. The results suggest deep reservoirs in Katwe and Kibiro. Earlier on we had thought that these reservoirs were nearer than a kilometre but now they look to be farther on.

The ministry is now proposing to take the study further by using geophysical methods that are capable of probing in the deeper layers of the sub-surface to delineate anomalous areas in Katwe and Kibiro and to locate the deep reservoirs. 

In Buranga where the study is not advanced like in Katwe and Kibiro, the ministry is proposing to carry out preliminary geophysical surveys also to delineate anomalous areas that could be targets for deep drilling.

In the ministry we are taking this study seriously because geothermal power stations are quicker than the usual hydro and also they are renewable like hydro. 

We have as our future activities the exploration drilling on the most promising areas in the next phase. The objective of this phase is to drill at selected sites in one or two areas and from there we shall get enough data to prepare technical and financial investment plans for the installation of appropriately sized power plants.

But this is a new area and we will need to train more Ugandans in this branch of science. I would like to inform the House that I have just returned from Addis Ababa where all the ministers of energy discussed this matter in detail because geothermal occurs right from Ethiopia to Malawi in the East African Rift Valley. UNIDO together with a centre for science in Italy are going to help us with the subject; they have offered to train some of our young people in this field. We will evaluate the project design and financing. 

Alongside this rather expensive venture, sociological and environmental baseline studies, and infrastructure and pre-feasibility assessment have to be done. I thank you.

4.04
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): The minister says the renewable energy policy was passed in 2007 - I think the minister should be courteous and pass this policy on to Members of Parliament. I do not know how many of us have this kind of statement yet we need it.

In your view, hon. Minister, do you think it is necessary now that the policy was passed to establish a fit-in legislation to encourage and kick start investment into the renewable energy apart from hydro? Because a policy will not give a law and the investors cannot work on policy. We need a fit-in law to be able to attract them into this investment. 

Sometime ago I read in the papers that you had failed to distribute the balance of the 200,000 energy saving bulbs and the World Bank was asking you to look for some organisation to distribute them. Is it true? If it is true, why doesn’t Umeme which was distributing these bulbs go ahead and complete this exercise?

By distributing bulbs worth US $1 million, you saved 30 megawatts of power. Yet to generate 30 megawatts of power, you know how much money you spend, Mr Minister. I thought it would be prudent if I were a minister to even spend US $5 million and save up to 100 megawatts of power because it is very expensive to generate 100 megawatts as compared to the savings that you will make. I thank you.

4.06
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Youth): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the Government of Uganda aware that our Kenyan counterparts have a very good and viable geothermal energy plant? And if so, what lessons have we learnt from the Kenyan experience and how are we going to translate those lessons into action in Uganda?

4.07
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you. Does the honourable minister consider it fair to distribute energy saving bulbs to the urban areas, especially in Kampala, which he assured the committee when they asked him that this is just for these areas and more bulbs will be given to the other areas especially where the poorer people are? Is the minister saying that he has now changed from that position and instead tactfully brought bulbs which he gave the affluent people around and now he cannot distribute to the poor people in the rural areas?

4.08
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2005/2006, work started in one of the areas in my constituency to install a power line from Rwitera in Rutete sub-county. But at the height of campaigns in 2006, the staff and materials were shifted from that area to Ntungamo which I think was taken to be a more deserving area. (Laughter) After raising the hopes of my people and they had started installing maize mills et cetera, they have waited in vain. Where is fairness in this country? 

Two, when is work resuming on this line?

4.09
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a power station in my constituency called Maziba Gorge power station which used to supply power to the whole of Kabale District as it was then. But since 1992 to date, it has been let down and is now in total disuse. Does the ministry know the existence of that power station and if it does what plans it has to revamp it to produce power for the people?

Secondly, I was talking to a Norwegian three years ago who had discovered a potential of electricity from gases in the valleys of Kabale cutting across the counties of Ndorwa and Rubanda and that it has the potential to generate 100 Megawatts of power. Is the ministry aware of that research and if so, what plans does it have to use that power? Thank you.

4.10 
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About a month ago the Faculty of Technology of Makerere University displayed some cheap technology on TV which they said could generate and distribute power. Has the minister been in touch with Makerere University to help some of us who need such kind of technology because they said it can generate power from shallow water sources? Has the minister been in touch to help the general populace on how we can make use of this technology?

4.11
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Minister. I note that Uganda got a loan to acquire bulbs. Therefore, it is an appreciation that we did not have enough money to run the sector. I, therefore, wonder why Umeme staff destroys facilities that were bought on loan. 

In Masaka District, Umeme has taken on a habit of cutting wires into pieces wherever it finds illegal disconnections. Why don’t they handle these facilities that are acquired on loan in a proper manner so that they are not destroyed? And as a result, I would like to find out from the minister whether this is one of the causes in the increase in tariffs because the Umeme tariffs are increasing daily.

The ministry is trying to distribute bulbs but I would also like to find out from the minister what the plan for expanding electrification especially in the rural areas in Masaka is. I usually visit Umeme offices but I have never seen the plan. Even the ministry has never given us a plan to say that maybe in two years time we shall have reached this area. There is no accountability to show us what was done. I want to find out whether this plan is there on a monthly basis and what is being done by the ministry to sell their facility because people –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please ask supplementaries.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I have a supplementary question that I wanted to finish -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, ask the minister: “What plans does Umeme have to do a, b, c?” But now you are on preamble!

MS MUGERWA: Thank you very much for the guidance, Madam Speaker. What plans does the ministry have to tell us the system or the methodology it is using to expand electricity in the rural areas especially in Masaka?

Secondly, what happened to the electric poles that were put in Bukomansimbi because recently –(Member timed out_) 

4.15 
MR ACHIA REMEGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for these responses and to ask him two supplementary questions. One, is the ministry aware that besides the Western Rift Valley, there are a number of other areas in the country with geothermal energy particularly the famous Opoka springs in Kidepo National Park, in Pire and in Loyoro? If so, what plans are there to evaluate the potential of these areas to also produce geothermal electricity?

Secondly, what plans does the ministry have with respect to the development of wind and solar energy, particularly in areas of our country where the potential for hydro power is as good as other sources of energy? Thank you.

4.16 
MR ELIJAH KYETUNDA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When areas that had power generation in the last years had nothing to benefit from the energy that was being produced from those areas - Jinja being one of them and Kasese where power was generated from the Kilembe mines - I must appreciate the efforts of government where a policy was – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, ask the minister: “Why hasn’t Kasese benefited from the power being made in Kilembe mines?” Please, just ask. 

MR KYETUNDA: My question to the minister therefore is, how are these areas that now have these power generating projects like Nyagak, Bugoye going to benefit from these schemes because when you go to the regulatory authority, they say it is the other side? Thank you.

4.17 
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Instead of investing in expensive diesel driven engines, why has it taken long for government to exploit and venture into the geothermal energy? 

Can you take up this geothermal energy instead of relying on the dwindling waters for the hydro power? 

Thirdly, are you aware that at 100 percent exploitation the Naivasha plant in Kenya is able to generate 5,000 megawatts of power? Thank you.

4.18  
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, the minister has informed us that the preliminary survey was able to reach only 300 metres. Is the minister aware that the same team that carried out the survey advised government that it is not economically viable to hit anything far below 300 metres?

4.18 
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two questions. One, what plans does government or the Ministry of Energy have to rehabilitate or reconstruct the existing power lines that were destroyed as a result of the war in Northern Uganda? A case in point is Ayer-Loro line, Lira-Aloyola power line and Serere-Bukondo line.

Two, what criteria are used by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to select areas to benefit from the Rural Electrification Project?

The third one and the last one is, what mechanism is put in place by the Minister of Energy to control the excesses of Umeme in over charging and faking bills to the customers of electricity?

4.20
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three questions. I would like to know from the minister if there is a scheme to cater for this kind of garbage. That is, are the bulbs that were collected from the households going to be disposed of, reused or recycled?

I would also like to know whether there are any plans to legislate energy efficient measures to support this energy saving problem.

Lastly, these normal light bulbs produce a lot of heat in that while only 5 percent of the electricity goes to light the bulbs a whole 95 percent is just heat. Heat is very dangerous. It affects newly born babies and young children and also contributes to climate change. I would like to ask government whether there is any plan to announce a total ban of these normal light bulbs just like other countries did. Australia announced a total ban of these bulbs by 2010 and even other countries like USA have.

4.22
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is related to question No. 2 about solar energy. Of the 60,000 households in Kilak, only 22 households benefit from electricity from the national grid. 

My question is: is the minister considering highly subsidising the solar energy sector so that most of the households in the country can benefit form solar lighting?

4.23
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You realise that a number of lower urban centres are growing rapidly to the extent that the transformers that were installed earlier cannot supply power regularly to the rapidly growing centres. A case in point is Ngora. I would like to find out what plans the ministry has to supply bigger transformers to cope with the increasing demand of power in such centres. Ngora, for example, has been in a black out for so many months because of a low capacity transformer. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, concerning the energy saving bulbs, the Government of Cuba was able to donate to the giant, South Africa, so many energy saving bulbs. You know that is the economic giant of this continent. When I went there in February they were wondering when the Ministry of Energy of this country would go to activate the joint commission between Cuba and Uganda. I would like you to take that up and ensure that we get those bulbs so that we help this country. Thank you. 

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker, thank you for that. We will take it up immediately and we will follow up accordingly.

I would like to thank my colleagues for raising these issues. Such follow up questions will help me to make clarifications as well.

The follow up question from hon. Kigyagi is: is there new legislation for renewable energy? He said that we had a renewable energy policy way back in 2007 and Members received copies. I recall that we distributed a few copies to the Members of the Natural Resources Committee but my ministry will make these copies available to each and everyone of the members here. 

The answer to hon. Kigyagi’s question is, no. However, we have the Electricity Act of 1999 which we are using at the moment.

The other issue was that the balance of energy saving bulbs has not been distributed. Sometime back we had some difficulty with the administration costs for the distribution but I am glad that some budget line is available to distribute the rest.

Also, hon. Kigyagi asked that if we could save 30 megawatts with 800,000 bulbs, why don’t we find more? As I said before, the distribution of a few bulbs was to stimulate and create awareness among the public so that this can become part and parcel of our consumption. It is also in the interest of the consumer because their energy bills are considerably cut. So, for the time being we do not intend to budget for distribution of more energy saving bulbs. What we are doing now is to emphasise efficient use of electricity and that is where most of our effort is going.

Hon. Wopuwa asked a very pertinent question and said that geothermal energy in Kenya is well advanced. I would like to inform the House that in Africa, Kenya is the leading country in exploitation of geothermal energy. In the last meeting we had with the Ministry of Energy of Kenya, they offered to give training to our scientists. This offer is being handled and we will soon send a few of our people there to learn about this technology.

Hon. Bukeni wanted to know why distribution of bulbs is in Kampala and not to the poor. Well, as I said, the distribution of bulbs was done here because of Kampala and this central area being the load centre - most of the difficulties with power consumption are here. That is why it was thought necessary to reduce the high level consumption. And we said 30 megawatts were taken off. It was not a means of saving money, but a means of reducing consumption. I would like to request Members to look at it in that context.

I must confess that there was a question relating to a rural electrification line in Burahya. I have no answer, but I can promise that I will contact the honourable member to give me more details so that I can be able to check on it.

Hon. Niwagaba said something on Maziba 500KW Power Station. I am glad to inform you that with the help of Germany funding this power station will be rehabilitated. As a matter of fact, the consultant should be on the site having come back from the Northern region. We have funds to do some projects in the North, to build another line from Kampala to Entebbe and repair that one under the GTZ Programme.

There was a question as to whether I am aware of the presence of gas in Kabale. I would like to say that I am not aware, but I am aware of the presence of heat in Kabale. I know that a private company is doing research on it. That mineral can be used for production of electricity.

A Member asked something about working with Faculty of Technology of Makerere University. I would like to inform the Member from Ibanda that yes, we compare notes with the faculties of technology at Makerere, Kyambogo and other universities in general. The science of generating electricity from a flowing river has been in existence for quite sometime. But when we talk about big quantities, then this cannot be applied.

To respond to what hon. Sauda said, I would like to say that the cutting of wires in Mbale, sorry in Masaka – I mentioned Mbale and Masaka because those districts have something in common. Our recent studies have shown that the commercial loss in Mbale and Masaka is 65 percent. In other words, if you sent there 100 units to those two districts, you would lose 65 of them in theft. And indeed there have been some very harsh actions taken by for example cutting the black wires that connect houses to the grid in these two districts. However, I would like to inform the House that this is being contained.

And about rural electrification in Masaka, I would like to say that we are currently doing some work there; we are building a line from Nyendo to Bukakata. I would like to add that we indeed have a plan for rural electrification; this plan is available at the ministry offices. About the Bukomansimbi project, I can only say that I will check on it.

Hon. Remigio Achia, as I said earlier, these geothermal techniques are still new. So I would really be glad if later you direct us to where this hot spring is; we will evaluate it. 

With respect to wind, I would like to say that the speed of wind with the current technology in our country is not good enough. I think Members, whenever you drive along Entebbe Road, you see some wind turbines between the junction of Entebbe/Kampala Roads and the Clock Tower. There are some wind turbines although most times you do not see them turning. Anyway, that should tell you that wind energy in this country is not good. 

But in the Karamoja sub-region and to some extent, Ssese Islands, we have some good wind energy. We are looking at the speed of wind in these areas and all the other islands on Lake Victoria. As you may know, solar energy is still expensive, but the good news is that the whole world is now engaging a lot of money into research. We hope that in the near future mass production out of new technology will bring this cost down. I know that Israel has done quite some good work at this front together with the United States of America. We hope that soon, solar will be cheaper; it still very expensive and being used only for smaller application in health centres and so forth.

There was a question on how a person who stays near Mobuku Hydro Power Station would benefit. I would like to say that the honourable member who asked this question will agree with me that we are currently doing some work in Kasese. In fact the local population there has got its own equivalent of Umeme. I am sure if the system is not commissioned, it will soon be commissioned. Anyway, let me say that for every power source we always want to do a local network.

Hon. Ibi asked a question on diesel versus thermal. I would like to say that diesel is much quicker than thermal. The diesel we have is for emergency; it is to give us time to look at thermal and other sources of power. Thermal source needs drilling and so forth, but diesel though expensive, is very quick to acquire. If you wanted one, you would have it next week.

MR KYETUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think my question has not been answered directly. The question was: how are the local people going to benefit? It was not about when these projects are going to be completed. My question has been answered the other way round. The issue was about how the community around are going to benefit from these projects.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member be clear. Are you talking about benefits in terms of getting power or other social responsibilities? What is it that you want the Minister to answer?

MR KYETUNDA: He should answer all. 

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, these issues were resolved long ago in the Electricity Act. There is some loyalty – I do not have the Act here but those of us who were in the Sixth Parliament remember that we had that debate and some loyalty was included. I had not understood that aspect of the question, I was thinking of net work and transformers. But there is some loyalty.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I also visited Kasese and what I found in Hima was a dispute between the local government and the local authority on the distribution; the quantum on this loyalty. Hima wanted to get more, but the district was taking the bulk and distributing. There was a problem and you need to look at it.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, the disputes are case by case but the law is very clear on this. My ministry has arbitrated in some cases and we think these disputes will continue coming. But the law is very clear on this. I will perhaps discuss it further with the honourable member.

As I had mentioned, hydro-bus is due, but some of these are renewable, but geo-thermo is quicker if you have decided to drill. But there is a danger of drilling and finding a dry well. 

About Naivasha, the geo-thermo capacity there is in excess of 5,000 but they had done only 60 mega watts. In fact when we had a meeting with them, this was a big challenge to the Kenyans. But they had capacity in excess of 7,000. For us here, we have confirmed so far 450 mega watts. But I think if we look closer – I just heard that there is another hot spring somewhere which we shall look at. So we could have more energy from this. 

On hon. Odit’s question, below 300 meters – this is subjective. But there is now technology to reduce the cost of going below. The wells in the other parts of the tropics are up to four kilometres deep and with pressure – which I do not want to go into - let me put it this way; all sources of energy can be harnessed. What is considered is the opportunity cost. Like before we had not thought about bio-gas, but when fuel became too expensive, we started considering bio-gas because it is cost effective compared to the others.

On hon. Otto’s question, not long ago I was in this region and I have initiated work. In fact the specific schemes are now on a World Bank project. In the other areas work is already going on. 

On the criteria we use for rural electrification, first we target the borders, like we are about to do in Amolatar. Secondly, we target fast growing centres along the ways and communities, health centres and so on. That is our order and we have a programme to cover all. We have now cover 10 percent, we want to reach 50 percent at least in the next few years.

On the bills of Umeme, we have just put in a new billing system. We have instructed them to introduce pre-payment meters so that you can control your own expenditures and it will also minimise this commercial loses. 

Hon. Nampijja, when the bulbs are removed, they are disposed of. No energy efficiency measures, I agree with you that this should be legislated. But we will do it systematically. For the time being, we are doing awareness every year. And statistics have shown that if Ugandans can be only 5 percent more efficient than they are now with use of electricity, we would postpone investment in generation capacity considerably.

On the incandescent lights satellite, I know that in Australia they have been banned and I think anther European country had gone the way. We may later go the same way, but as I said, the market for energy saving bulbs is not yet developed. But with time we think it is going to be more beneficial to go for the energy saving bulbs. 

Hon. Ocula, solar is expensive and government already takes no tax on solar equipment, but they are still expensive. But we hope that with more research and mass production the cost will reduce.

Hon. Epetait, system improvement is done case by case. If in Nyora the transformer is over loaded, normally this is manifested in deem lights; Umeme should take this up, after here, I will get more details from you to see how I can help.

Thank you, Madam Speaker. Those were the issues raised, but we are always available for farther discussions. 

QUESTION 61/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

4.46
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Although I do not have a copy of the response as required by our Rules, I wish to proceed:
i)	“Can the Minister of Works and Transport inform this House why the construction of Ntungamo - Rukungiri – Kanungu – Ishsha road stopped in Rukungiri before reaching Kanungu?
ii)	When does the Ministry intend to resume the construction of the road form Rukungiri to Kanungu?
iii)	Is the Minister aware that the road in question has been a government pledge since 1986?
iv)	When does the Minister of Works and Transport intend to construct the Biraara Bridge that connects Rujumbura County (Rukungiri) and Kanungu District?”

4.44
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Baryomunsi for this question. The Ministers for Agriculture are currently out of station – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is for Works!

MR MIGEREKO: Oh, sorry. 

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Simon Ejua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. But Madam Speaker, I beg that we answer this question next time.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You would like us to postpone it to next week?

MR EJUA: Yes; I haven’t come with answers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I defer this question to next week.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I saw how quickly my friend hon. Migereko jumped up. There appears to be a problem with the numbering of the questions. There are two questions sharing the same number: which is which? I think that is why he quickly jumped up to defend agriculture. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you should just go with the sequence – look at them sequentially. Anyway, we know the text of the questions.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sent this question over one year ago – the one on the road to Kanungu, and I am surprised that the ministry is not ready up to now. So I just want you to direct them to give a date when the minister will come and give an answer. Next week is not a date, we want a specific day.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am directing that the minister returns here to answer this question on Thursday next week.

 QUESTION 63/01/08 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY & FISHERIES

4.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, as I report I have been in contact with the Minister, hon. Bright Rwamirama, who is supposed to answer this question. He is not in Kampala, but he has made an undertaking that on Thursday he will be here to answer this question. He has been out of the country as a matter of fact. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you have now committed the government. You recall in the Business Committee there were complaints that 38 questions were still pending and that we are not moving fast enough. Last week we did well but this week we have not done too well. So I will continue putting these questions on the Order Paper as I told you.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, as you must have noticed, there has been marked improvement in regard to the way these questions are being handled on our side as government. I will make sure that this is sustained all the way through. I thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO ADDRESS THE GROWING PROBLEM OF STREET CHILDREN

4.48
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to request the House to move a motion under rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure urging government to address the growing number of street children in this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded by the Youth Representative, Northern Uganda.

MS NALUBEGA: Motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to address the growing number of street children in Uganda. This motion is moved under rule 43.

“WHEREAS Article 34 of the 1995 Uganda Constitution provides for the rights of children particularly to basic education, medical treatment and special protection to orphans and other vulnerable children; 

AND WHEREAS the Children’s Act Cap 59 advocates that children have the right to access basic needs that are fundamental to their holistic growth and development at all levels including the right to food, health, education, love and care, shelter and clothing; 

AND WHEREAS Part three of the Children’s Act specifically provides that it is a general duty of every Local Government to safeguard and promote the welfare of children within its area;

AWARE THAT the number of street children has increased dramatically and significantly over the last two decades in major urban centres in Uganda with majority spending most of their time, day and night, on the streets begging, stealing, using drugs or engaging in prostitution to survive;

NOTING THAT Government programmes like UPE and other previous interventions like the Police arresting these children from the streets and taking them to rehabilitation centres have not addressed the problem;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT children on the streets face hostility, sexual harassment including rape, unlawful arrest and imprisonment and are easy targets to criminal elements involved in human sacrifice and trafficking, which is contrary to the Constitutional provision on the rights of children;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this august House that:
1.	Government carries out a comprehensive study to establish the pull and push factors that are responsible for the rising number of street children
2.	Consequent to the study, government designs appropriate and sustainable interventions to address the phenomenon of street children
3.	Government reports to Parliament on the findings of the study and interventions designed to address the intolerable phenomenon of street children within six months.”

Madam Speaker and hon. members, I beg to move.

I have justification for why I am moving this motion. I am the National Female Youth Member of Parliament and in the streets out there are female youth whom I represent. This phenomenon of street children is not new to us neither can we claim not to know or be aware of its impact on national development. 

Today the number of street children continues to increase from time to time. However these children are people, part of the community and are Ugandans who have the right to enjoy their full rights as citizens of this country as enshrined in the Constitution and in other relevant laws such as the Children’s Act. Unfortunately, street children seem to be foreign to most of us yet it is required by law that Government and other state actors provide for their wellbeing. 

It is only during international events such as CHOGM that directives are issued to remove street children and banish them from entering the streets. At that stage, the image of Uganda is viewed as one that has no street beggars or children. After that, they are left to whom it may concern!

I wish to pose a few questions to this august House. How are we going to achieve national targets such as UPE, USE enrolment and retention of children in schools when our young girls are dropping out at a rate of 31 percent and resorting to street businesses such as begging and prostitution? This not only affects UPE but also causes a burden to Government expenditure such as on health because most of them undergo complications and some die.

We are also promoting Prosperity-for-All. How will the street children prosper? Can the Shs 100 that they beg everyday take them through their whole lives so that they can prosper? How shall we ensure disease control, reduction on maternal mortality and infant mortality when street girls become pregnant at a tender age and have no shelter or food to feed their newborns, which are basics for human development? Who protects the rights of the street children? Do we even know when these children are killed by gangsters? Do we know whether these children live long? Do we know whether they get health care? 

These are Ugandans and people. Everyday they are trafficked. Who knows their whereabouts? They are used as criminal agents and these are our sons and daughters of Africa yet the country seems to be silent and not observing this situation. This is very painful! As a mother –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I am a mother! I wouldn’t feel fine if I found my child on the streets begging. 

The government has to act on these issues. We need to identify the pull factors such as poverty, instability and the issue of parental negligence. In Kampala, there are about 300 street children and there are a number of them in Masese in Jinja. We might think that they are coming from Northern Uganda because of the 25 years of instability but surprisingly, these children are coming from within the central region and maybe Karamoja.

Hon. Members, I believe we can do much if we come out with concrete actions and a comprehensive strategy to address the pull factors. I am convinced that a child in a rehabilitation or reception centre is better than one on the street because his or her security, food and shelter are somehow guaranteed.

Therefore, today I stand here to urge and request you to support this motion so that we can address the plight of these Ugandans suffering on the streets, many of whom are our voters, strong campaigners and sympathisers. Indeed we cannot wish them to be in such an environment as we wouldn’t wish this for our own blood. 

In the same spirit, I wish to ask government to undertake the following measures to end this miserable situation among the children of Uganda. That government should carry out a comprehensive study to establish the pull factors that are responsible for the rising number of street children and also use the study to design appropriate and sustainable interventions to address the phenomenon of street children and to report to this Parliament on the findings within six months. I beg to move. Long live the children of Uganda; long live Africa. For God and my Country! I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.58
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker, I rise to second this motion and in doing so, I would like to remind this Parliament and the country that 14 days ago Uganda joined the rest of Africa in commemorating the day of the African Child. On that day, as I moved downtown in Lira after the district celebrations, I was moved and deeply touched by what I witnessed and I would summarily describe it as a growing social problem of street children in this country.

Street children are people 18 years and below who live on the street and this is their major socialising environment. These young people are deprived of family care, protection and have no adult supervision and care yet they are our very own children.

Our nation Uganda is a signatory to many international conventions on the protection of the rights of children and in addition to our national Constitution and the Children’s Act all passed by this Parliament, Article 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted on December 10th 1948 by the General Assembly of the United Nations without dissent stipulates: “Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance. All children, whether born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy the same social protection.”

On the Sunday that preceded the commemoration of this day, I also attended a church service. I was equally moved by the biblical implication on the importance of children and I was challenged by the preacher, as a leader who is elected by the people and who has a mandate and the power to even make laws because the preacher was talking about child sacrifice, the fate of street children and went ahead to say that it looks like our lawmakers are not looking at these social problems that are affecting this nation. 

He particularly challenged me to read to this House the provision in the Bible, Mark 10:13-16 and it says, “Jesus welcomed children. People brought their small children to Jesus so that He could lay His hands on them to bless them. But the followers told the people to stop bringing their children to Him. Jesus saw what happened; He did not like His followers telling the children not to come so He said to them, ‘Let the little children come to Me; don’t stop them; because God’s Kingdom belongs to people who are like these little children. The truth is, you must accept God’s Kingdom like a little child accepts things or you will never enter it.’ Then Jesus held the children in His arms, laid His hands on them and blessed them.” That is the end of the scripture. 

I have given the legal perspective of the importance of children and the biblical implication and importance of children. Therefore, that has a lot of things to do with the mandate of this Parliament in protecting the rights of children most especially our destitute on the streets. 

As I interacted with these young citizens, they told me that they are on the streets due to a number of reasons: one, the question of family breakdown; secondly, armed conflict; thirdly, poverty; fourthly, famine. That is why we are saying that government must take a comprehensive study and not only wait for CHOGM to get rid of these children and the following day they return on the streets. That is the gist of this motion.

I would like to urge Members of Parliament to put ourselves in the shoes of these children. These are children born in this country and if we do not handle them by protecting their fundamental rights, these are the same people that one day will rise up against this country. One day they will move straight to this Parliament and demand for their fundamental rights. This time should not come when we are still Members of Parliament. We must have something to say about the fate of these children. 

As I urge Members of Parliament to support this motion, I would like to say that street children are also people and as people they have fundamental rights which are inherent. As leaders who are elected by the people, we are very powerful. The time is now for us to speak about the fate and the plight of street children in this country. I second this motion and urge you honourable members to support it so that we pass this resolution and we give government this responsibility to ensure that this social problem, if it cannot be stopped altogether, we can control it. May God bless Uganda!    

5.06
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much. I would like to thank the mover of this motion, hon. Nalubega, for this very thoughtful process she has set in motion. 

The issue of street children only keeps getting worse by the day as we, as principal actors in this country, watch. I am glad therefore that this motion seeks to get government to look at the pull and the push factors that are making this situation worse by the day. 

We all know what is causing these phenomena but it is only healthy that government puts these issues together and perhaps comes up with a strategy to address the phenomena of street children.

Madam Speaker, I want to state that this aspect of children getting into the street and becoming helpless and abandoned is made worse by issues and aspects of conflict in our community. Before the conflict in Northern Uganda, in Teso, the issue or phenomena of street children was unheard of; and that applies to most of Lango and Acholi areas. But when the conflict started, there was massive displacement. There was a cultural problem that emerged. There was psychosocial trauma and total displacement. Ultimately the question of survival came in and most of the children were squeezed into the streets, trying to beg, trying to survive, and trying to hide from the people who hurt them in their communities. 

I think that as we look at the push and pull factors, government should look at the bigger picture: how do we handle conflict in our communities because children are the biggest victims of these conflicts, followed only by the women of our community. Unfortunately, children and women do not start the wars. They are sometimes even left out from the conflict resolution perspective. They are only victims; they are not beneficiaries at all of the war’s loot and boot that takes place. 

The breakdown of our families; the breakdown of communities is a very big aspect. When I was growing up, we the children of our village belonged to everybody. All the way from school, you would not abuse people and get away with it. You would not delay and play on the road and you get away with it. Everybody was responsible for us. These days, children belong strictly to their parents. The community does not seem to know or does not seem to care. There is a problem with our communities that needs to be addressed. 

I would also like to point out the fact that as children get into the streets, these massive amounts of money that we put into UPE, USE, and vocational education in this country is lost out. They are not beneficiaries because somehow in the street your priority is survival. You cannot think about going to school. You even have no mechanism to locate the nearest school. 

The other aspect is that of poverty and I think that perhaps government should emphasise on means and mechanisms that improve on household incomes so that people take children as a priority.   

Lastly, I want to share an experience which I had on Monday, which I thought points to the weaknesses of institutions that are supposed to protect our children. This week on Monday, I got a call from Ruhama constituency, and I was in Soroti, and it had to do with a woman who had been arrested. This woman had a one-week old baby and she was detained at Mbarara police station. And for some reason, the people who were keeping her could not allow her to feed this baby - and I thought that was sheer madness on their part! It took the intervention of the police headquarters to cause these people to grant this lady a police bond so that she would go back to her home and feed the baby. 

Our institutions have a problem; either they are not serious or irresponsible or they don’t understand the extent of innocence that our children have. Whether the mother is guilty or is reckless, our children must be protected. And this applies to our street children. 

The question of maintenance as provided in the Children’s Statute - sometimes you find that the LCs make very hopeless rulings to the extent that this woman ends up running away, abandoning the child and even the husband does not take care of the child.  And the children resort to the streets as a way of running away from the confusion and violence in their homes. It is my prayer that   when we are passing this motion government will look at the institutional framework that should protect our children. Once again we support the motion and we would like to thank the mover of this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, since the shadow minister has spoken, the rest will get two minutes. And I don’t want to have a very long debate since the motion is straight forward.

5.13
MS FRANCA AKELLO: (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, since I don’t have enough time, I will thank the mover and the seconder of this motion. I also rise to support this motion and I would like to thank her so much for coming up with this motion. 

Children do not choose to go on the streets. There are factors that force them to go on the streets. So I would like to agree very strongly with the first prayer that government carries out a comprehensive study to establish the push and pull factors. 

We need a joint hand in handling the problems of children because if parents could carry out their responsibilities to provide children with all the necessary things they need, there would be no factors that would force some children to go on the streets. So, I strongly feel that some parents are not doing their duty according to how they are supposed to do.  So I would like to urge parents out there through you, Madam Speaker, to carry out their parental duty and make sure that they provide for their children. 

Secondly, moral and cultural values should be reinstituted in our society because I want to give an experience I had about three to four weeks ago when I was passing through Gulu. You know, we used not to have street children in Northern Uganda but because of the displacement we have started recording cases of street children and -(Member timed out_)

5.15
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of street children is indeed of great concern to all of us especially we as leaders. But I categorize these street children into two: the involuntary street children and the voluntary street children. Some voluntarily move from home as a result of stubbornness.  And indeed their parents are no longer in position to control them. 

The other category is those who move from their homes due to domestic violence and other related reasons. And I am aware that very soon we are going to debate the Bill on domestic violence, which is one of the causes of these street children.

We were informed that some of these street children were being ferried here in Kampala. These street children are like a business. They are ferried from other regions and there are some people who are agents. They go to rural areas and say, “If you give us your children, we are going to do a, b, c, d and they are going to be taken to Kampala – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this motion is really straight forward. It is really asking the government to do something. We are not looking for the reasons. 

5.17
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I wish to support this motion but hasten to seek your indulgence to be given more than two minutes because in as far as I am concerned, I am an authority on the issue of children and youth in this country. If you really want me to make a useful contribution, please I seek your indulgence. 

I would like to say that it is not studies that we require in this country to understand the plight and magnitude of the suffering of children in this country. A lot of studies have been carried out by UN agencies, local and international NGOs and government ministries in this country on the issue of street children. Therefore, for us to continue to vie for studies is a waste of time. 

The problem in this country is that much as children account for more than 51 percent of the Ugandan population, service given to them is lip service. The Ministry of Labour, Gender and Social Development which is being represented and headed politically by hon. Gabriel Opio receives 0.01 percent of the Budget. So, what are we talking about? If 51 percent of the population of this country is given such chicken feed, what do you expect the technocrats and the politicians in that ministry to do? Therefore, I would like to appeal to this august House that instead of us talking about six months within which this Parliament should be fed with information, we should rather take immediate action and do the needful through appropriate budget allocations. (Applause) Give fair resource allocation to this ministry! 

We have left our children to be looked after by the UN agencies; without UNICEF, that ministry would not be in existence; without UNFPA that ministry would not be in existence because I know more than 90 percent of the resources that are used in that ministry are from these bilateral international NGOs and UN agencies that are running in this country. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, now that the minister is here and he has heard all this - even when these children are taken to Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre what rehabilitation is there? There is nothing. These children are taken there first through the courts of law and when they go there, they are just seen around. Not even the vocational workshops are working, not even are the instructors are in place. 

MS LAGADA: Thank you for giving way, hon. Member. I want to inform you that the children are taken to Kampiringisa Rehabilitation Centre but the food for feeding them is the major problem. In Koplin Rehabilitation Centre in Karamoja, because the majority of the children on the streets in Kampala and elsewhere are Karimojong children, I think the last time that anything happened there must have been in Obote I Government. It is just a shell with nothing happening there. Therefore if the House really wants to address the plight of children, we must give the Ministry of Gender money to do the work they are supposed to do. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, for that information. Hon. Members, when the various countries were invited to New York to sign the UN Convention on the Rights of Children, Uganda was led by a high powered delegation led by His Excellency the President.

And one of the key commitments that governments one after one another committed themselves to, was to have a fair resource allocation to the children and youth sectors in their respective countries.

When we came back what did we do? Why do we have to think that others are going to help us? We have got in place Uganda National Plan of Action for Children. This is a framework which is supposed to provide technical insight strategies as to how the various actors should be assisted technically to intervene on behalf of children.

These documents are collecting dust. It is not studies that we want and I appeal to you hon. Colleagues let us resolve to give fair resource allocation to the Ministry of Gender so that we are able to see how best to monitor interventions aimed at addressing the plight of children of this country. I thank you.

2.24
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really take this opportunity to thank hon. Nalubega the mover and the seconder. I bring you greetings from Kooki where –(Laughter)- some of these children come from. I am addressing this House on a very noble subject; no other time, no other place, no other people – it is us, the place is here, the time is now. Where are our ethics? We pass by these children every other day, we drive home, we drink, we eat, we sleep well, we come back, the next day, year after year! 

Have we taken time off to think about them being creatures of the same God who created us? I am going to deviate a bit from the previous speakers. In Uganda, particularly the Movement Government, we have succeeded in very many other things so far. We have failed on only one. Let us have a national reconciliation process started.

Why am I saying this? Hon. Alaso mentioned one thing. Violence in the North, the war for over 20 years, violence in Karamoja, but that has not affected only those areas. You go to the street and you will find that the nation is well represented -(Member timed out_)

5.26
MAJ. (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In theory, during civil strife, the cause of upheavals in society, the cause of death of parents, disruption as far as school going is concerned, the depopulation of villages because of conflicts, food insecurity and others, children usually wander away from their homes and find themselves in places they will not have loved to be.

Apparently, the 1981-1986 war, the rebellion of Lakwena, the Kony, the disruption in Karamoja because of cattle rustling, all these civil strife have caused children to leave their homes and wander outside their villages and homes where they live.

Apparently, there has never been a study as to how to manage, how to rehabilitate, how to gather all these children and find an answer to the problem and I hope that this comprehensive study which is being proposed by the mover, being opposed by an expert, really can find an answer to this particular problem.

There is the village to urban movement of people and children being unchecked by the authorities because the child now can sit in the bus, leave Kabale or Fort Portal and come to Kampala and as long as he/she has paid the bus fare nobody bothers where the child is going; why is he being given a ticket? -(Member timed out_)

5.28
MS SARAH MWEBAZA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. Samia-Bugwe North has the biggest number of street kids but when we stand here to talk about street children, Samia-Bugwe North is not mentioned at all. This constituency is at the border and we have more than 10,000 street children who are unaccounted for and most of these children come from Karamoja region.

Recently, in my Committee of Gender we moved around the country assessing the situation of street children. We found a street kid who had been killed having been mistaken as a thief, only to find out that he was moving around requesting for food being hungry.

And we found there was a problem. The people who handle the issues of children, the community development officers and the probation officers are under funded, and these ones do not lie anywhere, neither in the Ministry of Gender nor in  the district administrative units. So you find that these community developmental officers and the probation officers do not have the capacity to handle issues concerning children.

Another issue is that the children in Busia are being trafficked and taken to Kenya. We do not know how many but when we inquired from the authorities, the security officers and then the probation officers and the district administration, they say that they are in thousands. They find them on the street and take advantage of these children whom they deceive that they are going to help them -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chairperson of the Committee on Gender has been lamenting every financial year; can we do something different this year for the Ministry of Gender? Can we rise to the occasion and help the Ministry of Gender? 

5.31
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very grateful to the mover and the seconder of this motion. The government accepts this motion; we are going to carry out a comprehensive study although my friend the Opposition Chief Whip says that they have already done that. Even if you have done studies, you need time to put them together; you cannot just say because I studied this one, I am not going to do this. Otherwise why do people go for workshops? Some of you go to workshops, including the Opposition Chief Whip, every other day and yet he had learnt before that time. So let us accept that.

We would like to accept the motion that government goes and designs appropriate and sustainable interventions to address the phenomenon of the street children. 

We accept the time of six months and if it is not enough, we shall come back for more time. 

But before I end, let me say that the government has done quite a lot in this area. We passed here some time back a motion on the children’s rights and secondly we have the UPE and USE, which are addressing the children issues -(Interruption)

MS BEATRICE LAGADA: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Gender appearing before the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, when we were looking at the pre-budget documents, did present before the committee voluminous documents derived from studies and counter studies in the Ministry of Gender. They did provide before the committee a comprehensive plan for removing children from the streets. I know that the minister is relatively new in the Ministry of Gender and may not have had the time to get into the nitty-gritty of what is available in his ministry as far as the problems of the street children are concerned. But on this Floor this afternoon, the minister has been informed that there are too many studies in this ministry. Is he therefore in order to state that they are going to conduct yet other studies when they have had so many studies not yet acted upon? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From the debate, I heard that there are many causes of these children being on the streets. There are old and new causes and there are also causes which we do not yet know. I think it is important to have a study.

MR GABRIEL OPIO: Thank you. Even as we speak now, we are aware that we are not even sure of why, for instance, the children who are picked from the streets are taken to parts of Karamoja and after some time, they return. When I ask the technocrats why that is so, they say we need a study. It is true that there is that request to do the study and my chairperson of the committee is aware of that. Let us go ahead and do the study and come up with comprehensive answers to these questions.

Some of the reasons why we are having children here are the civil wars. I would like to say government has done well to make sure that we settle some of the problems in Teso, Lango and Acholi regions and I hope this is going to help us to contain some of the children who are running from their homes to come to Kampala. We would like to encourage leaders here to make sure that we do not go back to civil strife.

I would like to state that Prosperity-for-All if implemented properly can increase the income per homestead and make sure that the parents are responsible. As we go to do the research, we shall find out why children are being dumped right left and centre. As government, we accept to go and do the comprehensive study and the doubting Thomases will come and see it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do resolve that Parliament urges the government to address the growing problem of street children in the country in the terms proposed by the mover.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW AN ADDITIONAL FINANCING OF SDR 3,100,000 (US $5,000,000) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING COST OVERRUNS IN THE SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES PROJECT (SMMRP)

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICROFINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to secure additional financing of US $5.0 million from the International Development Association (IDA) for purposes of supporting the cost overruns of the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (SMMR).

“WHEREAS the amending and restating development credit agreement is to be signed between the IDA of the World Bank Group and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the purposes of supporting the cost overruns of the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159, clause (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159, clause (2) of the said Constitution borrowing by government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated financings of their approval and authorisation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the government is hereby authorised to secure SDR 3,100,000 which is the equivalent of US $5,000,000 for the purposes of supporting cost overruns of the sustainable management of mineral resources project.”  I beg to move. 

Madam Speaker, the objective of this request is to seek authorisation of this Parliament to allow government to borrow an additional US $5.0 million from World Bank International Development Association to enable the successful completion of the sustainable management and mineral resources project. 

You recall that Parliament did approve this project of borrowing on 21 July 2004 by a resolution that was passed on the same date. The goal of this project that is being implemented by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is to strengthen the government’s capacity to develop a sound mineral sector based on private investment and improvements in artisan and small scale areas. 

Excellent project results are already being achieved in a number of areas. The Minister of Energy is free to outline the areas where the project has excelled. 

Hon. Members, I wish to further inform you that a joint term review of the project by all financiers and some stakeholders was carried out in January 2008 and all parties were satisfied with the project results to date. However, three major challenges have to be overcome and these are: one, the project is behind schedule mainly due to the two years of delay caused by getting the co-financiers. These are NDF and ADB on board.

Secondly, there is need to complete the pending project activities like geological mapping of 75 percent of the countries’ land mass and geochemical surveys and reconstruction and construction of offices and laboratories at Entebbe and seven regional offices at Arua, Fort Portal, Gulu, Kabale, Mbarara, Moroto and Tororo which require extension of the project by two years. 

Three, there is a funding gap of US$5 million for collection of ID activities and US$0.8million under Government of Uganda counterpart funding.

Madam Speaker, the terms and conditions of funding are based on the standard IDA terms with a maturity period of 40 years including 10 years of grace and a service charge of 0.75 per annum on disbursement and outstanding amounts. These were the same terms for the original credit.

Two, the conditions are similar to those of the original credit including the provisions for IDA and the Attorney General’s legal opinion on the legal validity of the additional credit document to the government and undertakings by government that counterpart funding is properly budgeted for.

In conclusion, I am now requesting Members of Parliament to note the progress made to rejuvenate Uganda’s mining sector and also to note the need to extend the sustainable management of minerals resources projects life for an extra two years and therefore terminated in June 2011. 

Lastly, I request that you authorise the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by passing this resolution. I beg to move. 

5.44 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Madam Speaker, this report by the committee was presented and as we were sailing through, we found some turbulent weather and some concerns were raised and the Leader of Government Business requested that we have to clarify a few issues. We have since sat with the Ministry of Energy and we now want to give the details.

When we presented the report, we did lay on the Table the project progress report of the original loan as the committee’s first responsibility was to check the performance of the earlier loan of US $25 million and fortunately the printery could not avail us enough copies. We have now made enough copies of the project progress report from 20 September 2004 to March 2009, which clearly gives the details of what we had summarised in our report.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have just received a number of copies related to this very request but the chairman is already asserting that the committee presented an earlier report and now what he is bringing is just details of what was missing. I would expect that even for that detail, Members of the committee ought to endorse it because we do not know who has prepared this detail and which particular copy you are referring to. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, since the issue was referred to the committee, I also would have loved that the chairperson comes up with an addendum report such that we can follow because I am actually surprised. I have received these documents, but I expected the chairperson to have summarised them to assist me understand them. You cannot read and understand this volume in a minute. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, may I seek your indulgence? Last time when I presented this report, I did lay these copies on the Table as annexes but we did not have enough copies from the printery and just now, we have succeeded in availing enough copies for you. So, it is not something new. We did present them last time but copies were not enough. So what we are presenting is not a new finding; it is our old report and there were questions raised that day and we have explanations to those questions. The Minister of Energy also has questions and we have put these answers in writing and I request that I am allowed to proceed and explain. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Mukitale, did you again meet as a committee with the minister? 

MR BUKENI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of the Committee of Natural Resources, the committee which is going to oversee the Ministry of Energy using this money, and a meeting was called on Friday by the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, which we were invited to attend as a committee. A number of us did attend and we agreed with him that the information that was lacking be provided for, indicating the amount of money that was given before, what it has done, what has not been done and the amount of money needed now.

I think what is lacking here is that following those meetings with other committees, that information should have been put together. Information that we met and gave a go ahead should also have been provided. I do not seem to see that here and that is what the problem is. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have that? Because we actually directed you and the Committee of Natural Resources to sit together and also meet the minister -

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to request that I am allowed to clarify because I was requested to come and clarify. That day, we had the information that we are giving but we just did not have enough copies for Members and we were not given time to explain and -(Interjection)- I have just started. Can you allow me to finish?

The copy I have given first is the performance of the old loan of US $25 million. The second copy which I laid on the Table last time but I was not given chance to explain because we did not have enough copies, Members did not have copies - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not say you were not given chance to explain. You just laid it on the Table. You did not state that you wanted to read it otherwise I would have given you time. You are accusing the Chair of not giving you time.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to give a clarification now on the multiple financing which Members had sought as a question, because I laid on table a copy of the multiple financing and it is in our original report. So I just want to explain that whereas the total project cost is -(Interruption)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the Committee of National Economy but for a number of reasons I was not able to attend the last meetings, including the one of Friday. However, I will contribute according to our Rules of Procedure.

If something is referred back to the committee, then it calls for a new report to be presented to the House. What we have here are good responses from the minister to the committee and not the Floor of the House.

And again, there are a lot of things that we can question from the response of the minister as well. For example, just simply looking at what people are questioning on page 4, no.12, the coverage of the geological survey of the country, the minister goes to say that 92 percent of the land mass of the country was covered. Whereas statistically Karamoja is 11 percent, if you add 11 to 92 it is 103. It is still wrong. These are some of the things we could really do in the committee and I think we need a report from the committee to the Floor of the House and not necessarily this big document or the response of the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I also have received three documents whose source I do not know. (Laughter) I know that time is of the essence but let us do work in an orderly manner. If you sat as a committee, please compile an addendum report and then bring these documents. Otherwise, we will not know which one to open. I am sorry hon. Mukitale but let us do things in an orderly manner. Come on Tuesday and I will give you time. Please meet and compile your report again.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I will take your guidance but all the questions you are asking are here but we concede and we shall present it next time. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY ON ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENTS (EPA)

5.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY (Mr John Bosco Lubyayi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope the copies are being circulated. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I understand the copies are going to come but I do not know whether the other report is ready. Are the reports on the petition of violence against women available?

MS LAGADA AMONGI: Madam Speaker, the copies of my report are ready. They were with these chamber attendants but I do not know where they put them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I see a heap of documents here but I do not know - clerk can you ascertain? What are those documents? Check if the petition on violence is ready so that we deal with it. 

Okay, madam chairperson, they are ready; you can come and make your presentation. The chairman for the Committee on Tourism, please hold on.

Can I ask the technicians to put up the machinery for the honourable members? Madam Chairperson, you present; we shall put up the machinery.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF    THE COMMITTEE REPORT ON VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

5.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beatrice Lagada): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The petition on violence against women was presented to Parliament on Tuesday, 8 July 2008 and in accordance with rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure, referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration.

I wish to say that I did seek your permission to present a short video clip to the House in connection with this report in the course of its presentation.

Methodology

The committee held consultative dialogue with the following stakeholders: 

1.	The Uganda Association of Women Lawyers (FIDA-Uganda);
2.	 Women International Cross Cultural Exchange;
3.	 Raising Voices for Uganda Women Network;
4.	 The Platform for Labour Action;
5.	 Faculty of Law of Makerere University;
6.	 Foundation fort Human Rights Initiative;
7.	 Centre for Domestic Violence Prevention;
8.	 The East African Sub Regional Support Initiatives;
9.	 The National Association of Women Organisations of  Uganda, Action Aid-Uganda; 
10.	 Akina Mama wa Africa; and
11.	The Uganda Law Reform Commission.

In addition, the committee made reference to the following documents:

a)	The 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
b)	The 1970 United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women;
c)	The 1993 United Nations  Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women;
d)	The Convention against Torture; and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

Observations

The committee observed the following:

1.	That there is no specific legislation on violence against women. Where attempts have been made to demonise the vice, provisions are weak in nature and not punitive enough to bring it to a complete stop.

2.	As a result of (1) above, women have continued to suffer from violence perpetrated by their husbands, relatives, strangers, workmates, employers, boys and men. This has gone unquestioned or unattended to by the concerned authorities.

3.	At the workplace, women have suffered violence, particularly from their male counterparts. Oftentimes women have been molested sexually, ridiculed, threatened with dismissal and demotion, all because of their gender.

4.	The main victims of violence are women with their male counterparts as key perpetrators. Statistics from the 2007 Action Aid – Uganda research report reveals that 84 percent of women are battered by their husbands. Where women are cited as culprits often times this is done in self defence.

5.	The committee also observed that whereas visible bodily injuries is perceived as the most credible evidence of violence, this evil is multi faceted and has taken on such other forms as sexual violence, emotional violence, trafficking, harmful customary and traditional practices like female genital mutilation, property grabbing, forced marriages or wife inheritance and early marriages, scolding or abuses, heavy workloads, among others.

6.	Madam Speaker, violence is ignorantly perceived as part of the dynamics of many family situations in Uganda. Society has sadly continued to deny its existence on the premise that its admittance is an attack on the integrity of the family. In whatever form it may occur, violence can never be justified. The primary effect is dehumanising and humiliation of victims.

7.	The committee further observed that violence in the domestic arena is considered a private matter where intervention with the intent to prevent it is a challenge yet when left to happen, the consequences are immeasurable. This is based on the fact that most women victims prefer to remain silent in order to keep the sanctity of their marriages for the sake of their children. Efforts to  report the cases of violence has always earned the whistleblower public criticisms all of which and many other similar local dialects – Luganda and the Lunyoro ones, which I will not attempt to pronounce – the local dialect silence women victims from revealing their domestic woes.

8.	The committee noted that violence has been exacerbated by patriarchal thinking prophesized in many African traditional societies. Women themselves have been socialised into thinking and believing that certain acts, violence inclusive, are normal, which is a narrow perspective.

9.	And deep-rooted cultural norms exacerbated by religious ideologies and teachings have continued to sustain violence against women.

10.	Madam Speaker, I would like to report that the committee observed that religious institutions have been passive to the cry and call to end violence against women. Instead they are seen to be at the forefront to continuously inculcate beliefs that have continued to rank women at a lower position in society. For example, the Apostle Paul is quoted in the Good News Bible, in his first letter to the Corinthians 14:34-35 as saying thus: “…The women should keep quiet in meetings. They are not allowed to speak; as the Jewish law says, they must not be in charge. If they want to find out about something, they should ask their husbands at home. It is disgraceful thing for a woman to speak in public.”

11.	The committee also noted that the society gender stereotypes held against women as opposed to men have helped to sustain and exacerbate violence against women. Upon marriage, women are very often urged to be submissive, in every way, to their spouses.

12.	And violence against women is associated with severe and lasting consequences. In social-economic terms, victims have isolated themselves from potential economic and social networks and their participation in development activities limited due to fear of being beaten or their income being forcibly taken away by their male counterparts. 

In health terms, escalating violence against women has led to increased HIV/AIDS prevalence among victims. Statistics from the 2007 report of Action Aid indicate that 57.8 percent of women confirmed contracting HIV/AIDS from violence and abuses they have suffered.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that:

1.	There should be a strong political will to extensively deal with violence against women. The government should take lead to demonise and blacklist the evil. All efforts should be explored to enact specific legislations outlawing violence against women.

2.	As a matter of urgency, government should domesticate into law, the provisions related to violence against women as contained in the different international statutory instruments as such instruments cannot be binding in nature unless domesticated. I would like to point out that the committee is happy to note that since this report was made in the last session government has gone on to table the Domestic Violence Bill before this House; we really appreciate that action. We hope that other gender related laws will also quickly be tabled in House so that they are all comprehensively dealt with.

3.	The committee recommends that leadership, particularly at LC V levels should formulate bylaws and ordinances to govern their communities in all aspects related to harmonious living.

4.	All efforts should be explored to create awareness with the objective of propagating ideas to address sexual gender-based violence. Government and civil society organisations at all levels should endeavour to propagate ideas right from the national to family levels to help wipe out this evil.

5.	The committee also recommends that there should be established a toll-free and easy-to-use 24-hour hotlines through which cases of violence can be reported. This facility should be in an easy-to-reach area for all women.

6.	We also recommend that the post exposure prophylaxis drugs should be fully stocked in all health centres to treat victims of sexual violence and to help prevent HIV/AIDS infections, if reported within a period of 72 hours.

7.	The committee recommends that government should urgently design and put in place specific programmes targeting women empowerment to help ensure self reliance and full potential.

8.	That government works to establish psycho-socio rehabilitations centres to help provide trauma, relief and counselling services and treatment of victims. In addition there be provided start-up resources to rebuild the lives of victims of violence.

9.	We also recommend that the media, both print and electronic, should be called upon to champion the condemnation of acts of violence against women rather than reporting on them as fun pages, the way some tabloid do.

10.	The committee also recommends that cultures that repugnant to the supreme law of the land are null and void and should be outlawed, specifically female genital mutilation should be outlawed; it contributes nothing positive to the welfare and future of the young teenage girls including those who have already undergone it.

11.	Civil society organisations should play an active and complementary role in fighting violence against women specifically regular reports with credible evidence should be drafted and published exposing and condemning the veil.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, violence against women and girls cannot be justified or overemphasized. It is a demonic act that has contributed nothing positive to the status of women and girls in society. It has only humiliated and dehumanised the victims.

At this point I beg that we show to the House a very short video clip to underscore this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

(A video presentation was made)

MS LAGADA: Madam Speaker, I hear colleagues commenting that there is no violence there. But I saw a lot of it. Women gave testimonies of being beaten, women suffering from HIV/AIDS because of being forced into unprotected sex and so on. I beg to report.

6.23
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for bringing this report. First I want to declare here that I am a duly registered member of the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association. And as such I have a lot of support for the women’s cause. 

I am actually so disappointed that out laws are not punitive enough. First of all, I contend that the quality of the citizenry depends on the welfare of the woman. If the woman is in a bad shape in a household then such a family is likely to be in bad shape. A family in bad shape translates into a community in bad shape. Therefore, if the women are in bad shape, then the country is in bad shape. 

Many Members were murmuring when we were seeing this video that they hadn’t seen violence, but denying your daughter education merely on grounds of gender discrimination is violence by itself. 

Recently, I had an opportunity with other colleagues to go and benchmark the health systems in Botswana. What we saw there was that Botswana had achieved a lot in their health indicators. We asked what tricks they had used to achieve a total fertility rate of 3.3 when we are at 6.7 - I will not talk about all the indicators. But whatever area that we reached, the women told us that the women are more literate than the men. 

So education is one way we can empower our society. I would like to thank government for promoting affirmative action on education for the girl-child. I call upon everybody to support that initiative because we need an enlighten society. 

I thank the committee for their recommendations including outlawing the female genital mutilation. I am glad that one of our colleagues is due to table a Private Members’ Bill. Once it comes here, I beg all Members to support that Bill to outlaw the female genital mutilation in this country. What are we waiting for; the women that we see with all forms of disabilities – and incidentally tomorrow is world day for mental health. Most of the mental health related conditions are caused by stress. Stress takes many forms, one of which is psycho-stress which is inflicted on the individual by fear and being battered. 

The other one that I would like to urge colleagues to look into very seriously is the issue of alcoholism. I keep repeating this because most of the offenders of domestic violence actually do it in a very funny state. No wonder most men in a drunken state demand for conjugal rights even when they are not ready for it while using all types of force. This is no laughing matter. We need to come up with another regulation on drinking habits in this country because it is not just about alcohol. 

Another issue is these drug abusers and the various drugs that are being used by majority of men and youth. 

Such are the drivers of domestic violence and I implore all Members that if we want to have a serene country, let us empower the woman and have a woman with dignity and one who can be proud of her dignity rather than just looking at things happen. Even the law enforcers are abusing the very law at their various places of work. I beg that the entire House supports this report. I thank you.

6.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking guidance from you. I have read the report and without doubt, I support what the committee is saying. However, I am not sure how we should proceed because having looked at the report and the Domestic Violence Bill that was tabled before this House and I guess it is before the same committee, I find that a number, if not all the issues that are being raised here, are being addressed in that Bill. I don’t know how we are going to proceed. Do we consider this report then come to the Bill and raise the same issues or should we allow the committee to marry the Bill and the recommendations with this report? I am just seeking guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this petition was brought long before the Gender Violence Bill and I think that both the government and the committee of this House will benefit from the contributions of these Members. It has gone for the first reading, I don’t know when it will come back but I think that if the Members of the committee listen, they will be enriched by what is said here. I think it is going to help our committee to do their work better.

6.30
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I want to thank the committee for this report and I would like to emphasise that violence be looked at holistically. The aspect of psychological and economic violence where women are denied the proceeds of their own labour by drunkard husbands who take away the little they have worked so hard to earn and the physical violence, which seems to be emphasised in the report – therefore, in making the law I implore the committee to look at all those aspects because the practice has been to reduce violence against women, especially domestic violence, to physical assault. If you go to a police station now, they simply call it assault because they have no provisions to address violence in a wholesome manner. My impression of violence is that there should be a deliberate attempt to put law practices where settlements in regard to violence against women are handled out there in the community. There is a practice where somebody murders a woman or beats her up and they say, “Let us settle it locally.” I think that denies the women of this country justice.

The second aspect is the question of awareness and access to justice as well as affordability. It is my prayer that we look into aspects of paralegal training and legal aid clinics for women. This is because most of these women that are battered and cannot find justice are also illiterate and poor and because of this, they cannot stand on their own or afford justice and are probably not even aware that the law is on their side. Most of them end up continuing in the perpetual circle of violence and become victimised to the point of death. 

I want to also state that there is need to look at aspects of temporary accommodation; administrative arrangements. Most of the women who are battered or subjected to domestic violence go and report to the local council chairperson or go to the police station and go back to the house of the offender. Most often, they do not survive the night because they are beaten again and may be killed. It is important to put in place administrative arrangements that help women find custody even in a temporary way until justice is dispensed and provided to them.

The institutions that are supposed to ensure that women are protected should also be called to order. The worst offenders have been Police and local council courts. You know the case in Pallisa of a woman breastfeeding puppies! That was a horrible story and the worst kind of abuse you could hear but unfortunately, the Police at one point said this woman is mentally sick just because there was nobody to help this woman bring out her case and support her through the process of looking for justice.

Having said that, I would like to support the committee and pray that we quickly move in the way of providing for a law and also ensure that the law, when enacted, is duly enforced and that the women of this country are helped to obtain justice. I thank you.

6.35
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join previous speakers to support the report of the committee. My only problem with the report is the heading, which states: “The petition on violence against women,” but since it was a petition, I have no problem with that. 

Before I proceed I want to announce to you and to this House that we now have over 15 male Members of Parliament who are fully registered with UWOPA and they subscribe and contribute monthly to the cause of UWOPA and women. This was out of our efforts, hon. Obua Hamson, the Youth MP for Northern Uganda and I. And I believe that if we continue on that trend, we are going to change and turn things around in favour of our women so that we have a future for them. 

I do not want to take long on this report; I want to get to the recommendations. Recommendation No.3 is about the involvement of LC V, that they should formulate the bylaws and ordinances to govern their communities in all aspects related to harmonious living. I want to appeal that we should not only look at the LC V; we should also look at the lower local council because at the sub-county level, that is where we register most of these cases. So, we should really appeal that even the LC III, should come up with bylaws that would help to protect the right of women and children. 

The committee also observed that the role of civil society organisations is crucial in protecting the rights of our women. I do agree with that but I think civil society organisations need guidance on their role. In many cases we have learnt with regret that some of these civil society organisations are also in a way trying to cause problems. 

6.38
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. I also want to support the report of the committee. We have very many factors that have led to increase in domestic violence. Today when you see men in their capacity as husbands, most of them have lost their responsibility as the family head in the home. Thus giving a lot of burden to the women and making them work for more than 18 hours. When a mother and her children are in the field digging or looking for food for the family, the husband is busy in the trading centre enjoying himself; eating good food and yet the mother and children do not even have any food for the day. This is especially so now where there is food insecurity and famine in West Nile. 

As women, we also have problems. Women are also the cause of domestic violence especially when you see them pour acid on each other, and torture the girl-child. If as women we are the cause of this violence, how then shall we justify domestic violence by men on us? This is a very big problem and when we are advocating for our rights, we need to consider this angle. We need to clear ourselves before we put much blame on the men. 

6.40
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for that excellent report. 

The committee pointed rightly by quoting a certain part of the Bible in regard to marginalising women. I would like to add more. First is that right from creation, in Genesis; they say a woman was made from a man’s rib. That means that she is the property of the man. So you can do anything with your property. Surely, with this belief, men believe that we are their property. This belief is later on increased by bride price. The moment you have paid the bride price with your cows, you say this is my property and she must do what I want anytime. When you say no you are beaten. If you do not bring food in time, you are beaten. If you deny him sex, you are beaten. If you do not take children to school, you are beaten. That means you are really the property of the man. Maybe if we did away with bride price we would be a bit freer. 

Men also think that we can be corrected. I would like to inform men that once you are grown up, it is just like a tree which is bent, can you straighten the tree? In the process of straightening, you will break it. So when you are marrying a woman, you should give yourself enough time to know her weaknesses and strengths -(Applause)- so that when she makes certain mistakes, you know that is herself. And what you would do then is to give guidance and discuss with her as mature people and not to beat her. Actually beating does not help at all. If we have done away with beating in schools, why not do away with violence at home? I think we can manage it.

We also need to correct all the colonial laws that marginalise women because it is from those laws that men continue to capitalise on to marginalise us. So, we need to bring all those laws which are gender insensitive so that they address the plight of women. I would also urge that this domestic violence report should be discussed quickly and I think we shall pick a lot of issues from here to improve on it. Thank you very much.

6.44
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, although people have been quoting the Bible in different ways, according to my understanding, in the beginning when God created man, He saw that he was lonely and then He decided to get him a companion. And now men are misusing this companion and they want to become lonely again and yet God made their situation simpler and decided to get them a companion. (Applause)

When we look at women who are battered the most, they are the grassroots women; women who are voiceless; women who cannot even go to court. Some of them even fear court. We have always received these cases in our offices where women come and report their family problems and when you advice them on the way forward, some of them even fear to go and get justice in the courts of law. 

We have seen very many people coming up with organisations but the people they call for sensitisation are people who are already aware of the law.  I would like them to go to the grassroots because I have seen the committee calling upon the civil society organisations to play a big role.  But they can only help in playing a big role if they really involve the grassroots women so that they can know their rights and know what to do in case they are battered.

We have also seen circumstances where men over abuse the rights of women. A man becomes polygamous when he cannot even sustain one wife. I think as government we need to come up with a law to see to it that these men who marry everyday –(Interjections)– yeah, you find a man marrying more than one wife and putting them under one roof. I really feel that this is violence of the highest order! In fact, some of them share rooms –(Member timed out_)

6.47
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Because of the limited time that I have on my side, I will dwell on only two or three points basically on economic and circumcision of women. There are many factors as the committee has said and I thank the committee for the good work done; they must have done exhaustive research. 

But when I talk about the workplace violence I have the experience and it is a bitter one. These young girls of ours you see really suffer a lot. Some of them are virgins; they go looking for jobs after school but what do they face? They face carpet interviews, they leave offices late for the bosses to feast on them - and forcefully by the way. If a girl wants to get a promotion, she will have to submit so that she can be promoted or be taken for further education and that kind of experience. So workplace violence is so much and I think we must have forgotten to enshrine it in the labour laws when we were making them. So when we bring the violence law, we should put all these. Chairperson of the committee, these things should be depicted properly. 

Then, when you look at the economic violence on the other side, you find that here is a woman who has suffered to get her little salary and then when she goes home, the husband asks for some part or the whole of it to be put on the table and shared accordingly. She is at times left with nothing otherwise she is going to be beaten and battered. Some of them have even been killed. After making malwa to get that little money, the man wants to get other women to marry.

On the genital part of it, when you look at the way women go through this torture, it is so painful that a woman will stay with that torture. The trauma will remain with her throughout both physically and psychologically because some of these women who are circumcised are stitched up to a time that she will marry the chosen husband. It is on the eve of the marriage that she is opened and with that fresh blood and the wound, the man has to penetrate. So, you can see the trauma. There is a great need for us to have a law in place which can protect our children. Look at our children you people. That is what I wanted to say. Thank you so much.

6.49
MS MARY TUUNDE (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for that good report and what I want to say is that violence in humanity is one of the traumatic events and it is very big because it does not occur once. When somebody is being battered or beaten in a home or in a workplace, it does not occur once. So that person will never forget that incidence. It is a very difficult thing to look at. 

But what we have been doing in Uganda is looking at the stressors and violators and putting them to book and may be imprisoning them. But I think it is not the best way of doing things. Much as those people should be punished, we should also look at the victims because trauma healing is very important. And I saw that it was one of the recommendations in the report. It is very good and I think even the Ministry of Health should put a budget for that alone because even the women and the men from the North whose rights were violated because of the war need trauma healing, reconciliation and counselling. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.  

6.50
MR STEPHEN BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the very wonderful report. I think it is because the chairperson is a lady and it seems there are many Members who are ladies. Although the video was not very convincing; I thought that it would be as good as the other one of FGM but I was a bit disappointed. I did not see what I wanted to see. (Laughter)
 
I agree with the contents of the report. The observations and recommendations are very good and they have been spot on. But there is a very important factor that has been left out especially in the observations. I expected the committee to have realized that although the men are the biggest perpetrators and beaters of women, but I think it was important for them to note in the observations that one of the biggest cause of this violence are the women themselves. 

What do I mean, Madam Speaker? When you look at all the cases of domestic violence, either the woman has been found with a cheating message on the phone –(Laughter)– the woman has not cooked food on time, or the woman has been caught with a handsome houseboy - so if you look at all these, although it not justifiable for the man to react by either beating or killing, we must agree that women to some extent are the cause. 

Look at the workplace, the women dress indecently -(Member timed out_)

6.53
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for coming up with this report and I would also like to confirm what hon. Kiyingi reported that a number of recommendations in the report are fairly answered in the Domestic Violence Bill. And I want to say that this Bill is before our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and I want to confirm to this House that we take it as a priority and within the next 45 days we shall return it, for enactment into law.

I should also add that this Bill on its own may not be enough in addressing the problem we are trying to solve. In this regard, I should appeal to government especially to the Attorney-General that other laws relating to family relations should also come up. The Domestic Relations Bill and other related Bills that address family relations and family law should come to this Parliament to address this important matter. Otherwise, in passing the Bill, already before Parliament we may not comprehensively deal with the problem that we are trying to solve.

Another matter also to look at is the programmes put forward by government that also affect this matter. I would like to thank government for policies, for example, of USE and UPE that have allowed the girl child to access education and opportunities. That is why I was surprised this morning when I read in the press that government is considering withdrawing the 1.5 points given to girls in Makerere. I think that is a step going backwards. If we are going to reduce violence we must empower women -(Member timed out_)

6.56
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to refer to page 4 on emotional violence that actually it is not only domestic violence but also institutions like Parliament and government cause violence. (Laughter)

I would like to talk about the psychological part in terms of our toilets. The toilets here are full of condoms. (Laughter) There are no sanitary towels that are a basic need as far as a woman is concerned. That is psychological violence because it does not meet the basic need of a woman.

On page 5, we look at what the report refers to as ranking women in a lower position. Government does that too, it happens in my case as a woman representative of the district. When it comes to Constituency Development Fund, I am given the same amount as my male counterparts who are covering like two sub counties vis-à-vis a person covering 23 sub counties. So, really there is lower ranking of institutions, even government, not just the religious institutions that have been referred to.

Had I been part of this committee that made this report, I would not have tagged this domestic violence to women only because children especially in Masaka are battered very much by their step mothers. I have children who are slaughtered [HON. MEMBERS: “Nabukeera”.] Nabukeera is there but there is Ivan, about two months ago whom the step mother just slaughtered; he was only five years. Many children are slaughtered in homes. Therefore, domestic violence is not only on women it also goes to men and children.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in this case, this was a petition specific by women. 

MS MUGERWA: So, Madam Speaker, I beg you to consider also other aspects as far as violence is concerned in future.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that will come in the other one. But do not blame the committee for not addressing that.

MS MUGERWA: I was not blaming the committee but I am just making reference that actually violence should also be considered for other groups of people. Thank you very much.

6.59
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to agree and thank the committee for the report. I will just begin by making a few recommendations also, that they did not capture. One is to do with the probation officers at the districts. You find that most of the district budgets, there is no provision for the probation officers.

I have been visiting quite a number of districts at committee level but you find that they only take care of the salaries for the probation officers, but there is nothing like fuel. When these women go there to report cases, they say we have no facilitation. They cannot move. So, it is my humble prayer that government addresses this concern to take care of our women down there.

Another recommendation to do with community liaison officers at police, they also face the same problems. There is no facilitation. They ask ladies to bring something before they can go to trace for the husbands. The lady is helpless. In the end they suffer locally. At times men come and bribe these officers, in the end the woman has to suffer silently. So, we should also address that concern.

As one Member was proposing to review the laws, the law of succession should be addressed. Most of the women are suffering silently as far as succession is concerned. There are quite a number of us even here who have girl children but culturally, even in Busoga having a daughter to be enthroned as an heir is a challenge. 

I am told even in Buganda if you leave only girls they either bring a brother’s son to come and take care of the estates or the legacies behind. In the end, they end up battering even the orphans instead of them being helped. So, there is need to review succession laws where by widows are taken care of and even the girl children. Thank you very much.

7.01
DR BRIAN ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. One thing I would like to say is that violence against women cannot be stopped within a short time.

There are underlying causes why violence against women has persisted in this country. Unless these causes are addressed we still have a long way to go. A study carried out in my district one time revealed that violence against women was commonest among the poorest families, among the least educated families. Hence poverty, illiteracy and ignorance of the law are the major causes of violence against women -(Interjections)- I am not saying that among the educated and the rich it is not there. We have even seen some rich people killing their own wives, battering them but the majority of cases are among the poor families. I want to support hon. Tashobya about the affirmative action on women especially in education. I was not very comfortable when the 1.5 points were given to girls leaving senior six joining the university. It was a very good thing and I still support it but they ignored the other lower institutions at technical, PTC and all those education levels. They should have spread this affirmative action across the board so that all women are taken care of.

When I look at NAADS, affirmative action should have been taken for women to be economically empowered. They should have said that for every six households in a parish, at least two should be women-headed families –(Member timed out_)

7.04
MS ANNE AURU (Independent, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and the recommendations. I support the recommendation on the participation of civil society organisations. It is true that the civil society organisations are doing quite a lot but they are not spread all over the country. In Moyo District, we do not have the legal aid support by FIDA and I would like to request the civil society organisations to try to spread out in all areas in Uganda because domestic violence against women does not leave out certain districts or regions.

I want to bring out some of the silent issues which have not appeared here. Women suffer so much but quietly when they give birth to the same sex children. Women who have given birth to only girls have ended up in separation with their husbands. This is not an issue caused by women. Scientists tell us that it is the men who have the X and Y chromosomes but even the elite men blame it on women and they go ahead to cause divorce. We should look at the silent issues and try to provide solutions to them as well.

Many women do not report violence against them and amongst them are the elite women. It is just because we are easily embarrassed; we feel we are known and when we suffer and speak it out, it is an embarrassment to us. When we cannot come out to talk about the violence we suffer, how do we expect to be of help to our fellow women who are down there?

Another salient issue is this beauty contest; young girls are exposed to dance naked and they are paid. Who are the promoters of such competitions? It is men again –(Member timed out_)

7.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr Nelson Gagawala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We must thank you for having insisted that this petition be presented because it is urging all stakeholders to pay serious attention to the issue of violence in society. This is rampant for all ages, all sexes and all cultures. 

Originally, the African took a woman as sacred. In fact, the chief and highest priest in a typical African family 2,000 years ago was normally a woman. This was because the men died earlier and the custodian of history of the family used to be a woman. Slowly when slavery came in, it caused a lot of havoc because they were taking away the strong men and slowly the African degenerated to the extent that they stopped respecting the woman. 

I am glad women Members of Parliament have started championing the recovery of that dignity and the importance of women in society. I think this fight will have to go on. Maybe the degradation of women, children and other weaker people in society was brought in by slavery. We must go back to our roots and bring back our culture. It is important for every culture which calls itself so to record its norms and we must analyse these norms and segregate those which are acceptable from those which are not so that we take a record of it. 

I am told Africa has got the richest cultural heritage but when it is not recorded, some people are using vague cultural practices and presenting them as though they are correct. Yet the correct cultural practices of an African are positive and even superior to some of the European cultures.

It is a pity that the religious institutions are not fighting to see that the woman get the first position she deserves in society. It is very important that this report is used to make the law. I am glad that the law is going to be brought forward and I thank you.

7.09
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a senior citizen in Uganda, I have stayed in marriage for the last 27 years. I thank the initiators of this report; you will share experiences with me because I am married to two wives. With the first, we have stayed in marriage for 27 years and with the second, 20 years. I love them very much -(Laughter)- and I understand them well. Therefore, I have never had any problems. 

But to fellow husbands who are here, what causes violence is that you may lack respect for your wife. You may lack care and that love which you started with –(Interjections)- resources are not an issue. I would like to tell you that the poor men have always managed their families very well because the wives of poor men know that the men are poor and therefore they cannot admire this and that.

For us as husbands, what we need to know is that when you marry someone’s daughter, you need to try to do what you vowed in the Church or in the Mosque. I want to remind you that when we marry these women, we leave them and start lingering out, reaching home at midnight and when the wife asks you where you have been, you just slap –(Member timed out_) 

7.12 
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee Members and the committee chairperson for the submission, but allow me also to look at the observation where there is no specific legislation on violence against women. Allow me emphasise the fact that women have been violently abused but as Parliament, we have not domesticated all the bills of rights; the right to food, the right to education and the international obligations which are taken under the UN convention. As a committee, I think we need to verify whether we have domesticated them. 

Violation of one’s rights should be condemned in any society and under the bills of rights we should be domesticating these international conventions which ensure that our actions are in consonance with the legislation we shall put in place. 

Emphasis has been put on women but allow me to emphasise the fact that as we talk of gender equality and women empowerment, men have been silently abused and have been silently beaten up by so many women who have gained a lot of emancipation. They abuse the rights of men and I think that much as we condemn violence against women, we should also condemn violence against men. Many women who have acquired positions of responsibility have taken it upon themselves to violently abuse the rights of their men. As a fact, we should also condemn violence against men.

As I wind up, I have looked at the recommendations of the committee and most of them are medial. They are looking at how we treat those who have been violated against –(Member timed out_)

7.14 
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two recommendations: One, I want to add that we must look at the men in a friendly manner. I recommend that we run programmes that sensitise men against violence. I have been visiting many clubs in mainly the Church Of Uganda – the Father’s Unions – when you analyse all these men in these clubs and when you visit their homes, you find that they change in practise and their homes are very peaceful. So if we create a political mass of men who are friendly to women, I think the violence can reduce drastically. 

Secondly, when we go to our constituencies, we meet very many women with a lot of problems ranging from land cases, violence and poverty. So, I highly recommend that we highly decentralise all these issues to do with women. Let us look at family issues and issues of social fabric in our society because the cycle is continuous. It is actually bigger than what we are talking about here because we have talked about children and women, and now we are talking about men. All this is affecting our social fabric. 

So if we look at globalisation, we should go down and have a mechanism through the Ministry of Gender. We have mainstreamed gender but we should further mainstream all these issues of culture and social development and take the action through our levels especially the LC III so that within certain localities, or within the institutional framework of the LCs we can effectively address issues that address the social fabric of society and ensure that we act at lower levels. I think it can help us to reduce the current problems. Otherwise, the problem is beyond women and men; it is a rotten society of violence, of murders, of killings and of lack of hopelessness and it is becoming uncontrollable. I thank you very much. 

7.17 
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for a well presented report. I have just three concerns. As we fight to eradicate violence against women, there is need to modernise our cultures. Some cultures actually breed violence against women. A very good example is the central region of Uganda or even the whole of Uganda. Polygamy is for men and not women and yet human beings are equal before God. So when a man is caught with another woman, they say it is okay but if a woman is caught with another man, they say it is adultery. So when making relevant laws, there is need to criminalise both sides. 

Madam Speaker, a few minutes ago we were discussing street children and one of the causes of street children is violence in families. When families break and when there is no peace at home, definitely the children will be on the street. So, if we manage families, we shall have very few street children on the roads.  

Although some people have alleged that families of poor people have peace, in most cases there is a lot of violence especially when there is abject poverty. So we should call upon government to make sure that we eradicate poverty. If money is not enough, then families start weighing whether it is the boy or girl who should go to school but if funds are available, everybody will get the chance –(Member timed out_) 

7.19 
MR ELIJAH KYETUNDA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must thank the committee and especially the chairperson for this report. In fact, it should have been presented last year and not today. I really support them and I condemn violence in all forms. There is indecent dressing in this country. We have been talking of empowering the girl child in education but when you walk the streets of this city, you will virtually look at a lady and you will see them walking almost completely naked. I plead with all civil society organisations and Members of Parliament to try and instil sanity and moral ethics into our children beginning with our own homes. I think that some of this violence, especially sexual violence, at times is being abated by the way our girls are dressing in this country and this is happening as we just look on. 

As we speak, there is an established family and children’s court but I was looking at the vote on account just the day before yesterday; when you look at how ministries have been allocated funds, you find that one ministry has Shs 400,000 billion and Judiciary has just around Shs 2.0 billion. That is a distinct difference.

And even when the courts are there - like now we are saying that the LC courts should be there and the LC Is should also handle cases - I do not know how we have catered for all these so that when we actually establish them we empower them to do the job for which we formed them.

7.21
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyaddondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened well and I think this is time well spent. I thank the person who made the report. All the reasons for violence have been advanced except the one of politicising homes.

A lot of politics is causing violence in homes. You find the husband, a youth, supporting FDC and a humble woman, supporting the Movement. But when they engage in debate, the end result is a fist exchange. Over-politicising homes has become one of the recent violent debates because nobody takes these debates simply. Somebody goes back home and starts a debate and this ends up in violence. I think there should be people to counsel people during campaigns so that they understand that campaigns and supporting one party and not the other should not end in fighting.

Another cause of domestic violence has been the diseases. Diabetes has caused fights in homes because the man is no longer able to do what he is supposed to do. AIDS has also brought problems in homes. If a woman suspects a husband of womanising, the result will be that the woman will suspect the man of bringing the disease home and instead of having a discussion they fight. 

So all those reasons have brought violence in our homes and I think the solution is that we should embed counselling culturally and get NGOs and whoever to address this subject on radios and other -(Interruption)

MR KIBEDI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The issue of culture has also contributed a lot to this violence. As leaders, we should try to talk to these cultural people because this issue of asking for bride price, for some cultures which set bride price, leads some people to look at women as property. It is better that if I am interested in a girl or a wife I am going to marry like I am about -(Laughter)- it should be me to determine what to take because of the love I have for my wife. It should not be the family to determine what I should take. That eventually leads some people to take women as property and when a woman misbehaves fighting follows. 

The other issue is moral decadence. If we could continue to encourage our constituents to go to Church and to the Mosque - I have got the opportunity to read two religious books very well, that is, the Bible and the Koran. There is no religion that supports violence. It is only that now days the percentage of people behaving well is declining everyday. So it is upon us as leaders and religious leaders -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But are you giving information or making a contribution? (Laughter)

MR KIBEDI: Yes, I am giving information. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR SEBUNYA: Let me end my submission by saying that I think counselling should be brought to homes. It should not remain in institutions but it should come home and come to our villages. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.26
THE MINISTER OF LABOUR, GENDER AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on its report, especially the recommendations. 

I would also like to report that the government is doing a lot to address some of the causes of gender violence against women.

As other Members have stated, the education system which the NRM brought has helped a lot to remove the imbalance and therefore make sure that the girl child goes to school. In the past, the girl child would not go to school if the parents did not have enough. But because of free education, both the girl and the boy now go to school.

I would also like to say that with the introduction of universal secondary education, we now do not have a hard choice between the girl and the boy. 

Some Members have said that we have not gone far with regard to tertiary institutions apart from the university. I would like to say that vocational institutions which take on primary seven leavers do not differentiate between a girl and a boy. They all attend those classes freely. So, that is helping the girl child also to get technical education.

We would like to go further and state that this Prosperity for All is not prosperity for all men only but it is prosperity for men and women. So, when we are choosing the six homesteads in a parish, there is no provision that you cannot choose a wife or a woman. So, this also creates some income in the hands of both the women and the men.

Since we are pressed by time and since the Speaker has been so good to give me a few minutes, let me exploit them and say what I would like to say and let you go. I would like to say that the government is making sure that the laws which are trying to bring fairness in the homes are being brought before Cabinet. Some are already coming to Parliament. The Domestic Violence Bill was brought to Cabinet and we passed it. They have now written and we have had the first reading. Also, the Deputy Speaker has worked very hard to make sure that FGM law is brought forward to this -(Applause)

I would like to say that we in government are working with a private Member who is going to bring this Bill here. If he is late, I would like to report to you that we have done very well in Cabinet. The policy was passed and the principles of the Bill have been passed and we have sent them for drafting. We would like to say that we must work together. The Act which was brought by the Private Member of Parliament - not all of them are not done properly but this one of PWD was not done properly and it was not given time. So, I would advise that even if the Private Member’s Bill is ready we must make sure that it also goes to the Solicitor General’s Office so as to panel beat it.

We are failing to operationalise the PDWs law because the Office of the Solicitor General insists the Bill was drafted badly and that they cannot operationalise it by mere provision of regulations. I would therefore like to inform Members of Parliament that even if this Bill is brought via a Private Members’ Bill we should give time to the Solicitor General’s Office to advise on whether, if passed into law, that law can be operationalised. That is my opinion. I am saying this because I must do my job. Otherwise, we are not going to keep allowing Private Members’ Bills when we have the capacity to draw Bills.

I also want to inform you that the Marriage and Divorce Bill has already been discussed in Cabinet and sent for drafting. This Bill emerged after we broke the Domestic Relations Bill into two Bills: one to deal with marriage and divorce issues and the other to cater for our Moslem friends. This is an indication that we are working hard to contain violence in our homes.

I also would like to say that in our NRM committees at least three or four members are women. I hope FDC, CP and DP will copy that from us in order for them to balance up. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point of information that I would like to give to hon. Gabriel Opio, the minister, is that while he boosts of NRM having three women on each committee, for us we allocate a minimum of 40 percent of our positions to women. So, we practice more affirmative action than NRM.

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, I have been corrected; NRM has also moved to 40 percent.

Lastly, I would like to say that the NRM Government put in place a whole Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development –(Interjections)– well it was not brought by FDC. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, because of all these innovations by the NRM system and given our concept that we must treat women and men fairly, I would like to, in conclusion, say that we should take a short time when we discuss the Domestic Violence Bill. This will enable all of us to go to Heaven instead of Hell. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. But hon. Members, I just want to make a comment on the proposal to remove the 1.5 points. I want the Government Chief Whip and government to tell those who are proposing to remove the 1.5 points to first look at the census of 2002. In that census it was reported that less than two percent of the women of Uganda had reached post tertiary. That meant that less than two percent of the women population in Uganda had gone beyond senior four. So, as they talk, they should look at that too.

Hon. Members, I now put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.38 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 June 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)


