Tuesday, 29 June 2010

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. Today we have a full gallery. I would like you to join me in welcoming interns and law graduates of Pepperdine University School of Law, California. They are serving in various capacities in the courts of Uganda and they are here for three months. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Ibanda Town Primary School, represented by hon. Guma Gumisiriza. (Applause)

There is another group on this side. When I get their identity, I will inform you.

Secondly, last Thursday, the Minister for Agriculture moved for the first reading of the Fish Amendment Bill, 2009. There was an objection but subsequently, the Leader of the Opposition withdrew that objection. I have subsequently perused the text of the Bill and I find that there is no problem with it. It complies with the Budget Act and so I direct that the Fish Amendment Bill, 2009 goes to the committee for scrutiny and report back.

Then the other matter I wish to communicate is that you may have read in the press about our former colleague hon. Ken Lukyamuzi who has been threatening to sue Parliament for his emoluments. Just for the information of Members, Parliament was not party to the suit and, therefore, the Parliamentary Commission has written to the Solicitor-General seeking advice as to who is responsible for paying the judgment debt. So, we shall keep you informed about progress on that issue. 

Hon. Members, I think the group on this side are pupils and teachers of Namukoge Revelation Primary School, Kaliro. They are represented by hon. Wambuzi and hon. Mbeiza. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.51
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I rise to raise a matter of national importance, which also affects my constituency. It shall be recalled that some time ago this Parliament approved the formation of nine new municipalities in Kasese, Hoima, Mukono, Iganga, Masindi, Busia, Bushenyi, Rukungiri and Ntungamo. These new municipalities will start to operate on Thursday, 1 July 2010, which is this week. Guidelines have been issued by the Minister of Local Government to guide councillors in these areas on how to move on with the operationalising of the new municipalities. 

However, the minister, in his communication to the district chairpersons in these areas, indicated that the new municipalities will be established in accordance with sections 180(b), 181, 182, 183, 184, 186 and 187 of the Local Governments Act. 

He further indicated that the chairpersons or the mayors of the current elevated town councils shall be the interim mayors of the municipalities in accordance with section 181(2) of the Local Government Act.

When you look at section 181(2) referred to by the Minister, it reads: “Notwithstanding sub-section (1), a chairperson elected by universal adult suffrage shall have an option to remain the chairperson of the original local government.” 

The minister is extending this section to cover the election of the interim municipal chairmen whereas it is my opinion that this is not supposed to be the case. The Local Governments Act under section 182 clearly stipulates that an interim local government council shall elect an interim chairperson from among the members of the council by secret ballot. 

If we go by the interpretation and guidance of the minister, it means, for example, that the current chairperson of Mukono Town Council in my constituency shall be the Mayor of Mukono Municipal Council whereas Mukono Municipal Council now comprises of two local governments, that is, Goma sub-county and Mukono Town Council. 

The proper arrangement would have been to constitute the interim municipal council with councillors from both these local governments who would sit and elect an interim mayor. This election, according to section 187 of the Local Governments Act, is supposed to be conducted by the Electoral Commission.  

I feel that the framers of this law knew the importance of such an election and that is why they made it mandatory that in order for any person to be declared an interim chairperson or mayor of a municipality must have obtained more than 50 percent of the votes cast that day. 

So, by giving such a guideline, the minister is bypassing the democratic procedure and denying the people of these newly created municipalities an opportunity to vote their mayor through their councillors. 

I request, therefore, that this House pronounces itself on this matter. Whenever an election is proposed, it is ordered by law. I think such an election must be held, however short the period might be, however inconveniencing the holding of that election might be and however expensive it might be; when the law provides for an election, that election must be held. Rigging elections either directly or indirectly has very bad consequences and Madam Speaker, I want to request that this House pronounces itself and if possible after that guidance, the minister withdraws this letter and elections for these areas particularly my constituency in Mukono Municipality be held by the Electoral Commission. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do appreciate your difficulty but when you look at the list you read, there are some town councils which have remained in their original state and then there are those town councils, which have been combined with other areas. So, it is not possible for us to pronounce ourselves on a common position but what we can undertake is to ask the minister to come and clarify the position as it is going to be. We cannot take a decision on that one today.

Well, the Leader of Government Business is here.

2.58
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Minister of Local Government will clarify this matter. [HON. MEMBERS: “He is here coming in.”] Hon. Ahabwe has just come in but since he has just come, he may not have internalised the matter. So, I suggest that either she repeats or he answers tomorrow. You see what I mean? And I want to caution hon. Ahabwe never to come late. Never! (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Local Government should access the Hansard today, read it and answer tomorrow.

2.59
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nambooze has raised a matter to do with the municipalities which were newly created. I am rising to seek clarification from Government in regard to the newly created districts. We are aware that all of them will start operating on 01 July 2010, which is just a day after tomorrow. 

In many newly created districts there was a lot of excitement upon creation of new administrative units to the extent that for my case, in Ngora District to be, members there have been holding preparatory meetings for the start of the district, aimed at getting a semblance of a celebration on 1st July 2010 and in fact, even the Deputy RDC in charge of Ngora has been attending those preparatory meetings.

To my surprise, yesterday, the Deputy RDC came with the DPC and Deputy DISO and declared the second last preparatory meeting illegal and yet he has been attending the previous ones. He based his argument on the fact that, I hear the intelligence network from President’s Office had gathered that some other personalities were going to attend the celebrations of 1st July. He said no more such meetings were to take place, no celebrations on the 1st and even those individuals who had made contributions towards the celebrations on the 1st must be given back whatever they had contributed.

I beg to find out whether these RDCs are really not misusing the name of the President, claiming that they have got directives from the President that this meeting should not take place and even the celebrations must not take place.

And if the people have decided to organise themselves to have a symbolic party - I know the Ministry of Local Government will organise at a later date, the official launch of the newly created districts - but if the people have gone ahead to make their own contributions to have a semblance of a celebration, must it be criminalised by the state the way it happened in Ngora yesterday? Right now, people are not amused with the status quo. I beg to seek clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Local Government, you have heard, can you tell us what the people of Ngora should do?

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Epetait called me sometime this week and he was inviting me to participate in the celebration of the newly created district of Ngora on 1st July. Among other things, he was asking whether interim committees and an interim council should be formed. I told him he could not form the interim council because the district is legally operational on 1 July, so it is after the 1st that the Electoral Commission, as mandated by the Local Government Act, will come in and hold elections for interim councils and interim committees.

On the issue of celebrations and how they are interrupted by certain other offices, I am not privy to that kind of information. All I can do is to consult with the Minister for the Presidency who is in charge of the Resident District Commissioners and probably the Minister in Charge of Security because certainly, if it is an issue of security, it is not my area but I can always consult with the relevant minister so that they make a clarification on this one.

3.04
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. Yesterday as I was driving to town early in the morning, I was shocked to see the trees along Entebbe Road cut down. When we hosted CHOGM in this country, we undertook to make our country beautiful, particularly Kampala, and we allocated a budget to that effect where the beautification was undertaken.

Among other things which were done in the beautification of Kampala, was tree planting of selected species along Entebbe Road. As we are celebrating to see the beautiful palm trees and other selected species along our beautiful road to Entebbe, the entry to Uganda, somebody decides to cut them down and it has raised great concern because as we are looking at our country, allocating funds as it was during CHOGM to a project, that before we reap the benefits, somebody comes and cuts those trees down. 

In addition to that, climate change is a global problem. Tree planting is one of the activities we are undertaking as a country to adapt to climate change. It would be contradictory that we sink money into such a project and we destroy it before we can reap the benefits. 

I would like the minister concerned to come and clarify to this House who is undertaking the cutting of these trees and for what reason. How could it be possible that we sink money into this project and without any feel for the future of this country, it is destroyed without anybody raising concern over it?  

Lastly, who is going to account for such squandering of taxpayers’ money? I would like the minister concerned to come and explain to this House this unfortunate action and probably as an institution, Parliament would make a pronouncement over it. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe technically what we can ask the minister is whether they were supposed to be trees or flowers? Because, if you planted trees underneath electric wires, sewerage lines and telecom cables! So, the clarification should be whether they were supposed to be trees or flowers. If they were supposed to be trees, they are supposed to be cut because they are lying on the wrong technical line.

MR MUKITALE BIRAHWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the question of destroying trees is very important. Related to what Maama Mabira is reporting, a few weeks ago here at Parliament, in the northern wing gardens, I was shocked to find all trees around the Parliamentary gardens and the northern wing completely chopped. [HON. MEMBERS: “Pruning.”] No, it was not pruning. I actually thought the northern wing chamber was going to get started the following week, only to be told that somebody was cleaning.  

I am wondering - if you saw the logs, which were carried away! I really got concerned and I have been tickled to raise it today. Was that a firewood tender or cleaning of the compound? Because it takes long to have such beautiful trees reach that level. So, as we find out about the CHOGM trees, the beauty at Parliament is gone, the parliamentary gardens are naked. The last time I had my community here; they were very happy with the other garden down there. Whoever did it did it wrongly and should be made to explain. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the minister wish to say something about the beauty of Kampala?

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank hon. Anywar for raising this matter. Yesterday in the late hours of the afternoon, I was travelling to Entebbe and somebody called me. He asked me who was responsible for cutting down the trees between Lweza and Bwebajja Hotel. 

I got interested and started looking on either side of the road. I was dismayed that the trees on the right side of the road as you are going to Entebbe had actually been cut. I was so riled.    

My immediate suspicion was that probably somebody is trying to sabotage the convening of the African Union Conference. So I decided to call the District Police Commander who is in charge of the Police Station at Kajjansi and asked him whether he was aware that our trees planted during the beautification of the Kampala-Entebbe highway are being cut down. And when you look at the way they were cut, it looks like somebody was in a hurry. You could almost think that there was thuggery in the cutting process and that is why my suspicion was that maybe somebody is really trying to sabotage the forthcoming AU Conference. 

But the Police told me that they have information that one of the government institutions was scared by the rate at which the trees were growing and they were going to interfere with the electric line that goes to State House. 

I was a bit disturbed but I said, “Well, even if that was going to happen, at least some consultations should have taken place and then an arrangement be put in place to see how to either relocate them or replace them”. So, I immediately took a decision to write to the Inspector-General of Police and gave a copy to the DPC of Lweza although I had verbally instructed him to write a brief report of his findings so that I can formally inform the institution concerned in order to convene some kind of meeting, and then see how to replant the trees. If the trees were going to interfere with the lines, that is inevitable but we needed to sit and find a way of replacing those trees. 

MR BANYENZAKI: The whole issue about this highway to Entebbe and other roads in Uganda is a question that this House has raised before and that is the issue of the road reserves. The issue of road reserves in this country is not clear. People build where road reserves have been secured and some of the poles have been planted near the road. So, had the issue of the road reserves been clear, even this planning of these beautification trees would have been clear. 

I think that the thing we need to sort out, Madam Speaker, the road reserves along these highways should be made clear and secured. Unless we secure these road reserves, we shall always have problems like that. (Dr Epetait rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, now who is really going to answer this question?
 
MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, I have already stated that I have taken some action and I intend to call a meeting with the relevant Government institution that did that so that we rectify the situation. That is, I think, the way to go. Otherwise, there is really no way we can respond beyond this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the meantime, have you stopped them from cutting while you meet? 

MR AHABWE: Of course, I instructed the DPC to do the surveillance over the entire road stretch.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague, the minister for having shared the pain with other Ugandans who saw what happened yesterday but from some other angles of submission, there is the illusion that the Umeme people could have cut the trees citing that the trees grew and interfered with the power line to State House - whichever way, all Ugandans are the same to a certain level. 

But my clarification is: when we were planning for CHOGM and this tree planting, I recall that there was an inter-ministerial committee and all the relevant ministers were part and parcel of this planning. How could it have been possible that the minister in charge of beautification could have gone ahead and planted trees where they were not supposed to have been planted without the advice of the other related ministries like Energy? I want to seek this clarification. 

Secondly, I want my colleague to assure this House as to how fast we shall have this report and if it is found that it is Umeme purportedly doing part of the work and we are already saying that those who have cut these beautiful trees should be brought to book, what action are you going to take in the meantime? I found out from my other colleague who is not in that such cutting was also done in Jinja and Mukono. So, how come we shall keep on seeing Umeme cutting down trees, which have been there for years yet we are sinking money into preserving them? I need that clarification. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not want to pre-empt the debate on CHOGM. We shall give you time to debate that. Can I ask you to take note of those issues and bring them up during that debate because we are going to have time to talk about it at length as there is a report? You will ask those questions then, do not pre-empt the debate.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, it is with sadness that I am reporting to you and hon. Members about the death of the wife of hon. Tress Buchanayandi, Member of Parliament for Bufumbira South. She passed away yesterday. She had come to Kampala to join us in the National Resistance Movement conference. Details of her death are yet to be known and so is the date of the burial. As soon as we get more details, I will inform you so that you could inform the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I had received the information in the morning but I was hoping that by the time we sit they would have given us the actual programme so that we can inform you. I was actually looking around to see whether hon. Eudia Kwizera is here to give me the information but I did not see her.

MR BAHANE: The burial will be on Thursday. She died of hypertension. She boarded a bus yesterday and today morning as they were approaching Kabale, her blood pressure rose. She was taken to Kabale Hospital and shortly thereafter, she was pronounced dead. It happened this morning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, now you know that the burial will be on Thursday most likely in the afternoon. Where?

MR BAHANE: It will be in Kisoro town.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think generally we bury after 2.00 p.m. Let us stand up to honour Mrs Buchanayandi.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.21
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hilary Onek): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I promised to come on Tuesday and lay the Petroleum Production Sharing Agreements before you at Parliament and also make a brief statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But do not go into contentious issues please, because we do not want a debate based on speculation.

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, I will read what I have written. Allow me to lay before this House the Production Sharing Agreement for exploration, development, production of petroleum resources, which Government has concluded with various oil companies. These documents have on several occasions been presented to the Natural Resources Committee by my predecessor of the committee of Parliament for discussion and my ministry has conducted a workshop with the committee to facilitate in depth understanding of the documents.

Madam Speaker, the agreements before you have been entered into with licensees in accordance with the provisions of the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, revised edition 2000, Cap 150 whose commencement date is 27 September 1985.

As this House receives the agreements, it is important for me to briefly describe the various types of petroleum agreements and why Uganda concluded production sharing agreements as well as the main features of these agreements.

There are generally four major types of petroleum agreements between international oil companies and host governments and they are namely:
(a)	Concession agreements -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, on the Order Paper is the laying of the Production Sharing Agreements. Now we have a statement before us from the Minister. Does that mean that we are going to have a debate here after his statement? If we are going to have a debate after this statement, so be it but if we do not, then let him lay the Production Sharing Agreements on the table and they are committed to the appropriate committee; he comes at an appropriate time with his statement and then we debate it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, lay the various agreements one by one and then our committee will peruse them and we will have a debate later when they bring their report.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These are contractual agreements and there are certain obligations that Members must also observe, and that is why I chose to read this brief statement to guide them so that certain conditions are observed. Otherwise, these are contractual documents and not public documents -(Interruption)- then I will postpone laying them today. No, it has to be - I either postpone laying it or you listen to what I have to say as I am laying –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Just make a very brief explanation. Very brief and do not go into details because that will cause a debate.

MR ONEK: I thank you for your wise guidance. Concession agreements – there are four types of agreements; there are Concessional Agreements, Service Contract Agreements, Joint Venture Agreements and then Production Sharing Agreements. I have distributed documents to you to read the details. 

Uganda’s Production Sharing Agreement is explained – what kind of agreement we have entered. I have also distributed this to Members. I am particularly begging that Maama Mabira should lend me her ears because she has been misguiding the public on this document. I want it to be clear so that the public is not misguided. You must understand them before you talk. I would wish that that is the order of the day. 

Uganda’s Production Sharing Agreements which we have entered into with different companies are described here. I want to read through them. The major issues, which I want to raise and notify our colleagues about here, because oil is a national asset and not a political asset – it does not belong to any particular political party but to the people of Uganda. When we are handling this kind of strategic commodities, which is supposed to be for the entire country, it does not call for taking it as a political item. That is what I have to state briefly. I want to read the conclusion. 

In conclusion, I wish to stress the fact that Uganda’s Production Sharing Agreements compare very well with those of oil and gas producing countries which naturally have good agreements due to the reduced geological risks among others. The total take for the country is on average 70 percent and yet these agreements were negotiated at the time when Uganda was not among those countries, which were known to have oil and gas resources. 

In other words, if the oil production takes place, Government takes 70 percent and it is only 30 percent that goes to the oil companies and even that 30 percent is taxed by Government. We tax 30 percent of that 30 percent left to them – this is actually the gist of this report. The later agreements which were made after this – the original ones, up to 80 percent is taken by Government if they produce oil during the time of production and about 20 percent is given to the oil companies. Thirty percent of that 20 percent is taxed –(Interjections) (Laughter)

That important scenario is attributed to the strong vision of His Excellency, the President who set the long term strategic direction of capacity building in the oil and gas sector. It is these trained Ugandans who negotiated the good contracts and spearheaded the petroleum investment promotion programme that has led to the discovery of commercial oil and gas resources.

Finally, Madam Speaker, it is important to bear in mind that there is a lot of intellectual property and heavy risk capital investment that is linked to the Production Sharing Agreements. That is why both parties; the Government and the oil companies, seek protection against piracy and uncalled for disclosure through confidentiality clauses. I, therefore, request that the rights of the parties are fully protected by this House. These documents should not be made public or traded in the market or the streets because they are confidential documents, which are for you stakeholders to debate soberly and see how to improve them, addressing our interest. 

As Prof. Wolfson from the United States one time stated clearly to the Members of Parliament who attended the conference that production sharing agreements are not public documents and, therefore, I will request that when Members are studying this document, come out with their constructive criticism and it should remain the property of Parliament and the Republic of Uganda. There must be protection of these property rights – and that is only a measure where this House will be measured as full of patriots or people who want to sell out. This is our country. 

So, briefly, I have co-operated with the House and in future if I get this hostile kind of reception, I may decline from contributing further to this House -(Laughter)– this is a serious document, which I am laying on the Table. There is one agreement from – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members! You are the ones who requested for these agreements. Please, order!

MR ONEK: There is one agreement between the Republic of Uganda and Dominion Uganda Ltd. There is Heritage Oil & Gas Ltd, Energy Africa Ltd, Hardman Petroleum Africa Ltd, and the Government of Uganda and Fina Exploration Uganda Ltd. So these are the documents I have laid on the Table and thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just want to assure the Minister of Energy that this House has handled a lot of very confidential work and if it is required that the committee sit in camera then they will do so. I want to assure you that the documents are safe and that our committees can be trusted to handle important work of this country.

DR EPETIAT: As the minister was laying the agreements, I was marking from the list that we have in the statement. I did not hear Neptune Petroleum (U) Ltd. Is it by omission, commission, what is it? Where is it? 

MR ONEK: All the documents are there and that is why I was asking for them to lend me their ears. When they are talking they do not follow. (Laughter) So, I would wish that -(Members rose)- it is there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! We are not going to debate this. On what?

MR BANYENZAKI: On this process because documents that have been laid on the Table are public documents and these agreements – I do not see how we say that if we are going to discuss them in the committee and it is requested that we discuss the matter in camera – yes, it can be. But again, you do not restrict Parliament when you have laid a document on the Table and then say, “This is a confidential document.” It is a public document when you have placed it on the Table. I do not see anything wrong with that and the moment we go with that concept, then that means that even the committee that is going to study these agreements is going to say that they are confidential documents and then they will not allow Members of Parliament to have access to it the way the committee which had those agreements before - when they sneaked them to Parliament was keeping them and yet these are only confidential documents to us. So, it must be made clear that since they are laid on the Table, they are public documents.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are two things here: one is a rejoinder to what my colleague, hon. Epetait asked in relation to the delay. For purposes of the record, the agreement by Neptune Petroleum Company – Neptune is operating in Obongi and I am sure the people of Obongi would also like to see that the agreement between Neptune and Government of Uganda is laid on the Table. So, is it there or not? What should I tell them? 

Secondly, on the issue of confidentiality, I would like to seek clarification - members of the public especially the community around where exploration takes place should be able to tell whether they have a share or not. The information needs to be made public because such people would like to know it. So, how shall we handle that angle – that is a public resource? People are interested in the percentage for the beneficiary or affected communities, but how shall we talk about it when these are not supposed to be public documents? (Members rose)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, I have already said that committees of this House can be trusted to handle all the important work of the country – yes – don’t you trust our committees?

MR ONEK: Maybe, let me answer, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my brother for having made an effort to bring these documents to the institution of Parliament.

My clarification is related to the fact that when documents are laid on the Table in Parliament - I belong to the committee that is going to handle them, but if I am under strict advice that it should be kept confidential yet I am Member of Parliament representing the people of Kitgum, Lamwo and Uganda - so am I going to be dealing with these documents as a person called Beatrice Atim or as a people’s representative on whose interests I am here? Am I supposed to keep quiet and keep them in darkness yet the documents talk about an issue that matters to all Ugandans? Shall I deal with these documents as a person? Or is there another way this document is going to be treated in relation to us as Members of Parliament who represent the interests of our people? I need these points to be made clear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know why you are prolonging this matter. I have said that our committees should be given the confidence to do their work. If you are a member of the committee, those documents will be availed to you before you take a decision. Let us not engage in unnecessary debate. Yes, hon. Wamai?

MR WAMAI-WAMANGA: I stand to talk about the same issue, Madam Speaker. The Minister, after presenting and laying documents on the Table, went on to make statements that I feel are very unfortunate. How could he caution Members of Parliament to be patriotic? Is he the only patriotic minister? I thought ministers work in the interests of the people of Uganda. I think the people of Uganda are entitled to know this information; they have been asking for it. 

I recall from the time I came to this House, Members have been demanding to see the agreements on oil – it is surprising that the minister, after making the statement, is cautioning Members of this House to ensure the documents remain confidential. I am not going to be party to that. And since these are public documents, I will read and discuss them with my electorate who also belong to this country. I thank you. 

MR MUKITALE: Thanks you so much, Madam Speaker. As Parliament, we need to help this country; this oil was prospected under the 1995 Exploration Act by the Parliament then. In 2000, this Act was amended by Members of Parliament then who inserted the confidentiality clause. As we start demanding to open up, we should be mindful that it is Parliament that set the rules. 

So, what is the way forward? Right now, we have the Petroleum Resource Production and Value-Addition Bill before us. Can we use this Bill to outlaw the confidentiality clause, if we so wish? This will help us save future Parliaments and the country from this confidentiality, which the two Parliaments included in the law. What I am saying is that the Executive is putting in practice a law that we enacted ourselves. So, I think we should not put too much pressure on the current minister. The Eighth Parliaments should solve this problem once and for all by outlawing the confidentiality clause. Liberia has done that in their recent laws. We can even adopt destructive industry transparency initiative in our laws, if we want. We will not demand anything from the executive; we will have set the rules of the game. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the agreements are committed to the Committee on Natural Resources and I will give the guidelines on how they will be handled especially the proprietary of the parties concerned, tomorrow.

3.44
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today is 29 June 2010 and in accordance with the provisions of the Budget Act, the various ministerial policy statements and spending agencies should be here latest tomorrow. However, I would like to inform this House that only a few ministries have complied with the law yet it is important that we receive these statements latest tomorrow so that the House can proceed to do its work. This is to remind the respective ministries and the ministers who have not forwarded their policy statements to Parliament, to do it latest tomorrow. That is according to the provisions of the law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.45
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. I would like to say that the circular I gave to all ministers was that they should produce policy statements by the 21st day of this month. This was so because the Speaker urged us to handle these matters expeditiously in view of what is going to happen. So, those ministries that did not submit their policy statements by the 21st day of this month have heard and/or it may be necessary even to read their names here. I do not know the system, but Madam Speaker, it may be necessary to read the names of those ministers who have submitted their policy statements. As you know we did produce ours –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. The clarification I would like to seek from him is: yes, you directed that by the 21 June 2010 all policy statements must be here, but not all of them have complied. What action have you taken as a Prime Minister? Are you demonstrating that you are not capable to enforce your directives?

MS ANYWAR: I thank the hon. Prime Minister for giving way. I am seeking clarification that as we receive this ministerial statement, there is a lot of interest from the public to know and scrutinise it. We would wish those who have the technical know how to give an input. I want to know whether there is anywhere we can have software access to this ministerial statement so that the public and any other interested party can advise the ministries depending on their expertise.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I wish to inform hon. Nandala that according to the laws of natural justice, when I give a directive and a minister is unable to comply with it, I seek from that him/her the reason why he has not complied with the directive. He/she may have valid reasons for not complying. I do not act as a dictator as some people tend to do. 

With regard to the second issue, when policy statements are being discussed, the public will know what is happening. I suggest that we handle these policy statements as we have always handled them and we do this work expeditiously.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I add that the business of Parliament is not secret and usually the business that is being handled during the week is put in the press. So, any member of the public who has interest in fishing can come to the committee.

MS AKOL: I would like to make another reminder, the other time I requested that each policy statement should be presented with an additional three attachments. These should include: a work plan, a procurement plan and a recruitment plan for those who intend to recruit.

I note that those additional work plans are not included in their policy statements. I want chairpersons to be very critical when looking at these policy statements. If there are no procurement plans, it will be difficult for the Ministry of Finance to know how much money a given ministry needs for a quarter. 

This is to help them so that Ministry of Finance also allocates money efficiently. This House should make sure that those statements are there and should be presented together with policy statements.

3.51
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): I note that we are going to the second reading of the computer misuse Bill and the debate may take long. I recall that last week we demanded an explanation from the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Agriculture in regard to the ongoing recruitment of agricultural extension staff who are being conscripted into NAADS.

The Minister of State for Public Service did promise that they would update Parliament on what exactly is going on. Now that I see the Minister of Public Service here, can we be updated before we go for the next business? Currently, recruitment is going on all over the country and many agricultural extension staff are wondering what their fate is going to be in the Ministry of Agriculture.

3.52
THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): This matter has been with us for about two years and views are varied on how to proceed. The latest information is that there is a committee, which has been set up under the Minister for the Presidency in which all interested parties are represented. These include the ministries of agriculture and public service.

The concept of NAADS was that it would take over from the Ministry of Agriculture. This is because the ministry had not succeeded in delivering the services. However, NAADS remained an integral part of the ministry. NAADS tended to behave as if it was somehow independent of agriculture. As matters moved on, it became necessary to decide on the fate of the staff. There was no problem with the junior staff because those who remained were taken up by NAADS. The problem is with those who are at the sub-county level, there was debate whether they should remain in the Ministry of Agriculture or they should move to NAADS.

NAADS wanted them to resign from agriculture so that they become part them. The arrangement was that they would be employed on contract terms after resigning from the Ministry of Agriculture.

This was what NAADS wanted and some members of staff liked it that way because they were going to be retired and they would an extra 1/3 of their pension. They are also going to get favourable terms in contracts under NAADS.

The idea of retiring these people did not appeal to some people. They thought that they were being forced to retire. The officials themselves saw the benefits of taking advantage of this arrangement. They are retired and then they move on contract terms with NAADS and continue that way. But the whole idea of having resigned from Agriculture is what becomes difficult. Therefore, since there was no agreement, Cabinet has set up a committee under the Minister for the Presidency to look into this matter once again to see how we can move next. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I do not know whether you should not give us a statement because now we are debating from the air –(Interjections)– yes, hon. Epetait. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I am worried, this is the story of the camel and the Arab. We are aware that NAADS is a project and the Ministry of Agriculture is a public institution that has been there; now the project is literary taking over from a ministry. I am worried because according to the minister, this matter has not been finally resolved. He is saying that an inter-ministerial committee has been set up to look into it, yet the implementation is still on going. People are being told to get out and re-apply to NAADS. Then those who succeed in being recruited by NAADS will be the lucky ones, and that other considerations will be made for those who will not succeed. 

So, my worry is that a project is taking over a ministry. What will happen when the project winds up? We are taking another dangerous trend of retrenching agricultural extension staff; and where will our farmers go for services? So, Madam Speaker, this matter requires an urgent, elaborate statement for in-depth debt by this House.

3.52
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Madam Speaker, Cabinet directed that the whole process of requiring these officers to resign must be stopped, and it has indeed been stopped until such a time as Cabinet will receive the report from the committee chaired by the Minister for the Presidency and take its final decision; that is the position for now. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE COMPUTER MISUSE BILL, 2008

4.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, Dr Nsaba Buturo, is the acting Minister of ICT, so we are ready to proceed.

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Dr James Nsaba-Buturo: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Computer Misuse Bill, 2008”, be read for the second time.  

Until now, the safety and security of electronic transactions and information has not been guaranteed and that has caused a lot of concern to many, concerns to which Government wishes to respond. 

There has been no protection against unlawful access, abuse or misuse of information systems. The Government wishes to respond to this concern that many hon. Members have expressed over a long period of time. 

This Bill, therefore, is aimed at rectifying this and giving remedy to inadequacies some of which I have already indicated. Madam Speaker, I want to commend this Bill to honourable members and I beg to move. 

4.02
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nathan Nabeta): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Sessional Committee on Information Communication Technology is mandated under rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda to examine critical Bills brought by Government before they are debated.

The Computer Misuse Bill, 2008 was read for the first time on 18 March 2009 and committed to the Committee on Information Communication Technology, for consideration and report to the House on its findings. 

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda and now reports.

Background to the Cyber Laws

Madam Speaker, the three cyber laws: The Computer Misuse Bill, 2008; The Electronic Transactions Bill, 2008; and the Electronic Signatures Bill, 2008 are interrelated and together provide a platform for electronic transactions. 

In all electronic transactions, three issues must be address:
1.	The transaction must be enforceable in electronic form.
2.	All parties need to trust the message.
3.	There is need for rules to govern the executing of the transaction in electronic form. 

The Computer Misuse Bill, 2008 in conjunction with The Electronic Signatures Bill, 2008 and Electronic Transactions Bill, 2008 respond to the new market involving products, services and new activities created by electronic commerce. 

This would allow the current initiatives of both the private sector and public sector to benefit fully from the immense opportunities in ICT Sector brought about by the recent advances in the telecommunications and computer technologies. 

ICT initiatives from the private sector include online banking, mobile money transfer and online purchases of goods and services.

In the private sector, ICT initiatives will include e-government services such as application for passports online, e-health, e-tax, e-education services and some others like  the interrelated financial management system being used now by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Electronic Transfers (EFT) used by Bank of Uganda. 

Most of these above projects have been carried out without facilitative legal and regulatory environment. This Bill, alongside the Electronic Signatures and the Electronic Transactions Bill, will help in filling in the existing gaps so that Ugandans can benefit from the new ICT era by ensuring that each electronic transaction is legally valid, binding and enforceable. 

Objects of the Bill

The objects of the Bill is to make provisions for the safety and security of electronic transactions, information systems to prevent, including computers and to make provision for securing the conduct of electronic transactions in a trustworthy electronic environment and to provide for other related matters. 

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following ICT stakeholders:
1.	Minister of ICT
2.	Uganda Communications Commission – I will not read all of them in the interest of time.

The committee reviewed the Bill in context of international best practices embodied in the following regional and international electronic terms and related instruments:
1.	Draft East African Framework for Cyber Laws, 2008
2.	Council of Europe Convention of Cyber Crime, 2001
3.	United Nations Convention on use of Electronic Communications in International Contracts, 2005.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee made the following observations and recommendations. 

Penalties

The committee observed that the penalties and sentences for computer misuse in sections 10(7), 11(5), 13(1), 14(2), 17(1) and 20(3) are too low compared to the nature and gravity of the offences. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that more severe penalties should be instituted. The level of fines applicable for each offence should be reviewed to ensure that they serve as an appropriate punishment and effective deterrent for the offence. 

Child Pornography

Madam Speaker, Section 20(1) provides for the offence of child pornography. The committee noted that the current section makes the offence of child pornography one of strict liability, yet there may be lawful situations where one may possess the same, for example, law enforcement, research or genuine scientific purposes.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that it should tantamount to an offence where the production, distribution, procurement, possession and offering or making available child pornography are unlawful and intentional.

Cyber harassment, offensive communication and cyber stalking 

It was observed that the Bill did not cater for the above mentioned crimes.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Bill be broadened to cater for these crimes to mean: 

Cyber Harassment: Use of a computer for any of the following purposes -
•	Making any request, suggestion or proposal, which is obscene, lewd, lascivious or indecent;
•	Threatening to inflict injury or physical harm to the person or property of any person; or
•	Knowingly permits any electronic communications device to be used for any of the purposes mentioned in this section.

Offensive Communication

Use of electronic communication wilfully and repeatedly to disturb or attempt to disturb the peace, quiet or right to privacy of any person with no purpose of legitimate communication whether or not a conversation ensues.

Cyber Stalking

Repeated use of electronic communication to harass another person and making a threat with the intent to place that person in reasonable fear for his or her safety or to a member of that person’s immediate family. 

Searches and Seizures

Section 21(10) defines an authorised officer as a police officer who has obtained an authorising warrant from the court.

Recommendation

The committee recommended that the powers of the police officer under this Act should be in line with the provisions of the Police Act (Section 27) in respect to the powers of the police officers to search and seize.

Penalty for Misuse of Authority

The committee observed that there is no provision to cater for punishment for abuse of authority by people who have been given authority to use or modify computer material, but rather use such authority for their own benefit or with malicious intent.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that a special provision for this category of people be added to the Bill so that their acts or omissions qualify for abuse of office or corruption.

Jurisdiction of courts

The committee notes that the Bill does not provide for jurisdiction of courts. 

Recommendation

It was recommended by the committee that the Bill should expressly provide for the court, which has jurisdiction to try the offences created under it.

Compensation

The committee observed that there was no provision for compensation to the aggrieved party for the loss suffered.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that where a person is convicted under this Act, the court shall in addition to the punishment provided therein; order such a person to pay by way of compensation to the aggrieved party, such a sum as is in the opinion of the court just, having regard to the loss suffered by the aggrieved party. The award of compensation will help the aggrieved party recover the loss of damage incurred as a result of the accused acts or omissions.

Territorial Jurisdiction

The committee observed that extension of territorial jurisdiction beyond Uganda will be practically difficult to ensure justice in cases where the alleged criminal has fled to a country, which has no reciprocal extradition arrangements with Uganda.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that clause 23(1) should be strengthened to ensure that this Act shall have effect in relation to any person whatsoever his or her nationality or citizenship, and whether he or she is outside or within Uganda.

General Recommendations 

There is need to add a new provision creating general punishment for offences whose punishment is not specifically provided for.

The role of the National Information Technology Authority – Uganda (NITA-U) should be stipulated in the Bill.

There is need for a provision for the Tax Acts to define a computer from time to time for purposes of determining duties and tax liabilities.

For proper adjudication of e-commerce disputes, there is need for specialised knowledge in information technology. Therefore, a special court or tribunal should be established as courts of first instance to deal with matters of this nature. The court or tribunal should consist of persons with specialised electronic systems knowledge.

Conclusion

The committee has proposed a number of amendments (as attached) and requests that at an appropriate time, the House considers these amendments to form part of the Bill.

The proposed Bill, when passed into law with the proposed amendments, will prevent unlawful access, abuse or misuse of information systems, including computers and to make provisions for securing the conduct of electronic transactions in a trustworthy electronic environment.

Due to the overwhelming responses to stakeholders, it is only some of the stakeholders’ comments, observations, proposed amendments and recommendations to the Bill that have been attached to this report as  Annex 1 (page 21).

Madam Speaker, I now lay on the Table all the views of the stakeholders for those who might be interested in looking further at the comments. It should be noted that the stakeholders’ have been laid on the Table. 

The committee recommends that subject to the proposed amendments, the Computer Misuse Bill, 2008 be passed into law. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson and your committee. Hon. Members, I have noted that the report has the minimum number of required signatures, so you are free to debate it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, as you are aware that the world has now moved to the computer. I think it is very important that all of us understand what our colleagues did in this committee.

I have just looked at this report. First, on page 3, where there is methodology, you go straight to observations and recommendations. Having done the methodology, there should have been findings. In summary form, there should have been what these people who came to see you told you. Now, given that I cannot see what MTN said; what ITD Group said; I am lost.

So, is it procedurally right to start debating a report –(Interjections)- the public views –(Interjections)- listen, those are amendments –(Interjections)- without us understanding what it is, Madam Speaker? Is it procedurally right? 

MR NABETA: Madam Speaker, I was presenting the report and I do not know where hon. Nandala-Mafabi was. I said that I have attached a copy of the views of the stakeholders in Annex 1. Actually, I was saying that these views, which are attached, are fewer. I have even brought the bigger volume of the entire stakeholders’ comments; they are attached.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is very good that the chairman is telling us there is a big volume for the observations –(Interjections)- please, give me a chance. I went to school. What is important in this report is: what were your findings? What are the summaries of that big book, because not everybody is going to refer to that big book? 

I could rise and talk about something kumbe if you had summarised what is in the big book; I would not have talked about it. This is the one, which is going to be on our Hansard. I think it would be logical and sensible to have the findings in a summary form; what these people said in summary form; did you agree or disagree and then we can debate from a well-informed point of view.

Madam Speaker, at the back, which he is talking about –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, I 	do not think you have read his annexes. Actually in annex 1, he tells you who said what. I see Bank of Uganda, DPP, WARID Telecom, Uganda Law Reform Commission –(Interjections)- DPP, URA –(Interjections)- that is what I have, MTN. The sources of the views are there -(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what I have seen; I am not blind. It is talking about clauses and amendments. (Interjections) Yes I did, do not worry - I went to a village school; Mwiri is in the village. It is saying MTN - justification on page 24. 

For clarity, DPP, what did DPP tell us? You should have told us that this does not tally with this. MTN should have come up and said, “This is not right or this is what we want.” Madam Speaker, if you are telling me that the attachments that talk about clauses are our findings, then I am lost. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then listen, as others debate.

4.17
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICAITON, ICT AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Louis Opange): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to affirm that the Committee on ICT consulted all the stakeholders, including MTN, as stipulated in this document, and we considered all the findings that the stakeholders made and the observations while making our proposals for the amendment. 

I have two things to raise as far as this document is concerned. We are aware that this computer misuse Bill is a very sensitive Bill. We are also cautious of the way Government is going to handle some issues like search and seize. We agreed that a search warrant must be obtained first before searching of a premise is done, and this will also protect the misuse of the powers by the officers concerned.

We also realised that there is need to domesticate the international conventions of these agreements if this Bill is to be effective, so that we are together with other countries. 

We disagreed in the committee in regard to the penalties. The committee proposed amendments to make the penalties very high. For example, one of them is about 20 years; the other is about 25 years, which the stakeholders later on said is not called for. So, I recommend that the proposal in the original Bill should be adopted so that the penalties are not very primitive. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, this report is a joint effort between my ministry, the Shadow Ministry of ICT and that of the Government. Therefore, I request that the debate is made as short as possible so that we pass this report as it is necessary for the development of the country. Thank you very much. 

4.20
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): The honourable member said that we should debate but I want to seek simple clarification. We are talking of pornography but even Black berries get pornography on the internet. Is it a computer? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] If it is, has it been named here? 

To me, pornography is not misuse of a computer; it is the internet. These things are downloaded from the internet. I think we should perhaps tell people that we should not download some sites. A computer is a tool, which is used by anybody for computation, for writing, for playing cards and others. So, I do not see any misuse of a computer. 

The pornography and the immoral things you are talking about are basically internet items and that is why I am worried. Don’t you think it is important that we block internet sites than coming to the computers? 

I am looking at electronic data transmissions; I think that is where we should concentrate our efforts. How do we transfer data? Which best data do you transfer? Is the data you are transferring good or bad; is it corrupted or not? But this business of saying “misuse of computers” I think, is lack of what to do. A computer can never be misused because it has downloaded a website, which is on the internet. That is a different source altogether. 

Madam Speaker, I would have been happier if this were put aside and we deal with the Electronic Data Bill –(Interjection)– you see, having a minister in charge of guidance who cannot even guide herself is very dangerous. We should have dealt with the Electronic Data Bill and to me that is more important. I do not understand computer misuse; we should deal with the internet, and that is my view. I thank you. 

DR EPETAIT: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising to seek clarification on a few issues. One, we have three related cyber laws: The Computer Misuse Bill, the Electronic Transactions Bill and the Electronic Signatures Bill. I wonder whether it would not have been possible for us to have one cyber law taking into account all those three because fragmenting things like this, to me makes life a little cumbersome. 

Two, the committee on page 6, bullet 2, made a general recommendation that the role of the National Information and Technology Authority should be stipulated in the Bill and yet when I look at the methodology - the various stakeholders whom the committee met - they also forgot to meet that very authority and since you have made that general recommendation to be stipulated in the Bill, I hope at the time of the amendment you made some proposals on the role of the National Information and Technology Authority.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, actually these cyber laws are long overdue. There has been a lot of moral decadence, partly as a result of the misuse of computers and generally speaking, I would support the proposals but I am also a bit reserved about giving heavy penalties. 

I have just heard from the Shadow Minister for ICT that there are even proposals to a jail term of 25 years. I do not know the gravity of such a problem. I think when we go into the nitty-gritty of the various penalty clauses; we will have to reconsider because I have seen the draft in the original Bill. I think the proposals made by the ministry are quite deterrent enough. I think we shall consider that at the Committee Stage. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.24
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I welcome the report of the committee on this Bill. However, speaking on behalf of the old generation, we tend to go slow on the computer, but we are learning. 

I think the committee should have recognised the fact that there are so many people who belong to the old generation who need to know more and understand more on how the computer has been abused and what these stakeholders have been talking about. This would have been treated as such but just to say that they received a memorandum from the Ministry of Information and Technology for - from all these stakeholders; even from the ICT Department in Makerere - we would like to know what their experience has been and what has been happening. How have the computers been abused? How have the signatures been abused; and how can we avert it through this law? 

We can make this law but the application might be difficult. And some of us - I want to express my ignorance that I can use computer but not indepth. I know that those days we used to censor films and movies but these days you cannot because the children go to the computer and they can watch all those - you know they go to the internet and watch all those ugly things. But how do we control it? As a parent, how do I stop my children from using the internet to watch bad films? 

So, I think we need to understand what the concerns are. What are we addressing by these three laws? I think this is my problem and I want the committee to clarify this and come with more authoritative information on which we can base our decision. 

I am not saying it because probably I am slower on the use of computers. I am told that even some of the dot com neighbours around me are expressing the same concern. So, I would like the committee to be more specific, more elaborate and more informative. Thank you.

4.28
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of this Bill but with some concern, specifically to do with cellular phones and misuse of cellular phones and especially the fact that the phone has acquired other uses other than just calling.

A phone is actually a mini-computer depending on how you use it. So, it should be brought into the realm of this Bill as a computer because these days phones are used for all kinds of crime. A phone can store data. Phones have cameras that can take phone images and also send those images to various people. Phones are also used for other criminal activities but in this country one acquires a phone, buys a SIM card, uses it and immediately throws it away just because you can easily acquire a SIM card, misuse it and throw it away. So, I do not know how we are going to handle the issue of a phone being a computer and the ease with which someone can easily misuse that phone using a SIM card that is easily acquired and thrown away. 

In other countries when you travel - even South Africa - getting a SIM card to use in your phone is not easy. You have to be a registered resident and you have to be easily found or traced wherever you are for the purpose that in case you misuse that SIM card or phone, you can easily be traced for crime, for any other purposes including this misuse, of course, of that SIM card and phone.

So, I would really love this House to recommend some amendments to this Bill so that the phone is definitely brought into the realm of this Bill. This House should also deliberate on the way the SIM cards are being misused and restrict, in one way, acquisition of a SIM card by anybody in this country so that it is easily traceable to who has misused his SIM card, and therefore his phone, for any other purpose than the rightful purpose for which it should be used. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.31
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report but also join my colleagues in expressing concern on the way this Bill has been presented. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi pointed out that a computer is a tool and for sure a computer is a tool and a computer has three areas. It has the input area like the keyboard or maybe a microphone and what have you; it has a processing unit - the CPU where information is processed; it has storage and it has the output. The output part can be in different forms. The output could be another computer or it could be a loud speaker. It could also be a printer and so forth. I think crimes are committed somewhere between there, either in the processing or the transmission or in the output or publication or circulation of whatever has been processed in the computer.

So, in the same Bill, they have ended up mentioning the Electronic Transaction Bill as well just because the Computer Bill on its own has not been brought out clearly. They are also putting the Electronic Signature Bill under the same report whereas the report is talking of the Computer Misuse Bill. So, I think we need more clarification on what we want to solve as far as computer misuse is concerned. (Applause) Is it in the processing? Is it in the transmission from one computer to another, because a computer can talk to another computer? So, I think with more light the House would be at ease with the report.

The observations are good - for sure computer technology doubles every three years. What generation of computers are we talking about? Someone who has a stand-alone computer may not be able to misuse a computer but with these computers which are connected, definitely pornography can take place; one can send a bad picture. 

By the way, a television in our homes is a monitor; it is a part of a computer. You can use your computer to see whatever you are processing on the television. So, I think when the policeman is captured we should know. Do we have enough technology, for example if someone is sending voice mail, do we have enough technology to monitor and decipher the language or the accent and all that when this computer is being misused? All these shortcomings should have been pointed out.

But the issue is that computer misuse has been mixed up with electronic transfer and electronic signatures and I think more light should be shone on how these people we are recommending - why was MTN recommending the punishments? We need so many other organs to get involved as far as this Computer Misuse Bill is concerned. I am sure during our amendments, we shall ask for more clarification for everyone and each of these recommended amendments -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I urge Members to read the Bill together with the report because the Bill defines these issues you are talking about? You should read them together, and I also think that at the Committee Stage, all these will be explained.

MR NABETA: Madam Speaker, I think I need to make a clarification on these laws. You have the Computer Misuse Bill, the Electronic Transactions Bill and you have the Electronics Signatures Bill. Let us put it now in other languages.

We now have the road which is the Electronic Transactions; we have the vehicle now that is Computer Misuse and you cannot have transmission if you do not have a phone. If you do not have a computer -(Interjections)- no, that is the car. So, the car is the Computer Misuse Bill we are talking about here.

We are talking about the Computer Transactions Bill that is now the road, the infrastructure on which this communication takes place. The Electronics Signature is more like the drivers’ licence. How do we know that actually -(Interjections)- that is why there are rules to drive on the road, you do not just drive zigzag -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, a lot of concerns have been raised and we are seeking your guidance. I think it is important that the chairperson acknowledges that the points that have been raised are very important and fundamental. It is important that the chairperson goes back to the committee; they look at the points that have been raised and then see how you can combine because what you are talking about now is your personal view not the views of the committee. Can you go back to the committee and get the views of the committee on all these points which have been raised? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issues which have been raised are contained in the texture of the Bill. Read your Bill together with the report. Do not debate exclusively from the report. The Bill is here and all those things are here – yes! So, there is nothing he has left out.

4.40
MRS KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are embarrassing Busoga College Mwiri. (Laughter)

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi does not know that Mwiri is the school.

I want to inform Members that last week, we had a report and sent back the chairperson to the committee and he has brought a report. So for anything, if you want to -(Interjections)- I also want to inform Members that when a member is not happy with what the committee has presented, this is now the committee of the whole House, you are free to bring what you think the committee did not do well. Whoever has an issue that was not dealt with by the committee can bring it in the House and we debate it as Parliament.

Madam speaker, protect me from hon. Nandala-Mafabi because sometimes we do work as the commission when you have plenary here.

My question to the committee is: when you read through the issues of computers and what not, there is nothing that has come in the line of education. How does this Bill protect UNEB because we have had a situation where UNEB has brought in cases where cellular phones were used and then we politicians have come in to say, “Please do not because we do not have the law”? Now, this is a law that is also supposed to protect UNEB. So, how is this Bill proposing to protect UNEB when it is doing its work?

I also want the committee to tell us; last week you received a petition from people who are saying certain service providers are over charging. How are they going to protect us the service users from being cheated by service providers because this cheating is across the country whether internet or mobile phones? The airtime; you talk for one second, they charge for a full minute. How is this Bill protecting us because it is not showed in the Bill? Thank you very much.

4.42
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Examining the report, the core issue that the report intends to address is unlawful viewing. If you open a computer which is not yours and you view the document and in the process of reading you alter the document or the content, you erase the data on that computer; you copy the document - there are many people who do not do research; they go to the computer then maybe they copy the document -(Laughter)- no, without permission. These are the crimes because if you copy or if you move the document to any other place, which is not the original location, or if you use or destroy the document and if you modify the data or damage the data - those are the crimes in the law.

Now I am grappling with the question of identifying this person whom you are targeting to commit this crime. I will go and access the computer, probably you do not know me and I commit all these. How will you establish my identity? (Interjections) No, if I now go to maybe the library, because in the library before we were given our computers, everybody would go to the library and they would make all their documents -(Interjections)- I am telling you with the technology now, the issue of passwords does not help you. There are people who will access any document with your password. That is for sure. So, the issue of passwords will not help you.

I am wondering how you will - I go to the computer, I open the computer, I am hi-tech and then I copy this document, I alter this document, I modify it and I view because even just viewing is a crime under this law -(Interjections)- yeah, viewing! In the law, opening and viewing is a crime; altering, erasing, copying or moving, can be crimes. But I am wondering how you will prove that it is me who has done it.

Secondly, these days, there are many people who will use the internet to copy your document and you will not know. I can sit in New York; I can sit in China; I can sit in Turkey and I can, with a computer, access even security information. There are people who will access security information on their computer seated outside Kampala. Now my worry is that although here you are saying the jurisdiction will be beyond Uganda, but if I have sat on my own computer and used the internet to commit this crime of altering, copying and so forth, how will you get me from the US? How will you get me from Turkey? How will you know that it is me when I am seated with my internet and doing that? How will you know? 

I know in the law you are recommending that there are countries that have agreements to extradite, but what happens beyond the countries that do not have the agreements to extradite?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amongi, are you talking about what they call hacking or the hackers? Yes, they get them; they find the hackers. 

MR ISHAA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am a member of this committee and it took us a lot of time to scrutinise and analyse these three Bills. Indeed these Bills could have actually been presented at once because if you are reading them one by one, you may not easily understand them. 

I was proposing that if we are not short of time or if this report had not been presented on the Floor of the House, we would have called for a workshop or the committee of the whole House –(Laughter)- to analyse the Bills in order to understand them very well. Because the scientific technicalities involved are causing us a lot of problems. I am just following the line of debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Ishaa Otto is very right but also very wrong. Some of us went to Makerere –(Interruption)- listen - at the time when we were not paying school fees. So, we studied very well. These ones who went during the time of paying school fees were often being chased every now and then. Is it really procedurally right for a full Member of Parliament to stand here and tell us that we need a workshop to understand and yet we know these things? (Laughter)

MR ISHAA OTTO: Madam Speaker, you can see the extent - this is a very serious thing that we are discussing and I think my brother also has a lot to do in order to understand these things. Because as I have been telling you, I have been listening to the debate and it is more of a political debate and arguments rather than analysis of the Bill.

Secondly, most Members here have not actually seen this Bill. It was just passed on through their pigeonholes; they did not read through it and they cannot read it in comparison with the report.  (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Ishaa Otto has said that he is a member of the committee. If he really saw the Bill, why didn’t he sign the report? So, is he in order to impute that we have not seen it and yet he has not even signed it? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any further contribution? Chairperson, do you want to respond? Okay, chairperson. 

4.50
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nathan Nabeta): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my response, I am going to read to Members just a small component of the Bill on page 2. It says, No. 5: “Computer misuse refers to unauthorised access to private computers and network systems, deliberate corruption, destruction of other peoples data, disrupting the network or systems, introduction of viruses or disrupting of the work of others as well as creation and forwarding of defamatory material, infringement of copyright as well as the transmission of unsolicited advertising or other materials to outside organisations. 

The definition of computer misuse includes the downloading, displaying, viewing, manipulation of offensive or obscene materials. This would include things like pornography, scenes of violence; in extreme cases, this may include the criminal act of downloading or displaying indecent photographs of children. That is basically what computer misuse is. It is to protect the computers from abuse.  

Hon. Lumumba and some other honourable members have asked how this Bill can protect them. Let me give you an example: for Members of Parliament, we have our data in the Electoral Commission and if one of your competitors goes into the data base and deletes everyone he knows is your supporter; that is unauthorised access to the computer. So, that is where we are going. 

We are going into an era where we are going to have e-governance; where we shall be using the computer to issue passports, to do our taxes and our health. If someone goes into the computer and accesses data about your health, how good is that? That is computer misuse.  

If someone accesses the computer, gets into the data and knows that this is data about hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that is illegal and now there are people who have access to this information. There are people who have access to this information and they use it daily. If they use it against you, how would you be able to respond to that? 

So, we are saying that as we go into the digital era, we have people and all our information on a computer, which must be protected. People must approach all our data with the right authority and with permission. If that is not done, then we shall have a lot of problems with the people who use our computers. 

As you see in the transactions and the electronic signatures, you will understand that once you have agreed on the vehicle, which creates the content, you will look at the transmission, which The Electronic Transactions Bill is looking at.

The Bill is looking at the rules and regulations of transmitting this data. If I am sending health data from one hospital to another about some person, how do I send it? So, that is where the rules of electronic transactions can be looked at. 

In addition to that, we will transact in e-commerce, which is buying of goods online whereby you sit at home, buy a machine and it is shipped to you. You will use your bank to pay. You have not left your home but you have actually bought something from the market. That is electronic commerce. But you need to know the identification. How do you get something like that done if you don’t have electronic commerce and all the regulations in place? 

So the computer misuse is to: One, set up the vehicle in which we can now be able to use the computers correctly and not to the detriment of others. That is basically the main avenue of looking at The Computer Misuse Bill. We are making the computer as it is – and actually for you Members, you now need to take precautions because it is easy to trace a computer. Every computer has an IP address; even my Black Berry has an IP address. If someone sent a message from my phone, they would know. If someone comes to your computer, sits there and sends a virus, we shall know where the virus came from because you know the IP address where the virus came from. 

If someone just sits on your computer or uses your phone and sends bad things, we will always know the originator because every computer and phone has an IP address; it has an inscription on it. So, when you are doing computer forensics, you look at how the data. Maybe next time we shall log on to a computer in this House and see. I will tell you 11229 – something - it has four different sets of digits, which is a unique IP address only on that computer and not found elsewhere in the world.

MS AMONGI: I appreciate what you are trying to explain but my question is: can you get to know the origin? The origin is not the person, unless the crime is not going to be committed by a person. Let me give an example. I leave now and get an avenue to access UNEB and I get the data for exams for my private school to make them pass. Yes, you will know the origin maybe that the UPS that has transferred the data is of this and this, but will you know that it is hon. Betty Amongi who carried this UPS and transferred or altered the data?

MR NABETA: You see, there are people in UNEB who have access to UNEB information, not everyone has access to it. Now when you log into UNEB as an employee, you will put in your password and you will have access to that information. You see when you are dealing with data; there is information, which is accessible if you are a worker of UNEB. 

If you as a person are going into UNEB or you are a student and are going into UNEB to access your data, you will have your password or they will have a key that you will have to use. Now the reason those things are not effective is why we need the Electronic Signatures Bill because this Bill will give you the individual keys, which are not transferable to anyone else.

So the issue is, if you use a phone to access UNEB you must have a key to access that information, it is not public information. The reason that information has been very available to a lot of people is that these laws have not been available. People have this information available without actually having due regard to the privacy of the data. The data must be protected. If you are going into UNEB, it must be you and only you who can access your information.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the information I want to seek is that there is theft legality. If somebody came and transferred information using my computer, which is wrong - even for me it is not misuse of a computer but a crime. This is a criminal act that I have committed and not misuse. That is why we are saying we must distinguish between misuse and committing a crime. We are saying you are not misusing a computer but you are using it to send a wrong signature or to access different information, which you don’t have access to.

So, what we are saying is, why don’t we put it under the Electronic Transactions Bill other than talking of computer misuse because anybody can - I can play cards on my computer and you call it misuse to you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, chairperson. With the committee being people who are ICT experts or compliant, you should now be aware that the issue of passwords is not a major determinant that someone cannot access your data. Actually there was a report on CNN profiles where a 12 year old child in China accessed information from the Ministry of Security. You want to tell me that those people did not have passwords? 

So for me it would still go down to the fact that, yes where we have reached with the internet - in countries like China and the developed world and since this law is beyond, you should not only think about Uganda. The issue of passwords is not justification for you to tell me that you can identify me when I access information or alter it. Maybe you should just look for amendments on circumstances like that.

MR NABETA: I am failing to understand this. You are saying they saw a 12 year old - how did they get the 12 year old? This is how you trace a 12 year old. This is what they call hacking. You have to understand that if you are into hacking, it is algorithms. You can say I am going to see how I hack into that computer. You can even run algorithms for a whole week just to see if you can get the password of that computer. So the security is this, how did you know about the 12 year old if there was no law?

MS AMONGI: What order? I am only helping you. Madam Chairperson, I told you it was profiling and they were profiling high techniques that people have used and actually they were not showing the face of the boy. The boy volunteered to be profiled in the fight of terrorism and how it is now becoming more difficult to safeguard security information in respect to terrorism. So it was not that he was caught and is being charged. He was being profiled and his face was not being seen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I don’t understand the thrust of your argument. Are you saying now that it is beyond us and we should just leave it? That is what you are saying. It seems you are saying, “Let us leave it because it is beyond us”. How can you not try? 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I can see the chairman has made responses but I am still not - I want to pursue the issue on page 7 in the conclusion, the last paragraph, which says that, “It should be noted that the stakeholder’s views that have been laid on the Table include those on Electronic Transactions Bill and the Electronic Signatures Bill. The three Bills, including that of computer misuse, constitute the cyber laws.” 

I requested to know why we could not have a single law rather than bits and pieces. Moreover, I have just seen the other Bills that will come; the Electronic Signatures Bill and the Electronic Transactions Bill. 

In the definition clauses you find even the definition of electronic signature in this Electronic Transactions Bill different from the one of the Electronic Signatures Bill. I really don’t know -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one is not yet before this House. I think we will have powers to amalgamate the Bills.

MR MUGAMBE: I wanted some more clarification because in the same report here on page 7 in the conclusion, the second paragraph says, “The proposed Bill when passed into law with the proposed amendments will prevent unlawful access, use or misuse of information systems including computers and make provisions for securing the conduct of electronic transaction in a trustworthy electronic environment.” 

Now the Bill is a misuse Bill, and what it wants to achieve is beyond the misuse. I don’t know whether we should have an accident Bill. I think there is something missing as far as this report is concerned. Not that we have not read the Bill but the report needs to assist us appreciate this issue more -(Interruption) 

MR KIBAZANGA: I thank you. As I listened to the ICT Committee Chairman and all these experts, I really got more confused. Can the minister clarify, because a good law has got to only answer two questions and one of the questions is: “What is the problem? What is the magnitude of this problem we are handling and what is the solution?” Can the minister tell us the problem and its magnitude and then the solution so that we put this matter to rest? Can the minister clarify? (Laughter)  

DR NSABA BUTURO: Well, I wish to refer the honourable member to the contents of the Bill, a copy of which I believe he has. Clause 5 on page 2 does answer the very point he has raised. I want to suggest, Madam Speaker that you should really put a poignant question which I thought would have answered honourable members’ queries. The question was: “What do we do next?” We have presented a Bill to you, which we believe you have studied, –(Interjections)- and if there are any amendments, they will come through as we study article by article. 

My personal view is that the country needs this Bill. It is long over due and that is why we are commending it to the House -(Interruption) 

MS AMONGI: Considering that the minister is asking for advice, I would implore the committee and the minister to harmonise this Bill with the transactions Bill. Misuse is even more on the question of the internet and electronic mechanisms. Maybe if you can harmonise and bring one law, it would be better.

MR NABETA: These Bills are separate for purposes of ensuring that the rules of engagement are set for each area of e-transactions, computers, and e-signatures. Later on when you look at the Electronic Signatures Bill, you will understand that although the language is the same, it is actually discussing the issue of, “How do I have my signature, which is now usually the one I sign with, authentic so that it can be used by me on a remote?” That is the whole thing. It is only that in the Electronic Signatures Bill, it is setting up parameters of how one uses an electronic signature - instead of signing, how do I only have that? 

Electronic transactions are only about how I can transact electronically in the sale of goods or other transactions. How do I get e-government services? That is all it is doing. We have to understand that with computers, what you put in is what you get out. If you put the wrong things in a computer, you will get the wrong things out. So the computer and how we address the issue of the computer and the data in the computer must be addressed separately. If the computer and the data in the computer are not correct and addressed well, you will never have transactions. The transactions you will have will be faulted because of the data, which is stored in the computer. The computer is not being used correctly. 

First of all, you have to have the computer misuse. This is actually just the name but it is covering the crimes that can be committed if you use a computer improperly. We are saying that first, you set guidelines for the computer - how do you use a computer correctly? Secondly, how do you transact electronically? Thirdly, how do I have electronic signatures? How do I have Personal Identification Keys (PIKs) that I can use as my personal signature that I can use remotely?

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you. Actually, what the minister is talking about is all the Bills in their totality as reflected on the second page of the report - the cyber Bills - here before us. Right now we have only one Bill and yet he is talking about all these other Bills. I think this points out one thing, that we needed to codify these Bills. This is the point my colleagues have been making.

If you looked at this Bill, the first page, clause 2, you will see the defects in the existing law. The minister does not point out the defects in the existing law. The minister instead is saying that we have realised that Uganda needs to optimally exploit the great resources of IT by ensuring that the Ugandan communities, businesses and institutions have access to these new technologies. 

What the minister should have done, in my opinion, is to bring a regulatory law and not a penal law. That is why you are finding it problematic to define the magnitude of the mischief you are trying to curb. Why should it be computer misuse in the first place? It should be a regulatory law because now this is a penal law. You are proscribing the use of a computer in certain aspects but you are not talking about the prescriptive aspects. A good law, which is regulatory, should be both prescriptive and proscriptive but this one is purely proscriptive; it is not prescriptive at all. 

Where are the prescriptions for the youth because you are talking of exploiting the opportunities optimally? Where are those provisions? Where are those enabling provisions? They are not there. This is the very reason we should codify all these instruments relating with the cyber technology so that we have both prescriptive and proscriptive provisions, otherwise you are not adding value to the existing legislations like the Penal Code, which prohibits trespass to property. 

I will tell you that all that you are saying here can be summed up in only one offence in the Penal Code – trespass to property. If you unlawfully access my computer, my information, that is trespass to property. So if that is what you wanted, there it is. I would wish to hear from the minister if he really intends to push this matter back to the committee so that we can have these Bills codified and we come up with one enabling law, which is proscriptive and prescriptive. I thank you.

DR NSABA BUTURO: I do want to implore my colleagues to reflect on the objectives of the Bill. These objectives clearly answer what the honourable member is trying to say. It seems to me it is really a matter of semantics because the Bill says it is to make provision for the use and security facilitation, which seeks to make provision for these. In other words, there is no provision. That is what the Bill is doing. If they are careful to read the Bill, that is what we believe that both the committee and myself have successfully achieved. 

If I may remind honourable members, both sides of the House have actively participated in formulating this Bill and we are convinced that it adequately deals with the gaps. Perhaps that is the right word to use. There is a gap at the moment and that is what we are seeking to close to provide for the use, facilitation, security, and regulation of electronic communication and transactions. Up until now, there has been no provision, so that is what we are doing. It is about providing for all these but also seeking to encourage the use of e-government services. All that, we believe, has been provided for and I do not believe it is necessary to go back as is being proposed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the shadow minister has already said he supports the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much. Given the information that the minister is providing, it looks like he also is not getting the thing very clearly. He is just saying, “Read this clause, tie it here”, and I do not think he is right. So, I would like to seek your indulgence on whether the committee – since it has the Electronic Data Transactions Bill – should bring it so that they can see whether our arguments hold any water. 

I am saying this because it is the computer that processes electronic data. They are telling us that the misuse is due to electronic transmission – that is the thing we should look at. I think we need the whole cyber law. There is no politics in this; it is typically science. 

If I can give you a small background: some of us started from punch cards where there were many frames before getting to computers without a mouse. It was after that, that we got the ones with a mouse. We know all these things, and I am very certain that hon. Nabeta does not know the mainframe that I am talking about and the same applies to hon. Dr Nsaba Buturo. It is on this basis that we need to have one law called the cyber law. If we get this, Madam Speaker, I can assure you that these laws will be merged immediately for us to get one piece of legislation, which will be good for all of us. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your problem is the sequence of the Bills?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Not even the sequence because you will realise that the computer we are talking about is a small component in –(Interjections)– please relax. The internet we are talking about is only about information transmission from the internet to your computer. The signature we are talking about - whether it is about deleting or sending a wrong one - is also all about that electronic data. So, the core issue here is about electronic transactions. The computer is being used - you cannot blame the road for the accident; you can blame the accident on potholes. So, transaction is the basic thing here; the computer will be just a small element. They are the ones who have said these are cyber Bills, but where are they getting this from? They know why. Why should the minister tell us that we need these Bills?

You talk about unlawful access, abuse and misuse of information systems. Hon. Mugambe talked about information systems and he also talked about operating systems in the computer. I do not know if you know what we call an operating system of a computer. Madam Speaker, we need the whole Bill before we move on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me hear from hon. Penytoo and hon. Ishaa Otto because they are members of the committee and are well versed with these Bills. (Laughter) Can you comment on them?

MR ISHAA OTTO: Madam Speaker, actually I am not confused by the debate. I am only finding some difficulties with how the debate is going. My suggestion is that we could read all these Bills. What we have agreed on here is that these are cyber laws. We also went on to say that they are inter-related. So, to make somebody understand them wholesomely, it would call for a reading of all of them. 

I request that we give some time for members to internalise them before we get into the debate. What is actually causing all this is how to understand it. If we read all the Bills, we will be able to analyse why we want the misuse Bill to become a law. We will as well understand what “signature” means. If you could allow the chairperson to read all the Bills – these are cyber laws that are interrelated - it would help people understand the dimensions. 

MR PENYTOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that we burnt a lot of candles to come out with these Bills. The committee handled this matter by involving very many stakeholders. We also consulted a lot. You know that Parliament consists of people with various backgrounds –(Laughter)– it needs harmony. We need a forum outside this House to harmonise this. That is why we propose that there is need for us to get a few hours to have a workshop for members to understand these Bills.

Secondly, if we handle cyber laws at the same time, it will be easier because the definitions are the same; most of the properties are also the same. However, we should not forget the fact that it was brought to us from Cabinet in a hurry. Perhaps they also had more difficulties in understanding –(Laughter)– because of a generation gap. (Laughter) 

The generation of the Nandalas started with computers without the mouse, but you will realise that the generation of the Ottos and Penytoos started with laptops. There are other generations that did not even touch computers until recently. This has caused a lot of difficulties. That is why I am saying that we need to sit down in order to understand the mechanisms of these things. (Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague holding the Floor that most generations received permanent education and so we continue learning. I studied computers when it was in the form of punch cards. That time we were learning COBOL and FORTRAN. I have kept on updating myself to learn programming in dBase III, dBase IV or even programming in C. Actually, I am a computer programmer. We started when there was no Windows and now I have upgraded myself and I use Windows.

I wanted to inform the member that most people are not static as you may assume. Actually there are some people of this generation who cannot check for their salaries on the computer. They had to be trained on how to use the internet. So, it is not a case of a generation gap; I think it an issue of attitude.

MR PENYTOO: The information was good but he was also sincere that computers have also come through so many generations. We are the third generation and we are going to the fourth. It is also true that some people were privileged to have that knowledge. I think that even the committee can harmonise these cyber laws because technically they are not different, they are handling specific matters of the same substance.

MS NAKAWUKI: I am seeking clarification on bullet 5.8, page 6 of report. This has to do with territorial jurisdiction. How is this going to work? Assuming that somebody commits these crimes here and they run away, how can we get them if we do not have a repatriation agreement with the country he or she is in? I see that the only way to go about this is to arrange with countries around to get such agreements. 

MR OKUPA: I think we are coming to a consensus that we need this law and that we need to harmonise it. We have also realised that we have different levels of understanding of these laws. Some are at 20 percent and others at 80 percent. I think we should have these laws harmonised. 

We know our colleague, hon. Alintuma Nsambu, as one of those people who are very knowledgeable in this area but I was surprised that he is not here. We are being unfair to the hon. Minister for Ethics and Integrity. We should have had hon. Alintuma here to help us in this area. It is my prayer that the views expressed here be harmonised. We need the line ministry here because we cannot move and leave the implementers behind.

DR NSABA BUTURO: I wish to inform my colleague, the MP for Kasilo, that the ministers he is mentioning are very much present. We have technical officers who are the brains behind this Bill. If I happen to get stuck, they are available to guide. I, too, encourage you to believe that all the competencies you need are in this House. I, therefore, request the Members to allow this debate to go on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what the hon. Member was asking is: why didn’t you bring a law, maybe called the “Cyber Bill”, which has all these components?

MR NABETA: We had actually asked that question but the issue is that the three Bills are interrelated but they deal with specific issues that should be allowed to be separate.

I have the three Bills here. I have read that computer misuse refers to unauthorised access to private computers. That is the Computer Misuse Bill. We have the Electronic Transactions Bill. This one refers to the sale or purchase of goods and services whether between businesses, individuals or governments and private organisations conducted over computer mediated networks whether the payment or delivery of goods and services is made on or offline. What we are looking at here is more of a facilitation of trading and using the computer mediated networks to do trading transactions. 

You cannot apply for your passport now because the requirements are not available for someone to be able to do that. Uganda Revenue Authority and banks are losing a lot of money because the legal requirements for them to be able to address these issues are not there.

This whole Bill here is only about public keys. If you look at the Electronic Signatures Bill, it refers to the use of electronic signatures. It says that at present there is no law in Uganda that regulates the use of electronic signatures despite the fact that we adopted the National Information and Communication Technology Policy as early as 2003.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am asking is: is it not possible to say part a, electronic signatures; part b, electronic transactions; and part c is the computer misuse in the same law?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, that is why I was saying that the minister responsible should have been here because now hon. Nsaba Buturo cannot make a conclusive response to the questions we are raising; his area of jurisdiction is different. If hon. Aggrey Awori or hon. Alintuma were here, they would be able to state categorically whether they agree or not. Hon. Nsaba Buturo is only promising to consult. 

I agree with hon. Nsaba Buturo that the technical team is here, but they cannot speak in here. They cannot come down here. They can only send you a note, which is limited. So I appeal to the Prime Minister to take charge and advise that we defer this matter; we go back, harmonise things, advise the minister and then bring it back. 

Members are agreeable to the laws but they just need to be consolidated. Just like the Deputy Speaker has said, let the others just be part of it. When you look at the volumes of the three Bills, they are just five to ten pages, so they can easily be joined together. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am not convinced by the answer which the chair has given. Maybe you would want to hear from the Government and you want to be given time. Tell us tomorrow why we cannot have one law with different sections. Maybe it will even be more convenient.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I concede to that proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, let us defer debate on this and tomorrow you can let us know whether you are fundamentally opposed to having one cyber Bill, which has –(Interjections)– they are small Bills. 

Okay, hon. Members, the House is adjourned to 2 O’clock, tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30 June 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)


