Wednesday, 28 June 2006

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we indicated yesterday, we shall start the debate on the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President. Because we are many, I think we shall limit every Member to seven minutes. It is a debate where you could raise issues from your constituency or issues concerning Uganda. As I also indicated to you, we would like as little interruption as possible so that Members make their maiden speeches in peace and harmony. 

I have received communication from the Secretary General of the East African Community that the term of office of the Members of the Legislative Assembly expires on 29 November 2006 and that he would want all the Houses of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania to send to him the nominations of the Members by 31 October 2006. That is really just for information. 

In the visitors’ gallery we have students of St Joseph’s Secondary School Nagalama. You are very welcome. The young men are extremely smart. Oh! There are also ladies. We welcome you to your Parliament. 

2.32
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, during the discussion on the Vote-on-Account yesterday, I said that we already have a design for the new Chamber. I thought it was proper for me to lay it on the Table so that Members could have a look at it during their leisure time and possibly form up a diplomatic fight to ensure that we get the new Chamber constructed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are free to lay it on the Table.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, these are two dimensions, the inside and outside -[Hon. Members: “Show us.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the designs will be placed in the library for you to look at so that you appreciate the beauty and strengthen your resolve on the construction issue. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO 
THE SUPREME COURT JUDGE, THE LATE JUSTICE ARTHUR HAGGAI ODER

2.34
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker and honourable members, with your indulgence I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Justice Arthur Haggai Oder, Justice of the Supreme Court of Uganda. 

“WHEREAS Parliament notes with deep sorrow the untimely demise of the late Justice Arthur Haggai Oder, Justice of the Supreme Court of Uganda occurred on 26 June 2006;

CONSCIOUS of the late Justice Arthur Haggai Oder’s love for his country and human race, which made him serve his nation with dignity and honour in various capacities as a state attorney, legal secretary, a judge of the High Court and Justice of the Supreme Court;

NOTING AND APPRECIATING the contribution of the late Justice Arthur Haggai Oder to Uganda’s quest for respect for human rights, having served as the chairman of the Commission of Inquiry into Violations of Human Rights from 1986 to 1988;

WHEREAS it is deemed fit and proper for Parliament to recognise the contribution and services of the late Justice Arthur Oder and pay tribute to him;

NOW THEREFORE this Parliament resolves as follows:
1.	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends, the people of Apac, Lango sub-region, the Judiciary, the legal profession and the nation as a whole upon the loss of a nationalist, dedicated and distinguished citizen and legal luminary in the person of the late Justice Arthur Haggai Oder; and 

2.	That it appreciates and takes cognizance of the distinguished services rendered and the contribution made by the late Justice Arthur Haggai Oder to the nation more specifically to the Public Service of Uganda, the Judiciary, the legal profession at large in Uganda as a contribution to the development of the nation and the promotion of human rights.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

The late Justice Arthur Haggai Oder was born on 25 September 1938 at Aboke, Kole County in Apac District. He attended Boroboro Junior Secondary School from 1952 to 1954 where he obtained the Junior Secondary School Leaving Certificate. He did his O’ Level from 1955 to 1957 at Sir Samuel Baker School, Gulu, where he obtained the Cambridge Overseas School Certificate of O’ Level. 

From 1962 to 1965 he studied at Norwich City College of Wales, Westworth in UK for his A’ Level. He obtained his Bachelor of Law honour’s degree at the University of Wales in the UK. 

He was at the Council of Legal Education Law School in London, UK from 1965 to 1966. He was called to the English bar as a barrister at law.

From 1967 to 1969, he was a state attorney and was later promoted to a senior state attorney in the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, Attorney-General’s Chambers here in Uganda. 

From 1969 to 1972 he worked as an advocate in private practice in the chambers of Mboijana and Company Advocates in Kampala.

From 1972 to 1977, he was the Legal Secretary to the Board of Uganda Commercial Bank. He left the country in 1977 to escape death under the then bad regime, which was in power. From 1977 to 1980, he worked as state counsel in the Ministry of Legal Affairs in Lusaka, Zambia. He returned to Uganda, where he was appointed Judge of the High Court and he assumed that office in 1980.  

In 1986, he was appointed Chairman of the Uganda Human Rights Commission of Inquiry into Violation of Human Rights. In 1988, the late Justice was appointed Justice of the Supreme Court of Uganda, and he has worked as such until his death on 26 June 2006. He served as a Member of the Judicial Service Commission representing the Judiciary from 2002 to 2005.

Madam Speaker, many things could be said about the late Justice Arthur Oder but I will summarise the additional things I wanted to say. I reported this bad news yesterday here in Parliament, but I stand up to pay our condolences as the Ministry of Justice and as the Ministry in charge of the Judiciary and on behalf of the Government. We comfort the family for the loss of a father and a stabilising factor. Some people take fathers for granted but when you lose one that is when you will know what it means. This family has lost the anchor and our hearts go out to them.  

The Lango community is mentioned in this resolution. You know the record shows that Justice Arthur Oder was one of the first few lawyers to emerge from Lango and he inspired many young people to know that it is possible for a village boy from Lango to become a lawyer. Africa needs this inspiration; Africa needs these role models.

The Judiciary has lost tremendously. It is not easy to produce a good judge. We approach lawyers and ask them to become judges and they say, “No, leave me alone.” It is not because they cannot be judges but the requirement and discipline of a judicial office are rather demanding. Therefore, you should sympathise with the Judiciary at the loss of this very senior member.  

Very many people do not like lawyers but when you find yourself on the other side of the law that is when you know that lawyers have some value in life. And of course, Madam Speaker, I need to explain that nobody is born a judge. You must be a lawyer first and then when you have been there for sometime, you go up the bench. Therefore, when a judge dies, the primary loser is the legal profession in all aspects. We are very sorry about this.  

People have always mentioned the Human Rights Commission and I would like to give a little detail on this Commission. The Commission of Inquiry into Violation of Human Rights was established by Legal Notice N0.5 of 1986. Its membership was as follows:
1.	Mr Justice Arthur Oder 	– Chairman
2.	Dr Edward Khiddu Makubuya 	– Member
3.	Dr Jack Luyombya 		– Member
4.	Mr John Baptist Kawanga 	– Member
5.	Mr John Nagenda		– Member
6.	Mrs Kakwenzire 		– Member  

And above all, the Legal Counsel to the Commission was none other than Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi as he then was. Now, of course, he is the Rt honourable Speaker of Parliament.   

The job of this Commission was to investigate violations of human rights in Uganda from 1962 to 1986. I saw some comment that this volume here is just good academic reading. Yes, but we are not talking about academics. First of all, Ugandans for the first time were given a forum to explain what had happened to them; those who had survived anyway, or their relatives. They were given an opportunity to have a public forum where they could explain the atrocities that had been committed on them. 

This Commission travelled all over Uganda. Justice Arthur Oder led us on hard roads, soft roads and village footpaths until we travelled throughout Uganda. Finally, we produced this book. This is a summary of the recommendations; otherwise the actual report is in about 18 thick volumes. The work of this Commission fed into the work of the Constitutional Commission and finally into the Constitution of 1995. If you see a strengthened bill of rights in the 1995 Constitution as opposed to the 1962 and 1967 Constitutions, the credit should partly go to Justice Arthur Oder and his Commission.

Now we have a permanent Human Rights Commission, where people take their complaints and are awarded damages of violation of human rights. That recommendation came from him and for that reason, Madam Speaker, since some people think it is academics, I would like to lay a copy of this report on the Table and urge members of this august Parliament to read this report because it is a major foundation for the human rights movement.

There are procedures of inquiring into the conduct of judges. The Constitution provides that if you think a judge has misbehaved, then you invoke some procedures and inquire into the conduct of this judge. Justice Oder has been a judge for 26 years and these procedures have never been invoked against him. He has never been a subject of inquiry, judicial or otherwise, in other words, he maintained the integrity of a judicial officer. He was unchallenged for a period of 26 years. I could go on and on but I think Uganda has lost a distinguished son, a great legal mind and we just pray for the family so that God continues to protect them even in his absence. We pray to God that he continues to guide Government and the people of Uganda to find a proper replacement for this distinguished judge. I urge honourable members to pass this resolution. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Attorney-General. I have been notified that hon. Omara Atubo would be seconding the motion but I will invoke my powers to give a senior member of the Uganda bar the opportunity to do the seconding. 

2.53
MR SAM NJUBA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for this opportunity because without boasting I would state that I am very close to the departed judge. I have associated with the Judge for over 30 years professionally and I know him very well. I first met him in early 1970 as a young lawyer. He was working with Mboijana and Company Advocates and I was teaching at Makerere. He was in the transition of moving from Mboijana to Uganda Commercial Bank as a legal officer. He impressed me as a young lawyer, humble in his approach, ready to help everybody. He was always willing to assist not only young lawyers but also the lower bench. 

Madam Speaker, it is with a very heavy heart that I stand to talk about a distinguished lawyer of a calibre of Arthur. You have already heard his contribution to the Commission of Inquiry into the Violation of Human Rights. I do not want to tie you up by repeating what the learned Attorney-General said. Suffice to say that he assisted lawyers, litigants at the bar but when he was promoted to the bench, he also assisted young lawyers to have foot to stand. He did not allow any litigant to be bullied by either the lawyer on one side or by the other litigants. He was willing to assist the litigants who were not represented so that they do not lose cases merely because they lacked the legal knowledge. 

If you appeared before Justice Oder, you would enjoy yourself if only you worked hard. He was a no nonsense judge. By saying that he assisted those who appeared before him to learn the law does not mean that he did not want them to work hard. He encouraged them to work hard and if you appeared before him after working hard, you enjoyed yourself. 

Those of you who have had the opportunity to read his judgment will realise that he was very sound academically. He knew his law and stated it with all clarity. He burnt night candles to prepare all his judgments. He was very disciplined and brave in the sense that he did not fear to say his mind to anybody. Some of you would say he ran into exile. Many brave people run to exile because they are not dead heroes. You do not become a hero by dying. You do not just sacrifice yourself. Judge Oder was briefly was out of this country because he could not stand the likes of Amin. However, when he came back he continued serving his nation honestly. 

The profession to which I belong has lost a jurist, a father and a real leader. The Judiciary has lost a comrade, a man who would inspire younger members of the bench to achieve their competence. It remains for the profession and I to send condolences to his wife and children. Many of you have heard of Rasta Rob whom I believe is still in London. These children will miss their father.  

I also wish to pass condolences to the Judiciary, the Chief Justice and the Supreme Court and all the courts. I wish to convey condolences to the Government of Uganda upon the loss of a real hero in the field of justice. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

2.59
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, on behalf of Government, I convey our deep condolences to the family, relatives and the entire nation on the death of Justice Arthur Oder. He served the Judiciary for 28 years and has been a very senior judge on the Supreme Court bench. He got a very solid legal foundation from the University College of Wales where he obtained a law degree. That foundation is very critical because if it is not solid, people cannot perform well. 

As already noted, his chairing of the Commission of Inquiry into the Violation of Human Rights in Uganda was very important because it contributed to the inclusion of the Bill of Rights and the Uganda Human Rights Commission in our Constitution. In this book, which has been tabled, many people who committed human rights abuses appear but unfortunately some of them died and others were in exile. Therefore, it was not possible to make them face the law of the land. In remembrance of Justice Oder, all Ugandans have a cardinal duty to ensure that we acquire a culture of protecting and preserving human rights.  

In my paper entitled “Forging a harmonious relationship between the Executive, Parliament and Judiciary”, I made a number of points including the following: 

In order to forge a harmonious relationship among the three arms of the state, each arm must respect the role and the space assigned to it by the Constitution.  

I went ahead and articulated the role and space assigned to each arm of the state. However, as I said, while each arm of the state should enjoy its space, they must interface formally to solve critical problems of the day.  

Madam Speaker, I do not see any problem when His Excellency the President asked the Chief Justice to discuss a critical problem. The two could get advice from each other. 

I wish to pay tribute to the Judiciary for having interpreted the Constitution and the laws of Uganda. They have also played the role of mediating between individuals and the state, which they have done courageously. Although the Executive did not agree on some of the decisions of the Judiciary, it respected them. It is important to respect the decisions of the Judiciary. You may disagree with them but you must respect them.  

What is the link between what I have said and the death of Justice Oder? I wish to state that he stood for the independence of the Judiciary and the protection of human rights. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved!  

3.05
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Justice Oder comes from Aboke sub-county in Apac District. As the Lango community, we have lost a hilarious son and Uganda has lost a patriotic citizen. When people leave their villages and come to urban areas there is a tendency by some of them to forgetting their culture and their community. 

Members of the Lango community who reside within Entebbe, Kampala and Jinja established an association called the Lango Community. Justice Oder was one of the most accomplished people who served in many executive positions, including that of the chairperson. He even went to the extent of accepting to be the leader of his clan, which shows you that for him - many of us think that where we come from is not important especially when you accomplish so much in life.  

He was one of the elders who guided decisions that impacted on us politically. Like our chairperson of the community stated during the prayers, he came openly in the 1980s together with some of the elders in Lango to mobilise the Lango community back in Lira and Apac and persuaded them to leave rebellion and work for development. For this we salute him. He made a big contribution and as most of you know, the Langi have never since that time used armed rebellion as a means of achieving their political objective. 

I am not a lawyer but I read with admiration the analysis of the ruling that he did during the most controversial presidential petitions of 2001 and 2006. Although I am not a lawyer I felt that his citations of various laws and chronological approach to his conclusion left a great mark for the lawyers of this country to stand by what they believe in. Justice Oder has died and he is peacefully in his bed now knowing that what he did when he was alive he did it on principle. I really think this is a good lesson for us. When you believe in something you stand by it. That way, when you die you will always be respected and recognised.  

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Apac District I would like to pay tribute to him and ask this House to pass the motion. Thank you.

3.10
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam, Speaker. I support the motion moved by the Attorney-General, to pay tribute to the late Justice Oder. We all know that rising through the ranks in whatever profession is no mean achievement. For one to get promotions over the years in their profession is total demonstration of how hard working that person is. Many times some people join professions and get stuck at the level of entry but the hard working lot usually rise to higher levels.  

Madam Speaker, the mover of the motion said that some people take fathers for granted. I wanted to make an amendment and say, some people take parents for granted. A father is as important as a mother. Many people out there, especially the youth, have tended to ignore the plight of their parents. I am cautioning all of us to be very caring to our parents.  

It is reported that Justice Oder died of kidney failure. As the Shadow Minister for Health, allow me to touch a little on the health aspect. We all know that life is like a vehicle. You and I have cars; you do not have to wait for your car to develop a mechanical problem before you go to check. That is why we all take our cars for servicing. It is important to keep servicing ourselves. I encourage all Ugandans to take special interest in knowing how their body organs operate. 

I am aware, according to reports, that Justice Oder had detected that problem much earlier. Probably, if it were not for that, he would not have lived with us up to this time. I am emphasising the fact that we should all take keen interest in our health and not be shy in getting all tests done. It is for our own good.

Madam Speaker, specifically on the issue of kidney problems, I urge Government to take serious note that we have a very big problem. In most cases when Ugandans get kidney disease, they run to India and South Africa. It is reported that a kidney transplant costs no less than Shs 29 million in India. In South Africa it is even more expensive. You have to have about Shs 56 million. How many people can afford that? And yet we have not made an effort to put remedies in place. We need to help our poor people to get access to such treatment locally.

We have only two dialysis machines to help perform the function of kidney treatment in our national referral hospital. One of them has been set aside for HIV/AIDS patients because HIV/AIDS and hypertension have contributed to the high increase of diabetes in the country. In the last five years alone we have registered serious rise of diabetes.  In 2001, Mulago hospital alone had 123 cases but that has in fact more than doubled in 2002, when we had 260 cases. In 2003, there were 350 cases. Last year there were 689 cases. The number of cases keeps increasing while our capacity to cope with such cases is low. Therefore, I really pledge that during our term of office, we will try all possible ways to help Ugandans get access to quality, affordable health care.

I also want to urge Government to build our local capacity to manage some of these cases. I am not aware of how many experts of kidney problems we have in this country but I understand the Indian Kidney Institute has offered some training opportunities to at least eight Ugandans. I hope Government will find ways and means to facilitate those experts to access such training so that they come and help us.  

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, the death of Justice Oder has honestly dealt a hard blow to us as a nation. As the Attorney-General put it, getting into the ranks of a judge is no mean achievement and very few people yearn to become judges but the hurdles along the way are very high. Many lawyers fail to get there. Therefore, the loss of Justice Oder is not only a blow to the legal fraternity but also a test to all of us. 

To be referred to as “Justice” one must really be personally at peace with themselves. There are some people who even fail to be at peace with themselves. Usually when somebody is not at peace with himself, you do not expect such a person to go up the ladders. Therefore, the demise of Justice Oder is a very big loss for which I want to join all colleagues in praying that Parliament passes this motion. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

3.20
MR EMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are gathered here to pay tribute to one of the fallen sons of Uganda. It is a good practice as a House to demonstrate to the world that it is good to do good. We must do it as an incentive, to encourage people to do good. That way the world will acknowledge and appreciate your services. We acknowledge that Justice Oder has been a distinguished judge who served all these years, as the Attorney-General said, without any inquiry or without a disciplinary action. As a human being, he demonstrated that it is good thing to be good.

Madam Speaker, if we had not done this as a House it would have been a failure of democracy on our part because of the three different arms of Government. Different as we are, we must rely on one another in order to complete the process of democracy.  

We send our condolences to the family. We hope that many people out there will continue to do good so that when their hour of end comes, the world will have reason to thank them.  

Madam Speaker, Justice Oder has died. If you were to ask in this House, “Who wishes to go to heaven?”  I know everyone will put up their hand. However, one thing everybody wants to know is that there is nobody who will go to heaven without dying. Therefore, death is a reality and a must for everybody. But when the hour comes, we must have been prepared for it by doing good. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

DR. MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the contributions, which my colleagues have made to this debate. I note that there is not a single contribution opposing the motion. I, therefore, move that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, all the Members who spoke were in favour of the motion. Since there is no dissent, I now put the question that this House pays tribute to the late Justice Arthur Haggai Oder, Justice of the Supreme Court upon the motion by the Attorney-General of Uganda.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS OF THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY, 8 JUNE 2006

3.24
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Madam Speaker, I am sorry, but I will be very glad if you could guide me on this matter. I thank hon. Njuba for seconding the motion in my absence, but there was an amendment, which may appear belated but an important one, which I had indicated to the Attorney-General. I would like to move it now. The Prime Minister has gladly agreed to it. I imagine that if there was a way of allowing this late amendment, it would be a great honour to the late Justice Arthur Oder. I would gladly wish to see how best we could re-open the debate, and I move an amendment. This is to do with instituting an award in an advisory capacity to the Human Rights Commission, which would be called, “Justice Arthur Oder Human Rights Award” and I think this would be good enough.  

Many people here die and we give beautiful speeches in their memory and after that we say goodbye. We should have a legacy so that next time the Leader of the Opposition is no longer with us; we may move a motion for him to have a statute somewhere within Kampala.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Atubo, you are really putting me in a fix. You went to discuss with the Prime Minister - first of all you are late; I had to ask somebody to second the motion. You have not told me why you are late. You went and conspired with the Prime Minister after we had passed the motion. Now here you are, asking me to reopen the debate? I think this is not fair!  Is there any objection? [Hon. Members: “No!”] Proceed, you as Government; I cannot re-open the debate. I am sorry. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I apologise. You see I was in the Cathedral with the Speaker and he sent me a note. As I tried to come here, I am telling you the traffic jam in Kampala is -(Laughter)- in fact my car had to drop me somewhere near DFCU Bank. I ran here on foot and that is why I am still panting. I had to pick a boda boda to come here.  (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, on behalf of the House, you have the authority of Parliament to institute this award.  

3.28
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to add my voice to the rest of Ugandans to mourn one of the distinguished judges in the country. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

I beg to move that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address to Parliament on the State of the Nation delivered by His Excellency, the President, to this Parliament on Thursday, 8 June 2006.  

I would like to start by congratulating His Excellency, the President and the National Resistance Movement Party for the resounding victory in the presidential elections held in February 2006 under a multi-party political dispensation.  (Applause) I also most heartily congratulate you, Madam Speaker and Mr Speaker, upon your re-election to your respective offices.  (Applause) I also most heartily congratulate all Members of the Eighth Parliament. Whether you are in opposition or Government, we are all here to work towards the betterment of our nation. Therefore, I congratulate you all for having made it through the general elections. 

I also wish to congratulate the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and all the Government ministers who were sworn in on 2 June 2006. I also sincerely congratulate the shadow ministers.  

Now that all the three arms of Government are in place, it is important that each arm performs their role and works in harmony. We should respect each other, and we were all privileged to have been given a post-election induction seminar to help us appreciate and understand our roles as the three arms of Government. I would like at this moment to thank all those who financed and organised this seminar because we have never had it before. In the same spirit I would like to say that those who were not successful in the recently concluded elections should not take this as the end of the world. I encourage them to keep up that spirit and try again next time.

The President had two constitutional duties to perform, among others, and these are stipulated in Articles 101(1) and 155(1) of the Constitution. That is, to give the State of the Nation Address, and presenting the budget for the financial year respectively. Today I am privileged to be the mover of the motion to give thanks and appreciation for the State of the Nation Address. I have noted that some Members mainly from the opposition have been discussing this speech on electronic media, in print media, describing it as insufficient. 

My dear colleagues, I want to encourage you to read – as I told you earlier he had two constitutional duties. I encourage my colleagues to read the State of the Nation Address together with the Budget Speech and I believe they will discover that most of their concerns were covered in the Budget Speech.

I thank the President for he gave a speech, which indicated how he was going to implement the NRM manifesto of 2006 in order to improve the lives of the people of Uganda. The President in his introduction – I believe every Member came with his copy because they were put in our pigeonholes - one thing I did not mention about the Budget Speech is that we get so many things in our pigeonholes, so this is the Budget Speech, which I want you to read together with the State of the Nation Address. 

Madam Speaker, the President in his introduction reminded us of our history before the NRM took over power, when the environment was not friendly. However, with the support of the people the NRM Government has systematically and steadily created a peaceful environment, which has enabled us to score successes, which we are now proud of as a country. I should mention that this peaceful environment ensures the freedom of expression as often heard, as I mentioned earlier, on talk shows. We have many of these: Mambo Bado, Ekimeeza, Simbawo akati, and many others. 

What interests me is that people get to these talk shows and go to the extent of even abusing the President, the head of state. When they finish with their abuses they give their names and addresses, “I am so and so, staying at such and such a drive, on this plot number.” Surely, we have not heard any report of the state following up these people for what they say. Much as this should not be encouraged, it is proof of the transformation that is going on in the governance of our country.  

On the political scene, the President expressed gratitude to Parliament for having considered the status and entitlements of the Leader of the Opposition. I am glad he has been around; I think he has just moved out because he expected me to talk about him. Therefore, the Leader of the Opposition is now legal and this should give us pride. As a country now under a multi-party system, we must work together. We, therefore, request the opposition to give constructive and principled criticism in order to maintain a healthy balance to our politics. 

I also thank the President for having decided to retain the National Institute of Leadership at Kyakwanzi, which will be used to train leaders at various levels and to operationalise the provisions of Article 17(2) of the Constitution. The President was happy to note that the opposition is beginning to realise the usefulness and importance of this institution by organising the youth to be trained at this Institute. That really needs a big round of applause; for the opposition to say, “How do we work in harmony?”  They have got their youths and they want them trained at that Institute! In all seriousness and for the good of our country we must have well-trained cadres for both Government and the Opposition who are prepared to take on many challenges that are facing our country be it economical, social or political. So, I wish to thank him for retaining it.

The President in his address highlighted a number of challenges and one major challenge we are facing regarding our economy is the energy crisis. It has brought in critical checks on the country’s economic growth this year, and it may be so for some years to come. Madam Speaker, the onus is on us as Ugandans, especially Parliamentarians, to make sure that we do not frustrate the efforts that Government is making to increase our energy supplies. 

The President emphasised building dams and I would like to quote his words on page 12: “In Uganda we shall have all the power we need and anybody who is a friend of Uganda should not even whisper let alone say that we should delay the building of dams; no way! We are going to build the dams, build them, build them and build them.”  He was stressing that point – “… if there is a problem with the private sector we shall build them ourselves” - so determined he was! We pray to the creator that we achieve that. 

It is our duty as Members of Parliament to encourage our people to utilise the solar equipment for domestic consumption and I would like to report here, Madam Speaker, that I have encouraged people and I have encouraged myself such that I have already installed a solar system in my house. So, I wish all Members of Parliament could install - we would lead by example to others. Now that some tax relief has been given to those dealers in solar equipment, honourable members, please, encourage yourselves and your voters to use that opportunity. 

Regarding the economy, our people must be helped to access reasonable micro finance in order to realise the NRM slogan of “prosperity for all”. For the success of this prosperity for all, I request the Minister in charge of Micro Finance to reach out to the grassroots people who have formed their associations. I know many in all our constituencies have formed their associations such as the savings and credit co-operatives and organisations. In central Uganda these are commonly known as Nnigiina, I wish they get the first chance to be the ones to access these reasonable micro finance funds. 

Among other things, access to an internal market has been a challenge, which hinders development but much is being done to improve the situation. At this moment I would like to register my appreciation to the Government and mainly the Minister of Works and Housing for the work started on the construction – Madam Speaker, you will bear me witness - the work started on the construction of landing sites in – this is in my constituency but now that I am the mover you should know this. 

There is some work, which has started going on of the construction of landing sites between Kayunga District and Kamuli District; this side is Nabuganye and the other side is Mbulamuti. Some work has started, which I think is aimed at improving accessibility within, and the people will be able to move their produce easily. I really thank the Ministry of Works and the Government, and I wish they complete it because when completed it will provide easy transportation for the produce and it will ease transport in those areas and many others.

Regarding security, Madam Speaker, one scholar said that if mankind cannot put an end to war then war would put an end to mankind. In his address the President retaliated his unquestionable commitment to ending the insurgency in Northern Uganda and hence ensure total peace for that part of our country; and to bring peace to our brothers and sisters living in that part of the country. 

As the President put it, the NRM Government will continue to welcome those who are willing to take advantage of the Amnesty Act and give up rebellion. But if anyone is not willing to come out peacefully then Government should use all the means at its disposal to eliminate them in order to defend the people and their property. I am glad that the President reassured Ugandans that the UPDF now possesses the capacity to promptly destroy any terrorist group that dares to enter Ugandan territory.

Security of our country should not and must not be compromised. Now that the exercise of assisting our brothers and sisters living in the IDP camps to return to their homes has started, I beg leaders not to decampaign this exercise but rather support it. We have a tendency - I thought we were using it to look for votes but now that votes are over we should support and help. Even if you are in opposition, help Government to really achieve the goal of resettling our people in the Northern part of this country. The Government should make sure that resettling our people is carried out as smoothly as possible with the necessary security provisions in the villages they are returning to. With our support I know everything is possible.

This brings me to the issue of corruption. I know some items have been given to resettle these people and some people handling the exercise of resettling these people in the former IDP camps are misappropriating the items, which are supposed to be for the people. Madam Speaker, if anybody is caught doing so he or she must be dealt with externally. 

The corruption - as I said the President stressed that Government does not encourage corruption and it does not. Some people even go on radio and say Government encourages - I want to really dispute this. The fact remains that corruption is an evil, which must be fought by all people of good will because corruption does not know the opposition and Government. When you are corrupt you are corrupt no matter whether you are in opposition or Government. 

So, I want to refer my colleagues to the NRM Manifesto of 2006. There is unquestionable commitment of the NRM Government, when you look at our manifesto on page 14 that commitment is clearly – I will not read it.  I see people getting scared, no. But page 14, this is the manifesto of the NRM, these ones know, but this side should know. So, get to page 14 and see the unquestionable commitment that the NRM Government –(Interjection)- no, these ones already know, they were party to making it. So, please, the commitment is there. I want you really, honourable members, I do not want to hear that there is no political will. The will is there; the Constitution is clear, we have all measures put in place to fight corruption. So now the onus is on us as Members of Parliament and as credible Ugandans to fight this evil of corruption. 

And I wish to inform this Parliament that given this fight against corruption, we have a network of Members of Parliament against corruption, which is called the African Parliamentarians Network Against Corruption; in short, APNAC, Uganda. I was the Chairperson, APCAN for two years until I was elevated to the East African region as a representative of East Africa, and I gave up the chair yesterday. I will let you know the new people in charge. At this moment if you are around, please, stand up for recognition. 

Our new Chairperson of this anti-corruption network is hon. Beatrice Byenkya Nyakaisiki; she has a vice-chairperson, hon. Ruth Kavuma Nvumetta; we have the secretary general, hon. Kigyagi Arimpa; we have a treasurer, hon. Beatrice Rwakimari; and hon. Bahane Niyibizi Silver is the publicity secretary of the new executive. So, Madam Speaker, the will is there and Parliament is willing -(Interruption)- we will discuss when we finish –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! 

MRS NYOMBI: And APNAC, Uganda has networked with other development partners, Members of the Seventh Parliament will remember - because we subscribe to and pay membership fees for this - that we scrutinised and analysed the Access to Information Bill. By the time it came to the House all members of APNAC and most Members of Parliament had analysed that Bill. We hope that this new law, the Access to Information law will contribute greatly to the enactment of good governance through increased transparency and accountability. 

And APNAC, still in the fight against corruption, worked together with Transparency International and the Parliamentary Center of Canada and commissioned a study on the legislative and policy measures in Uganda vis-à-vis the practical challenges of compliance with the AU anti-corruption convention. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table this report, which we commissioned and I urge all Members to read thoroughly and I will make sure, with the new executive, that every Member gets a copy of this study. I lay it on the Table.

The last thing I want to tell Members about that will - I want the will to fight corruption to come out clearly - Uganda is one of the few countries, which signed and ratified the African Union Convention against Corruption. So the will is there. Members will have to get together to see that we fight this evil for the development of our country.

Within the social sector, Madam Speaker, the Government’s undertaking to have primary school teachers in Government-aided schools paid Shs 200,000 per month should be highly commended. I know some of us even if we are not teachers but we have teachers, we should be happy for them because I remember even when the President was saying it he was greatly applauded. What is happening today when I mention that? We should highly commend that increase in the primary teachers’ salaries because the motivation I believe will yield a better foundation for our children and indeed our nation.

Honourable members it is also gratifying to note that Government’s plan to embark on universal secondary education without overstretching the budget, has been finalised. Universal secondary education is a result of a successful UPE programme, so let us also continue to support UPE in order for universal secondary education to succeed so that we improve the level of literacy in our country more so for the girls because most girls – and I am a girl child - I know most girls drop out from primary seven –(Laughter)- I am a girl baby, it has been improved. When time comes and the resources are scarce they prefer a boy to go to school than a girl. 

So, I believe with universal secondary education girls will benefit more. And I am reminded of the quotation of the famous Pan Africanist Dr Aggrey Kwegyir who said that, “If you educate a man you educate an individual but if you educate a woman you educate the whole nation.” 

The President also emphasised science-balanced education, which will help our country to move away from a pre-industrial society at a much faster pace. Honourable members, let us support this good strategy because as you are all aware, science gives us a tool with which to explore the future. And I would like to thank the President for having created and appointed a Minister in charge of Information Technology. 

Last but not least, Madam Speaker, regarding regional co-operation, the President mentioned the commitment of Uganda to fully live in peace with neighbours on all sides. This has been fulfilled by the appointment of the Minister in charge of the Affairs of the East African Community, which has been overdue because our partner states had already put their ministers in place. But now that it has been done, this will help to streamline the handling of matters relating to the customs union as well as the political federation of our three countries, which will yield many benefits such as access to larger markets. 

I wish to urge the Minister in charge of the East African Community to work tirelessly towards popularising this federation and making all Ugandans aware of it. As we talk now the people in Ntenjeru North are not aware, but if we work together collectively we should –(Interjection)- to be honest! So, let us work to make them appreciate the federation and its benefits. We tried during campaigns but you know mixing the two, you would lose one. So now that we are in place we should work together with the Minister we now have and get to the countryside for everyone to appreciate it.

At this moment, Madam Speaker, I wish to congratulate our own hon. Beatrice Kiraso and Ambassador Julius Onen upon their appointments as Deputy Secretary General in charge of First Tracking and Finance and Administration respectively. We are proud that Ugandans were placed in those positions. (Applause) 

Finally, I know one thing - let me tell you this before I go. When a woman makes a mistake they say all women do the same. Yes, but finally, we should get committed ourselves to the challenges facing us as the Eighth Parliament. Let us build on the successes instead of fearing to move forward. We should build the necessary team spirit with all the three arms of Government working together to take Uganda forward. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker, that this House records its appreciation for the address on the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nyombi and I now invite hon. Baryomunsi Chris to second the motion.

3.56
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I regard this as a privilege to be here to second the motion, which has been moved by my colleague hon. Nyombi. 

Before I comment on the address by the President, allow me to also extent congratulations to the President, the Vice-President, you the Deputy Speaker, the Speaker and the entire House, the Members of Parliament - and that includes my colleagues Members of the NRM who are the majority in this House and also the Opposition: FDC, DP, UPC, JEEMA, CP and the many Independent Members of Parliament who made it to this Parliament of Uganda. To me this is a very big milestone in the politics of this country and the challenge is upon us to ensure that we exercise political maturity as we dispense our responsibilities as hon. Members of Parliament. 

Let me also congratulate our colleagues who made it to the Front Bench both in the Government Cabinet and also the official spokespersons for the various ministries in the opposition, the Shadow Cabinet, as they call it. You are not happy that I am thanking you and congratulating you? Okay. 

Madam Speaker, the President’s speech was generally broad and concise to me and I am glad that it covered most of the concerns of the citizens of this country. Therefore, I rise to support and second the motion, which has been moved and as I support it, allow me to make a few observations and comments to supplement what has been given by my colleague.

One, the President elaborately presented the security situation in this country particularly focusing on Northern Uganda and also the Karamoja region. And the issues of security and the issues of conflict are national issues and, therefore, they concern all of us. The President assured us that the UPDF has capacity to protect all Ugandans and called for our support to assist Government so that there is quick re-integration and return of the IDPs into their societies. Therefore, I want to urge this House that we must support Government to ensure that the internally displaced people in Northern Uganda who have lived in the camps for very many years return and are re-integrated into the society. 

The President talked about the services that are being rendered in Northern Uganda to ensure that the quality of life of the people gradually improves. On page 19 of his address he notes that “Now that we have dealt with schools and the health centers in the North - meaning that education and health have been interestingly addressed - we must also deal with the houses.”  He elaborated on how the Government is providing the iron sheets to the returnees; that we can transform the housing from the grass thatched houses to the iron-roofed houses. I think this is a very good big achievement on the side of the Government, which we should support.

However, I also wish to note that the conflict in Northern Uganda has resulted in social destruction and this has impacted on the development in the region. Honourable members, you need to be reminded that Northern Uganda is the poorest region we have in this country. Yes, when you distribute poverty according to the regions, I think the poverty index shows the Northern region as the one with the highest index. The indicators there are actually the worst and when we calculate the national averages, usually they are weighed down by the indicators from the North and even their HIV prevalence is second highest compared to the central region. Therefore, in addition to what was presented, we need a comprehensive and well-supervised programme in this region of this country to further improve the quality of life of the people of Northern Uganda.

On the economy, the President observed that the energy crisis has affected the economic growth and development in this country and most of the strategies the Government had adopted were very well explained in the Budget Speech as we learnt and heard later on. Also this is to note that the short-term strategies to address the power crisis have maybe not really made an impact because as you entered here, Madam Speaker, you saw the darkness, which welcomed you. I, therefore, want to urge the Members that we should work with Government to ensure that in the shortest possible time we are able to solve this energy crisis, which is a very big problem in this country.

On the economy, the President went to great lengths to explain the NRM slogan of “prosperity for all”, which was used in the campaigns. We translate it as “bonna bagagawale” in Luganda or “boona bagaigahare” in my language in Rukiga. In Ateso, you will tell us later. Indeed he emphasised that in order for us to address the poverty question in this country, we must help our people to access micro finance. So I take this opportunity to thank the President and the Government for having created a portfolio responsible for micro finance at the level of a minister, and we want to congratulate hon. Salim Saleh - he is not here with us today – upon having been given the responsibility to oversee the universal access to micro finance in this country. It is a good move on the side of Government.

However, I want to add that the experience that is documented shows that the administration of micro finance organisations is not very easy and also there is evidence that micro finance services rarely solve the socio-economic problems of people living below the poverty line. In Uganda we have 38 percent of Ugandans living below the poverty line. I, therefore, wish to call upon the responsible minister and the Government to develop a strategy where we as Members of Parliament will get involved and see how we can support the Government to mobilise our people to access micro finance in this country. We also need to explore other approaches, which can be used to further enhance poverty alleviation especially targeting the poorest of the poor in Uganda.

The President also talked at length about Universal Primary Education and the plans to introduce Universal Secondary Education. He also talked about the policy of promoting sciences and increment of teachers’ salaries, which later appeared in the Budget Speech and is commendable. It is through education- (Prof. Anokbonggo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, he is seconding the motion, you will have an opportunity to speak.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I appreciate my former professor, Professor Anokbonggo who taught me in Makerere. You allow me also to lecture to you now.  I was saying that in order for us to transform this country, Ugandans must access both primary and secondary education. And the efforts of government, which were ably explained by the President, should be supported by this Parliament in improving the quality of UPE, addressing the drop out rate within the UPE system and, ensuring that UPE is made compulsory in order for it to be effective.
 
On the issue of health, the President raised issues ranging from the primary health care interventions, which are being championed by the ministry. Particularly he touched on the issue of malaria control, focusing on the issue of DDT and assured us that this will be discussed later as the policy is finalised. 

He also touched on the issue of private life partnership that is also promoted by the Ministry of Health where the private health facilitators are given money by government to ensure that they deliver services in a much more qualitative form. 

He further talked of the health insurance scheme, which is being worked on by government.  These are very good measures that will go along way in improving health service delivery in this country.  But as a medical doctor, I observe that there are other challenges and issues, which this Parliament must note:

One, we are faced with a big problem of high maternal and child mortality in this country.  We loose very many mothers because of pregnancy and child related complications, which we should prioritise and see how to address it as Parliament.  

We also have a problem of HIV/Aids although it was not elaborately brought out. We note that there are recent reports that show that the prevalence or infection rate of HIV in this country has stabilised. In science we say, “Stabilised” but in politics we say, “stagnated” at around six percent. 

The prevalence rate has fallen from 18.5 percent from the early 90’s to 6.4 percent currently. And what we know is that for the last five years, it has stagnated there and the predictions we have made also show that unless we have serious interventions in place for the next five years, it is going to stabilise at that level. It should be brought to the attention of this Parliament that we need to work hard to ensure that we assist government to bring the infection rates of HIV lower.

Also the other concern is the high population growth rate in this country, which is at the level of 3.3 percent per annum. This greatly continues to undermine economic growth and development unless it is checked because the figures we have show that every year we add one million Ugandans and this means that the population will double within 21 years. 

Much as we may have poverty eradication measures and other programmes, unless we address this question of a high increasing population growth rate, then it will continue to undermine the efforts and achievements this country continues to register.   

I am grateful that the President explained the government’s commitment to settle all the pension arrears. The President described the various categories of the pensioners in this country. This is a thorny issue affecting many Ugandans, as most of you know, we have a duty to explain to our constituents the steps beings taken by government to settle this issue. 

In the same spirit, I would like to request and remind the President and government to consider members of Parliament as another category of workers that also need to benefit from the pension scheme.  

I also wish to register my appreciation to the President for having commended the Seventh Parliament for the good work that was done in passing very many legislations including passing the labour legislations.  He urged trade unionists and employers’ need to work together in order to foster harmonious industrial peace that is necessary for increased production of goods and services in this country.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the President noted that we have moved from a broad and all engrossing Movement system to a multiparty system. This transition, which we are witnessing, has resulted in the emergency of very many political parties some of which were able to field candidates during the last elections although others did not even have the capacity to field candidates.  

It is my submission that in order for us to have a strong multiparty system in Uganda, there is need for the various political parties to exercise and promote internal democracy.  This will greatly minimise the possibilities of individuals abandoning their parties to stand as Independent Members of Parliament or at various levels when campaigns and elections come. 

The President talked about Independent Members of Parliament and Independent candidates at various levels at great length. This issue has kept coming up on the Floor of this House and part of the solution to it is for the various parties to promote freedom and democracy within themselves so that people can adhere to the principles of the party.

I, therefore, want to call upon the members of this Parliament to be champions of multiparty democracy where co-existence, tolerance, patience, reconciliation and respect for each other are key factors. 

I appeal to fellow NRM members to acknowledge that the opposition in this country is now legitimate and also call upon the opposition to respect the decision of Ugandans who chose NRM to govern the country in the next five years.  

Madam Speaker, and honourable members, with these few comments, I second the motion moved by hon. Sarah Nyombi, MP Ntenjeru North.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you the honourable member for Kinkizi. Let me ask members to first sit down because now, the Opposition must first speak before the debate proceeds.  So, I will invite the Leader of Opposition to make his remarks before we open the report. 

But before we do so, I want to inform the House and the Sergeant–At-Arms that I have designated those two seats for hon. Safia Nalule and hon. Julius Balyejjusa because I do not want them to be crushed in the rush to sit down.  So, they are specifically for those two hon. members. Honourable Julius Balyejjusa, if you would like to come down and sit more comfortably, you can do so.  Thank you.

4.15
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo (FDC)): Madam Speaker, I rise to make a statement in reply to the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda at the opening of the Eighth Parliament on 8 June 2006.

On 8 June 2006, on a very historic day, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of Uganda delivered the first State of the Nation Address to the first bi-cameral Parliament of Uganda since the promulgation of our 1995 Constitution.  Coincidently, the 8th of July was also the state opening of the Eighth Parliament.  

Today, as Leader of the opposition in Parliament, I am greatly honoured and humbled to be opening the Parliamentary debate on the State of the Nation Address with this “Statement in Reply” to the President’s address.

After so many years of demonising multiparty politics in Uganda by the National Resistance Movement (NRM), the whole country is now watching us. Against the background of negative propaganda, it is so easy for Ugandans to misunderstand the role of the Opposition in Parliament and to even treat the Opposition as enemies of the state.  

It is, therefore, most important for Ugandans to know, understand and appreciate the role of the opposition in Parliament and what we all must do to entrench freedom and Multiparty democracy in our country.

The 2003 Official Year Book of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland at page 47, has this to say on the role of the Opposition in a Multiparty Parliament. I quote: “The effectiveness of the party system in Parliament relies to a large extent on the relationship between the Government and the Opposition parties.  Depending on the relative strength of the parties in the House…, the Opposition may try to overthrow the government by defeating it on a matter of confidence vote.

 In general, however, the Opposition aims to contribute to the formulation of policy and legislation by constructive criticism; to oppose government proposals with which it disagrees; to table amendments to government Bills; and to put forward its own policies in order to improve its chances of winning the next general election.” 

We in the opposition understand the fear that expression, “try to overthrow government” quoted above sends down the spines of Ugandans given our brutal historical political misadventure.  

We, therefore, would like to assure Ugandans and the international community, and hereby solemnly affirm in spite of unjustifiable court actions against our leaders and members and portray of opposition and our leaders in bad light, that we in this august House and as parties in the public domain, are nationalists, peace-loving, patriotic, faithful to our country and Constitution, loyal, law abiding, accountable and a truly responsible opposition. (Applause)

In Parliament, we shall play our roles, carry out duties, exercise our responsibilities and make our contributions without fear or favour and in full confidence of the fact that the country understands and supports us, regardless of what happened in the last general elections.

Madam Speaker, allow me now to turn to the President’s State of Nation Address to Parliament.  

Firstly, we congratulate His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. More importantly, we congratulate and applaud the President for the jovial and positive way with which he delivered his address in spite of the apparent physical discomfort that he seemed to suffer at that time.  

We also appreciate and thank the President for the formal recognition he accorded the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, particularly when that recognition had not come from the Chair and to the role of the opposition in bringing balance to our politics and governance. This is the way to go for our country.

Honourable members, we also join the President in congratulating the Rt. Hon. Speaker and you, Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Vice President, the Prime Minister and all of us who now constitute the membership of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda.  It is the hope and prayer of the opposition that, together, we shall make a difference to our beloved country.

Honourable members, the first State of the Nation Address in the life of any government is an important indication of how it intends to govern.  In ordinary circumstances, it attracts public interest and maximum response from the media and the general public. We were, therefore, most alarmed at the response of the newspapers to the President’s address the following day.  

As you may all have seen both the government owned, The New Vision and the independent, The Daily Monitor newspapers carried World Cup news on their front pages and made very small references to the speech of the President deep inside their pages. What message did this give to the people, we ask?

Honourable members, was this ignorance on the part of the media? Has the World Cup become more important than the affairs of our country?  Was this a case of familiarity breeding the usual contempt?  Or was this not a most damning manifestation of how the country now views H.E. the President and his explanations and promises?  

Having reached this far with our people and media, we, the opposition, feel roundly vindicated on our well-intentioned argument during the last Presidential elections that both the country and the President were tired, and that Yoweri Museveni’s earliest honourable retirement was in his own best interest and the best interest of the country.  We hope that the President will cease the next opportunity in 2011 to honourably retire, and to free the country to move on.

Madam Speaker, the President in his introductory remarks also made important reference to the last general elections and the growth of democracy in the country generally.  

Significantly, the President had this to say and I quote: “This is the first time we have had both the Presidential and Parliamentary Elections held on the same day. Elections have also been held for the local governments at the various levels and the exercise has been well-conducted.”  

Honourable members, we in the opposition took keen note of the fact that the President carefully avoided offering judgment on the conduct of the Presidential and Parliamentary Elections. To us this silence is a glaring and loud admission that all was not well with these two elections.

Madam Speaker, we remember with great pain, distress, agony, humiliation and fear the brutal, reckless and highly provocative arrest of the FDC Leader Col. (Rtd) Dr Kizza Besigye and opposition supporters and their subsequent arraignment in courts including the General Court Martial, on clearly fabricated charges. 

We also remind the House of the unanimous verdict of the Supreme Court, upon our petition on the failures of the Electoral Commission, the wanton use of violence by state agents, and the massive rigging that took place during the last Presidential Elections. 

Even with the Local Government Elections that the President described as well conducted, we all know that no other elections have been so ill-managed by the Electoral Commission and the state as these ones. 

In Pader district, for instance, election materials arrived at polling stations between 1.00 and 2.00 p.m., yet the elections were allowed to go on.  The absurd explanation given by the Electoral Commission was that the materials arrived late at Karuma bridge and the UPDF soldiers could not escort them overnight.  

Massive failures of the Electoral Commission were also recorded throughout the country. Were these failures note a deliberate strategy to subvert the electoral process and rig elections where the oppositions were strong? Madam Speaker, over the next five years, we must together do all that it takes to end the abuse of the electoral process and to create a free and level playing field for all political actors. 

As a start, Parliament must investigate the conduct of the last elections, and this time it must debate its report and demand specific actions from government.  It must also ensure that electoral laws are passed early enough and adequate funds provided to the Electoral Commission and on time.  

We in the opposition shall use all means within the law to get these needed reforms and we shall support government in ensuring these reforms. In particular, we shall pursue amendment to the Constitution to ensure fair representation of parties in the Electoral Commission and the complete independence of the Electoral Commission.

On the political scene, we agree entirely with the President in his exposition on the question of individuals who stood as Independents.  We particularly applaud him for recognising the challenges generated by the phenomenon of Independent candidates in the multiparty system and the need to address the challenges.  

We also entirely agree with the President that: “now that the Arms of Government are all in place, it is time for all of us to settle down and work for the good of the country,” and we further applaud his call for all to end politicking and forge unity and good leadership so that our people may realise their economic and social aspirations.

The President having quoted the Bible and preached religiously on this method, we can only humbly add that let the President put into practice what he has preached- (Applause)

To walk the talk and to demonstrate good will, we urge the President to: (i) immediately discontinue all court proceedings against Col. (Rtd) Besigye and other opposition supporters, that we believe and know were politically motivated and were intended to disorganise the opposition and to undermine participation of Dr Besigye in the last Presidential Elections;

(ii) end arbitrary arrest, illegal detention in safe houses and inhuman torture of the opposition as exemplified by the case reported in the media yesterday; and 

(iii) end any partisan victimisation of civil servants, police and security personnel who hold personal views by rights bestowed upon them by the Constitution.  

Our pledge to the country is that once the above is done, the President can demand of us whatever we, the opposition must do to ensure national harmony and peaceful democratic progress.  We assure you he will not find us wanting.

Madam Speaker, the other matter in this area is highly contentious and of grave concern to the country is the Kyankwanzi NRM Political School. Although the President was at pains to justify its present status, even sighting Article 17(2) on the duty of Ugandans to undergo military training, and the state to provide immediate facilities for that purpose, what is going on at Kyankwanzi is not acceptable to us.  

We roundly condemn the current situation whereby members of the UPDF and Uganda Police Force who are required by the Constitution to be non-partisan, are being subjected to the same political indoctrination under the tutelage of the same political instructors that so crudely spread the anti parties propaganda of the Movement over the years. 

 We demand an end to any further training at the school until its status, curricular and staffing are sorted out.  If need be, we shall take appropriate court action in support of this demand. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we welcome the declaration by His Excellency the President on holding constitutionalism and the rule of law and the call for us all to promote the same amongst our people.  We, however, do not accept any suggestion that we in the opposition have not played our parts.  

On our part we commit ourselves to doing all in our power to uphold and protect the Constitution against any further manipulation for selfish interests including amending the age limits for President. We shall, however, strive to support amendments that strengthen the Constitution and protect our people against advanced individual or group interests.

We support the country spending adequately on defence, but this cannot be unbalanced spending bridled with corruption.  We in the opposition favour spending that is nested in sound foreign and domestic policy that recognises both the short and long term needs of the country; and that seeks a rational balance in commitment between the services and the productive sectors.

Hon Members, we recognise the marked improvement in the security situation in northern and eastern Uganda in respect to the brutal LRA rebellion.  We abhor the long suffering of the people, condemn the brutality mated out on them and regret the many opportunities missed to bring the conflict to an end early through peaceful means.  

In this regard, we implore government not to tire with seeking peace so that our brothers and sisters in the North may finally see peace and regain normalcy in their lives.  We have postured too long about our might and capacity and we have set too many of deadlines. The people have suffered enough: Let this conflict end permanently.

Honourable Speaker, we also recognise that government has put in place many infrastructures in the war-afflicted areas of northern and eastern Uganda.  In the face of the conflicts, the priorities were clearly different.  We, therefore, regret the fact that, for years government did not relocate funds budgeted for the conflict areas to meet their real priorities, and that people continued to suffer needlessly when funds meant for them were returned to the Treasury at the end of each financial year.  

We hope and pray that as peace returns, the budget for the war afflicted areas will not be treated and appropriated in the same format and proportions as those for other parts of the country that have enjoyed peace all these years.  Let no selfishness or desire to punish those who did not support us stand between our human and the national imperative to support our desperate and most needy people in northern and eastern Uganda.

On the question of the resettlement of the people from IDP camps, we unreservedly support the return of the people to their homes, and acknowledge all the support given to them so far.  We, however, advocate for constructive engagement between government and the people and their leaders to avoid politicisation of the process and creation of suspicion that undermine harmony and cohesion.  We offer to be effective and equal partners in this process.

On the issue of Karimojong cattle rustling, we beg to disagree with the President’s assertion that “that is a simple problem,” because the gun is not the problem.  The bigger problem of Karamoja is the lack of a comprehensive strategy and holistic approach to addressing the issues of development, geographical and socio-economic isolation, decline and neglect, and failure of the state to address the water and pasture crises, to promote certain agriculture and to provide adequate security and protection in the region to individuals and their cattle. (Applause)

Over the next five years, we shall push government to end the rhetoric - sweet talk and the strong-arm approach, and ask it to present to the country a comprehensive restoration and development agenda for Karamoja.  We offer our proposals that are contained in our party platform.  

We shall advocate for adequate cross-border roads, placement of soldiers in strategic locations, and promotion of close interactions and positive economic engagement to bring the Karimojong and all their neighbours together in peace and mutual development.

On the economy, honourable Speaker, we would like to assert that the President probably downplayed the challenges facing the country.  May be the real challenges facing our economy linked to the energy crisis has not been clearly presented to him; may be the President is a perpetual optimist.  

It is, however, most unfortunate, honourable members, that the opposition and the Sixth Parliament continue to be blamed for failure to construct Bujagali dam, when this was clearly a matter of poor planning and failed policy.  Members of the Sixth Parliament probably saved the country from the worst catastrophe in regard to the Bujagali dam:  

Firstly, their insistence unmasked ENRON, the company whose leaders were doctoring their accounts, and that subsequently collapsed in a heap of financial scandal. ENRON would have collapsed with Bujagali and our money too.  

Secondly, the efforts by Parliament unmasked, the power purchase agreement between ENRON and the government that set very high tariffs for the Bujagali electricity and required government to guarantee the water flow levels for the dam.  

Clearly, ENRON knew that the second dam at Jinja, and not drought, would drain Lake Victoria.  Instead of warning government, ENRON sought to guarantee their income even when they would supply air!

Honourable Speaker, as the opposition, let no one doubt our commitment to seeing the country fully exploit the hydropower potential that we have, for herein lies our comparative advantage over other countries in Eastern Africa.  However, it is our responsibility to alert the country, advise government and advocate for the best alternatives.  Our motive is not to block the building of any power dam.  

The President has assured the country that his government will build Bujagali and Karuma Power Stations in the next 44 months or so.  This is a daunting commitment with numerous challenges that must be addressed.

Honourable members, the insistence on building Bujagali dam is strange.  Construction of a dam at Bujagali pauses two great risks to the country:  

Firstly, lower outflow of water from Lake Victoria will affect Bujagali output as much as it is now affecting Kiira and Nalubaale Dams.  

Secondly, concentration of three dams in the same area, when recent studies have warned of the potential for future wars over water is clearly non-strategic in security terms.  

We must also consider the facts that building the dam elsewhere spreads development to other parts of the country along the River Nile, a thing that is good for generating a sense of ownership and belonging among our people.  Given our heavy investment on hotels and tourism under CHOGM, saving the Bujagali Rapids for White Water Rafting will be critical to boosting tourism.  

Even when government considers building Karuma and Bujagali, serious considerations must be given to the availability of transportation and transportation of cement and steel.  Do we have adequate cement in the country to supply both the building industry and the dams?  How will transport materials to Karuma without a railway line from Gulu or Lira?  Do we have the fleet of trucks necessary to transport by road?  If yes, have we provided for their damage to the roads that they will use?  Surely, is 44 months a practical and honest target?  

In our view, instead of attempting to build two dams in rush, government should first consider building a dam at Ayago South with this 450 megawatt potential, and if need be, at Murchison Falls with its 650 megawatt power potential.

Honourable members, the energy crisis took the President’s eye off the real economic challenges, namely: 

i) 	The need to shift away from dependence on donor resource inflows as a stimulus and even basis for development, to building a sound national resource base through enhancing production and productivity across the economic and social spectrum, and sustained savings and investment instead of the current wicked consumption;

ii) 	Developing and implementing medium and long-term policies and programmes for coherent national development with clear goals and targets;

iii) 	There is need for putting real money in agriculture, processing industries and rural development to address the question of poverty.

Unfortunately, there is little evidence from the President’s address that this will be done by this government. In the next five years, therefore, the opposition shall take the lead in advocating for a shift in approach and resource allocation to address the needs of the peasants that the NRM so unashamedly prides itself of enjoying massive support.  

In the social sector, we fully support the legal reforms now in place to protect workers. We, however, appeal that, in future, to reflect the political diversity amongst workers that is now masked by the easily manipulated electoral college system, our laws be amended to provide for proportional representation of workers and other special interest groups in Parliament based on the share of votes earned by a party at the presidential election.  

In the education sector, our concern has been that our education system must be designed, supported and invested in, in an appropriate sequenced that supports effective human resource development.  

Honourable members, we do not seek to support our education for the sole purpose of numbers. No, it is not our interest if hon. Ben Etonu from Amuria joins the NRM because the classes he studied in were built in permanent structures by the Movement.  Yes, it is our interest that another young son of Amuria studying in those classrooms can successfully pass his exams the way Etonu easily did in a grass thatched classroom; earn his degree and become a Member of Parliament or minister as Etonu did. 

It is for the above reasons that in the next five years we shall advocate for the following: One, the revival of effective training in primary schools whereby first grades are not confined only to high cost primary schools and those in Kampala, but are equally obtained in rural areas;

Two, development of model secondary schools in all parts of the country that provide affordable opportunities to all Ugandans regardless of location and socio-economic base;

Three, intensive investment in technical training to truly prepare the country for industrial development;

Four, comprehensive rehabilitation and re-development of our tertiary institutions and universities as a basis for building our global competitiveness.  

Our health sector has benefited from tremendous support from the international community. This support is critical to further improve the health of our people. We were, therefore, surprised that the President did not announce specific actions that he intended to take against those identified by the Justice Ogola Commission to have mismanaged or corruptly “eaten” money from the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. The whole world is watching us on this matter.  

Honourable members, corruption is the vampire that has sucked the blood of the poor dry. We are not convinced that government is ready to act decisively on corruption, given the minuscule financial and material resources it allocates to the anti-corruption bodies or to back its words in general terms. 

We nevertheless welcome government moves to bring appropriate legislation to support the fight against corruption. At the political level, the opposition shall continue to be vigorous to whistle-blowers whenever government relaxes, attempts to hide or fails to take action on corruption cases. 

I also personally welcome the offer by the President to share files on those alleged to be corrupt. I thank him for the offer, although I have yet to receive the fat files on my brother, Gen. Salim Saleh.

On the public service, we welcome the President’s assurance that no list of civil servants has been drawn up for dismissal on account of their support for the opposition. We, however, urge that that neutrality and nationalistic stands should be extended to recruitment into the civil service.  

Honourable members, we oppose any recruitment based on cadre-ship, as this has, under the NRM, been the smokescreen and conduit for sectarian recruitment into key sectors of the public service.  

On pensions, Madam Speaker, we are genuinely concerned that a large number of pensioners are not accessing their pensions. We have teachers who retired three to seven years ago who have not received their pensions. We have relatives of dead soldiers who for years have struggled to collect their death gratuities to support the children and families of our fallen heroes, but have struggled in vain; 

We have former employees of the East African Community whose compensation money was diverted to other use by government and are now suffering or have died without enjoying the fruits of their labour. 

Most importantly, we have accumulated pension arrears, which as at 30 June 2005 stood at Ugshs 312.5 billion and climbing. Yet each year government provides less than five billion to cover these arrears. These are the matters that we talked about during the campaigns.  

Surely, why must Ugandan pensioners suffer so much neglect, and why must it become criminal for the opposition to champion their plight? In the coming five years, we shall agitate, negotiate, propose, push and cajole until the pension question is resolved.  

On the matter of regional cooperation, we fully support the efforts of government particularly in forging East African Corporation and ensuring total peace in the Great Lakes Region, and tackling the regional dimension of cattle rustling and the gun culture in Karamoja.  

We stand ready to join hands with all Ugandans and all our brothers and sisters in Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi, Congo and Sudan to ensure unity, peace and prosperity for all our peoples.

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, allow me to join His Excellency the President, in also extending the commendation of the opposition in the Eighth Parliament and all our party leaders to the Seventh Parliament and the two of you who successfully led the Seventh Parliament for a job well done.  (Applause)

However, while we commend the Seventh Parliament for the oversight role it played in scrutinising government accounts, loan proposals, the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank and Dairy Corporation, the passing of many Bills, and advocacy for the people of Northern Uganda. We cannot help recalling with pain the removal of the term limits which was the country’s only guarantee against the personalisation of the presidency. 

We assure you, Rt hon. Speaker and honourable members and all Ugandans that, at the earliest opportunity in the life of this Parliament, we shall definitely move a constitutional amendment to restore the two term limits for the presidency. (Applause)

Finally, hon. Speaker and colleagues –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

PROF. LATIGO: Finally, hon. Speaker and colleagues, we would like to assure you that, in all that we have said, we mean well for this country.  We seek cooperation and mutual understanding and not hostility and recrimination. We will extend our friendship to all and join hands with all for unity, peace and prosperity of our country and people. Honourable members, I thank you all for giving me your attention, God bless you all. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much Leader of the Opposition. We can now begin the debate. 

4.45
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Coming so soon after the remarks of the Leader of Opposition, it might be understood or misunderstood that I would like to reply to him.  However, I am confident that at the appropriate time, the appropriate people of his rank will do so. But because of my involvement outside this Parliament later this afternoon and a few days later, I would like to make my brief contribution and then go.

This is my first remark in this Parliament as it begins its business. It is, therefore, a matter of good etiquette to extend my appreciation to you and the Speaker personally for having been re-elected to those very challenging offices and also extend to my colleagues of the Eighth Parliament congratulations for being elected and for being in Parliament to contribute to the development, peace and unity of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, in accepting and contributing to this motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President to this Parliament on Thursday, 8 June 2006, I will only touch on two matters. 

The President did tackle a number of issues on the politics of the country, but I will only concentrate on two important matters, which I think will reverberate to assist in handling all other issues, which the President talked of. 

The first one, Madam Speaker, is the question, which came in the President’s first few pages that is the restoration of multiparty democracy. I am one of those who have been in this Parliament for a number of years and I did maintain a very consistent position both in the Constituency Assembly and here that it is good for this country to have multiparty democracy. 

I am happy that the President himself championed this at a later stage and the Movement government did accept through a referendum that we should have political parties restored. I thank them for that. 

Why do I think that it is important and good for this country to have these parties back? Because I look at parties and hear my words as organised peaceful institutions for competition for power. 

Madam Speaker, the history of Uganda, as we all know and it is in the preamble of our Constitution, has been characterised by instability, insecurity, and bloodshed. I do hope that 40 years after our independence, we have learnt a lot and one of the causes for this has been failure to accept how to acquire state power, how to retain that state power and how to relinquish that state power. 

I am very happy that it is now possible for people to compete for that power in an organised way rather than using armed struggle. I think we are moving forward and when I see my brothers on the other hand not just shadows but physically present on the other side –(Laughter)- I feel encouraged that my own future and the future of my children is bright and that when my time comes to leave Parliament and to leave this country, I will leave it happier for my children and for my grand children. 

The Leader of Opposition, Prof. Ogenga Latigo, who is my neighbour - Otuke and Agago counties are historical neighbours, geographical neighbours, tribal neighbours and we are great friends. He ended his long remark by wishing the President and this country well and he said, “I join you in the struggle for peace, security, unity and prosperity.” I think these are loaded and very important statements. 

When we were attending the retreat of Members of Parliament, it was said and written that Uganda should develop what we call common good and missions. There are certain things that should never divide us irrespective of our tribes, religion and more so political beliefs. 

Let us agree today, if we have not agreed before, that these must be issues of sovereignty of Uganda, unity, peace, security and prosperity. And when it comes to those, my colleagues, on the other side, you can count on me particularly for the security and peace.

I am looking at my own constituency Otuke, which is located in the war ravaged area in the North where all my people are in the camp –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have one minute.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you very much. Therefore, I look forward to having this. If you look at the President’s speech, which is contained on 36 pages, 10 pages are dealing with the issue of security. This means the government attaches great importance to the issue of security. And in the programme of our priorities, during the Cabinet retreat and the statement of the President, security and peace were top priority. 

I wish to add my remark by asking leaders that to be a leader- I am ending now- demands three things: sacrifice, courage and integrity. Man’s highest life does not consist self-expression but self-sacrifice. The word “courage” takes its meaning from the Latin word “animus” which means to take heart. 

Integrity comes from your heart according to philosopher Erasmus. The less time it takes anyone to be laid away from honesty - I am quoting this because of the issue of corruption and integrity. If you have integrity, you have gone out of corruption. And as leaders, we must have this integrity. 

And what did St Erasmus say on this? He said, “The less time it takes anyone to be laid away from honesty, the weaker he is. The less time it takes a man to say yes to a proposal in a nightclub, the nearer you are to a very serious problem of health. The longer it takes you the better”.

 I, therefore, support the motion and I hope that this House will be guided by these very important principles of sacrifice, courage and integrity. I thank you all.

5.03
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those that have congratulated you and the Speaker and my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, for having made it to the Eighth Parliament. I would like to further congratulate His Excellency, the President for the victory during the 23 February 2006 elections. I stand to support the motion and I will make some observations and comments. 

On security, I am happy that today we can hear security and peace in the North. And I am happy that the government has taken all the necessary steps in trying to resettle our sisters and brothers who have been displaced in the camps. 

However, I want to note that in the State of the Nation Address, I have tried to read through, I have not seen anything that is related to the hosting communities and in particular I want to make a reference of Masindi district. 

Masindi District has been hosting people who have been displaced from Gulu, Kitgum, Pader and other districts also have been hosting these communities. But when we are talking of resettlement, we do not mention at all these communities like Masindi district, Kibanda County in particular. 

I have been looking through and I have seen these people who are going to be resettled are going to be given some materials like iron sheets and the rest. And here I am looking at these communities like Masindi, which have been sharing on these resources with these people who have been hosted and some of these people - I am in a dilemma. 

I want the minister in charge to assist me, when these people go back to their areas, are they going to be accorded the same priority like those ones who have been settled in the camps?  Two, what does the government have for the people of Masindi and these other neighbouring districts, which have been hosting people who have been displaced? 

The President talked about the education and I am happy that we shall be fulfilling our manifesto, especially in implementation of the Universal Secondary Education (USE) and the increment of the teachers’ salary. 

I am aware that there are so many new districts, which have been formed and these new districts need to be equipped, especially under the UPE. But to my surprise, Western region has not benefited from the school facilities grant this financial year. I want the Minister to assist me. What happened to Western region? Don’t we have these new districts, which need to be boosted? Why should we be isolated? 

I know under western region, there is only one new district, which is going to benefit from the school facility grant. We are aware that this school grant is one of those programmes that have been helping in boosting UPE. This is an urgent issue that the government needs to handle and to address. 

We have so many new districts. We have Isingiro; we have Ibanda; we have Bulisa and others and all these districts need to be boosted. I am asking the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Education and Sports, what happened to the school facility programme to the Western region? (Interjections)- This is my maiden speech -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had indicated that we could as much as possible really leave the members to use their seven minutes.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I respect that. But, Madam Speaker, you are very well aware that we have not received as Parliament the policy statements from the Ministry of Education and Sports to enable us to meaningfully deliberate on whether our regions have been included or not. I do not know whether that is part of the President’s speech or she could give us further information to make us debate further.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is for the Minister of Education and Sports to answer. The Minister is in this House. She is free to raise any matter concerning her constituency. 

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, thank you for your ruling. I want to comment on the political space. I thank all Ugandans and especially people of Masindi district for having responded positively to the opening of political space. 

I have a worry. Today we are having 33 political parties in existence which registered and out of the 33 political parties, at least in Masindi, I know of only two which have opened offices at the district level. 

I remember in the Seventh Parliament, we passed a law, which if I am not wrong compelled these political parties to open offices. I want to know; does democracy mean only to register and you do not participate effectively down on the ground? I am about to move an amendment to that law, that if parties cannot fulfil some of these requirements that we put in the law, then they should wait or they should be revisited. 

Some parties are not even respecting the protocols that we have ratified as Ugandans and it is sad to note that gender in some parties has not been respected at all. I know I belong to a party, which is ruling and I want the government to take it upon itself to make sure that if we ratified some of these protocols as Uganda then we should be able to fulfil all these protocols that we have ratified.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to comment on health.  Malaria is an issue, which needs to be addressed. I have seen a report is being drafted, but I want the government to take keen interest in the preventive measures rather than curative measures. Our children are dying, the expectant women, everywhere you find them hospitalised. So, the earlier the government comes up with the preventive measures, the better. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.11
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion, which has been moved and congratulating everybody right from the President to the Members of Parliament who have made it to the Eighth Parliament. I just have a few issues to rise on the State of the Nation Address. 

One is an issue, which should be taken very seriously by all of us in this country. There is over politicisation of development, of health, of environment, of almost everything that we are doing in this country and this is slowing down the level of our development. 

Look at the swamps, the laws are clear. Look at the swamps and the rivers; people are ploughing up to the lakes and rivers and we cannot enforce the laws that we have put in place because of politics. It is high time we really took this serious as a nation and enforce the laws that we have put in place for the purposes of development. “Bulungi bwansi” is not being done. Now that the LCI elections are going to take place, even health guidelines like construction of toilets cannot be done. 

We are in the time of electing the LCI Chairmen. I would like to ask the Attorney-General - Section 1(6) of the main Act of the Local Government was amended to allow civil servants not to resign when they stand for LC II and LC I. And this one has to be clarified because we are now in the multiparty dispensation. What will happen to these civil servants when they stand? Are they going to stand independently? And when they stand in the new dispensation, will they not be regarded to be siding with one party or the other? This needs to be clarified because the Electoral Commission has not also clarified that. 

Then, on the issue of prosperity for all; I hope the Minister of Finance will come out with guidelines because out there the people are waiting for the poverty alleviation funds, but the procedure and the process is not yet clear and there is no way we can explain it to our population.

Now on the issue of education, I would like the honourable Minister of Education – sometime ago, about three years ago, a scheme was mentioned in this Parliament about providing a loan scheme for university students. It has died a natural death and I hope when the Minister comes, he will say something on the issue of providing loans for students who go to the university. 

Now, the difference between the developed world and the undeveloped world is a scientific difference. I think all of us should join the NRM Government and the President to give affirmative action to science subjects so that we can narrow the difference between the developed world and the undeveloped world, which is science. The moment we narrow the difference between the development of the developed world and us, then we would have achieved what we want to achieve.

Madam Speaker, the issue of cleaning of the payrolls by the Public Service. For a long time, Public Service has been cleaning payrolls, but as I speak now in certain districts the teachers are going on strike and other civil servants like health workers because they have not been paid.  

When I asked the Minister of Finance, he told me that Public Service has not submitted an appropriate list of a cleaned payroll and so they cannot budget appropriately. I hope during the budget debate and presentation, the Minister of Public Service will be able to table to this Parliament a cleaned payroll so that if there is a problem in payment of salaries, we know whom to blame.

Pension – it is high time we established a contributory pension scheme. People who are working now should be putting money in the pension scheme to pay for those people who retired. It is a shame to find the people who have retired cannot access money. I know at any one time the people working in the country are more than those who have retired, so it is possible to pay this pension immediately we establish a contributory scheme of pension.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to highlight the issue of politicisation of development. Tanzania and Kenya and maybe part of Rwanda whenever they pass a law, say on environment, it is fully implemented by everybody in government and it is respected. But here, in this country, we have a problem. I do not know whether it is because we have frequent elections or – it is saddening that all the laws that we have passed, all the bylaws that we have passed, cannot be implemented. 

I am taking it on that all of us, both government and those people on the opposition, should really make sure that we implement laws whether it hurts our people or not. I am sure it does not hurt them because it is for the purposes of development; we should stop politicising development. 

The other day when the President and the government leased land to developers, there was a lot of noise in the newspapers. A hotel or any facility that is going to be built will take 100 or 200 years; and leasing land to a developer for 50 years is an advantage to this country. But when you see what was put in the newspapers, it was being politicised that the President has sold land. 

All over the country, government takes responsibility for land, it leases it for development and when that is done, it should be supported. This is part of politicising development. With those few remarks, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, seven minutes.

5.17
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Central Division, Kampala):  Seven minutes? I will appropriately use those few minutes given to me. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

 I rise up to add my voice to a reply given by the Leader of the Opposition. In particular, I will address my mind to the observations of the President on page 9 of his State of Nation Address. This is in relation to constitutionalism and the rule of law in this country. 

It is my considered view and indeed an honest belief that the President did not give this concept of constitutionalism and rule of law the seriousness it deserves when he was delivering his State of the Nation Address. 

This is what he said: “The Movement government will continue to adhere to the constitutional order and the rule of law. This explains why when we agreed to open up the political space, the transition from the Movement system to the multiparty system was handled according to the provisions of the Constitution and other attendant laws instead of taking short-cuts here and there as it was being advocated by some individuals and groups, especially those who were saying that they were from the Opposition.”

In this statement, the President concedes that the NRM government had closed political space, which was unfortunate and the President did not show any remorse for this at all. He is saying when they agreed to open up political space -(Interjections)- anyway this is my statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle.

MR LUKWAGO: Secondly and most importantly, the President made insinuations to the effect that those who were advocating for alternative avenues for opening up political space were advocating for unconstitutional measures and were actually not putting into consideration the constitutional provisions but were advocating shortcuts. 

This is not true; it was not a true reflection of the constitutional order because those alternatives we advocated for were duly provided for under Article 74 of the Constitution. We simply called upon government to consider the alternative avenues, particularly using Article 74 (b) to simply pass a Resolution of Parliament to change the political order and this was equally legitimate and constitutional. So, the President was wrong in my opinion to refer to that avenue as a shortcut; it is not a shortcut. In other words the President was insinuating that this was unconstitutional, which is unfortunate.

Another thing, Madam Speaker, in regard to constitutionalism and rule of law, there are a few things the President ought to have alluded to and indeed probably made an apology to this nation as far as constitutionalism and rule of law is concerned in this country. 

There are those incidents, which really undermined the independence of the Judiciary and were condemned worldwide. We do remember the events of 16 November 2005 when the notorious “Black Mamba” invaded the premises of the High Court and in the words of the Principal Judge, His Lordship Justice Ogoola, this was discretion of the temple of justice, he called it “naked rape of the Judiciary”. Surely, does this augur well with the concept of constitutionalism and rule of law? 

The President ought to have alluded to this and probably made an apology on behalf of government. The “Black Mambas” kidnapped the people who had been granted bail and todate as we talk; they are still languishing in prisons when they were duly granted bail. 

I was a victim of Kangaroo courts, Madam Speaker. I vividly remember on 20 November 2005, I went to represent my client in the name of Rtd Col. Kizza Besigye before the Court Martial. I entered in the morning as an advocate but I emerged out a few minutes later as a convict. I was arrested, tried summarily, convicted and sentenced. Is that justice; is that rule of law; is that constitutionalism? There are these issues surely which should be addressed. 

Madam Speaker, as far as this concept is concerned, there are a number of things which are still going on which do not augur well and there are two incidents I wish to cite and wind up by submission.   

The wanton distribution of land in my constituency without due regard to the process of the law on presidential directives. You hear that UBC land is given away; you hear that Shimon Demonstration should also be evicted. 

I was recently attending a function at Nakasero Primary School, they are worried that Nakasero Primary is next in the queue; it is going. All do not augur well with the concept of constitutionalism.

And finally, there is a looming constitutional crisis, which we should address our minds to as we discuss the State of the Nation Address. The Seventh Parliament passed an amendment to the Constitution and inserted Article 178 into the Constitution which brought into place the regional government and there is a time frame, a deadline that is the 1st July; a week away from today. 

On 1st July, the regional government is supposed to be in place but here we are there is no law to operationalise it. There are sections within society particularly the Mengo government who have objected to it and they have not been addressed. Besides that there are no arrangements being made by the Electoral Commission to organise elections for the leaders of these regional governments. All these do not augur well with the concept of constitutionalism and rule of law. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.26
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. It is a constitutional mandate and there is no argument, there is no debate about it. 

We want to appreciate the effort made to make an attempt to express policies that the government intends to pursue in the next one year. In the same way, I want to thank the Leader of Opposition for his reciprocation. 

I want to thank the honourable members of this Eighth Parliament and make one appeal. First of all, I must congratulate you all for making it to this Parliament. This is going to be a unique Parliament and it will take some time for the Speaker to keep reminding us that this is a multiparty democratic Parliament. 

After getting used to individual merit’s contribution, it still takes time for us to adjust and where we have gone wrong, Madam Speaker, do not hesitate to remind us. We have not been used to this challenge after 20 years. Definitely it will be our duty to keep reminding one another that this is a new challenge.  

I want to also reflect that it has not been very easy for us all to make it to this Parliament. Now that we have come, it is our duty to struggle for the liberty of our people and for ourselves.  Liberty as you rightly know is the basic essential for civilisation and is an avenue that provides opportunity for us to express our independent opinion freely and this is very important. It is, therefore, important that we understand it and it has been a struggle for us to fight for it.  

Similarly, this Parliament will best be considered like a court with a jury. In this circumstance, government puts a case, brings in policy proposals, brings in motions, brings in Bills; it is our responsibility on this side to critically examine and where appropriate, give our input in order to enrich what comes out of the government side. If you see that Parliament operates along that line, we shall have created a very friendly atmosphere for us to lead this country through this Parliament.  

It is not right to look at opposition as enemies and it is our constitutional duty to analyse government proposals and do the needful so that at the end of it all, the decision we take here should be for the benefit of the entire country not only for the side of government. We should realise that we now represent the entire country; we are not representing any party in this House. We are the leaders of this country for the next five years.

I will probably now touch on three key areas. In the President’s speech, he made a very veiled reference to the use of DDT in control of malaria, this is right but that is one side of the argument.  

Government through scientists from the Ministry of Health has put a case. As an agricultural scientist, I would want to hear the position of the agricultural scientists. I would want to hear the position of the environment scientists and once these two other cases are put across, we should have a policy proposal duly presented to this House so that once a decision is taken; government takes responsibility for the good results of application of DDT in the control of malaria or even for any negative consequences. In the absence of a policy, we should avoid pronouncements for this will reflect badly on our democratisation process.

Number two, on the issue of Universal Secondary Education, UPE took off very well because the ministry took time to research, consult and produce a White Paper out of a wide consultation and debate and we all accept that UPE has delivered to some extent. 

But my worry is that in this year or the year to come, a pronouncement has been made that there will be Universal Secondary Education. There has never been a clear policy on how the people of Uganda will benefit from this policy if it is really a policy. What we need to do is to try and see that government uses some kind of White Paper again so that this policy on accessibility of Universal Secondary Education is debated and it becomes friendly to the people of Uganda. If we only depend on pronouncements, we might not benefit totally from this policy initiative.

Because of lack of time, I will conclude by making reference to the East African political federation.  Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is not an easy thing. We have looked at history in our library, this initiative started in 1899 by Queen Victoria who wanted a federation for East Africa and Sir Henry Johnston proposed it but Sir Clement Hill resisted it in 1901 taking the views of our local leaders here who had fears that the colonialists after forming the federation would deny them the right to their kingdoms, the right to their leadership, and the idea was suspended for some decades. 

Two days after independence on 11 October 1962, Members of Parliament pursued the policy again. They wanted a federation that very day or the following day. They did not know that Kenya was still under colonial rule in 1962 but they wanted a federation. Zanzibar was under Sultan; it was only Tanganyika and Uganda, which had attained independence. But the politicians wanted a federation immediately; it was not possible. 

So, definitely, what we need to do is to pursue this programme stage by stage. If we can identify common services, which are easy to be brought on board, let us make use of them for the time being. But I even get amused to hear that there is no fast tracking arrangement; fast tracking on what? It is not very easy because we are not at per as member states. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.35
MR JOHN OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, I would like to report to you that I am back from a long leave of five years. I did not apply for this leave but it was a forced leave imposed upon me by the powers that I would not do anything about.

I want to talk on a few issues and one of them is national unity. As we sit here, there is no one country called Uganda; we have two countries: one is located in the south and the other is in the North. Physically, politically, socially and economically, we have two countries. It would be naive of us to shut our eyes; we should do everything possible to help the President to re-unite the country. 

The people in the North - and when I talk about the North I mean North of Nile plus west Nile - are being treated as if they were second-class citizens. (Interjections) It is true. I am from there. If you put a question here to find out how many Members of this House have been to the North in the last 20 years, you will be shocked to find 50. So, one of the prejudice of the war in the North is that people who have not been there appoint themselves experts on what is going on in the North. It is very unfortunate!

Madam Speaker, this question of national unity must be addressed and very urgently. I am concerned about the health of our President. Any worker must take leave to revamp and come back fresh. To my knowledge, our President has not gone on leave for the last 20 years. He has got an accumulated strain of 20 years. If the President could take all this leave in one go, we would have an opportunity to evaluate the Vice-President. We have not been given an opportunity to evaluate those leaders who are up there next to the President because they are not given a chance to be in charge. This could be the reason for the Vice-President encroaching on the portfolio of the Minister of Agriculture. Taking on upland rice growing to the extreme embarrassment of the Minister of Agriculture is not fair. You are a minister, then you see your boss coming to take a portion. Really, something should be done.

Madam Speaker, the Office of the Vice-President is a good one and could be very effective but if you look at our Article 108 of the Constitution, there are two duties: to deputise for the President and wait for anything assigned. Now, if it not assigned and you are not given a chance to deputise, what do you do? The President should allocate any one ministry to the Vice-President to act on instead of that office which is sitting waiting to be assigned. The office is not doing anything for us because of lack of assignments.

Madam Speaker, power crisis -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope you are winding up.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I am winding up. I had many topics but let me talk about this one. In the Sixth Parliament and in the last three sessions, I was a Member of the Committee on Natural Resources. That committee struggled with the President to persuade and convince the President that Karuma should be allowed to come on board. The President stubbornly refused. The people who wanted to develop Karuma had made it very clear that they were not looking for money. They had their own money but they were stopped. All they wanted was power purchase agreement, which had actually been drafted but it was rejected by the President and the minister responsible.

Madam Speaker, on 23 this month, power went off when we were here. The generator went off, we were in total darkness. To access our pigeonholes, we had to use our telephone light. In a national Parliament! This is a very sad situation. How do we read those papers? You go home, you find your home so scary and full of darkness. How do we read to contribute here? We cannot wait for 44 months; something must be done now. I am saying something should be done now. (Laughter) If we are to tell you what should be done, you are telling me that you are in government but you do not know what to do. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Okello-Okello.

MR OKELLO- OKELLO: Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You have exceeded your time.   

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, let me conclude. The power crisis is the most serious thing that is happening and if we are not careful, it will economically kill our country. I thank you. 

5.45
MRS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to congratulate you upon the appointment in this Office and the Rt hon. Speaker and the various leaders in the various capacities. Allow me to congratulate you honourable members of Parliament too on your successful victory to join the Eighth Parliament.

I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the President on the State of the Nation Address, and I want in particular to commend the government on the educational policy. I commend the government on the policy of UPE and on their intention to embark on the USE. 

Although it is my conviction that we take on USE, I am of the view that actually supplements hon. Odit that an independent commission of educational experts should be set up to review the workings of UPE so that the shortfalls that happened in UPE are not carried over into USE. (Applause) Some of those shortfalls that you know of which involve high level of dropouts. For example, I note that when it was established in 1997, the figure rose from 1.5 million enrolments to 7.5 million currently.  That gives us a figure of around seven million pupils in seven years and when we take this number for seven years, it would mean that one million pupils would be sitting at one particular time.
 
When I was listening to the results that were released for the last PLE, it was said that 300,000 pupils sat for PLE. Then I keep wondering, what happened to the 700,000? When you get these figures, you find that there is a high rate of school dropouts.  

The issue of inadequate funding: Recently, the teachers were saying that they get money like for three, four months and this hampers them to effectively implement their workings. So, it is my contention that before we straight away embark on USE, we look into these issues so that they are not carried over because they affect our children and they affect the teachers.

Madam Speaker, I come from one of the new districts, Ibanda, that were created as a result of the need to bring services closer to the people. These new districts are financially crippled. It is my utmost request - I wish the Minister of Finance was here - that the new districts are given special funding to kick-start them because we are really in a bad state. The people are very anxious to harvest the results of the special development programmes that are put in this State of the Nation Address. However, if these people do not see quick results, the anxiety can turn into failure and it would not augur well for us as government. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.51
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to say that the two documents we have (one on the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, the President and the budget speech) are very good documents in content. As I read them closely, I found three areas where I should contribute. 

Area number one is the missing road of Kabale-Kisoro. For many years now, this road has been only on drawing board, and in the recent past, when government officials and ministers went there, they promised that this road would be improved and put to standard. They further revealed that a loan had been obtained from African Development Bank, that tenders had been evaluated and everything seems to be ready to start the works. But in the budget speech that road is clearly missing and we have had floods of people making inquiries; they want an explanation. Maybe it may come in the policy statement by the Minister of Works. May I ask that this be put to him for an explanation? Otherwise, the people of Kabale and Kisoro are highly concerned. That is point number one.

Secondly, I want to say something about the state of agriculture. The book clearly says that agriculture has deteriorated from a five percent to 0.4 percent. Personally, I even questioned whether that 0.4 percent is valid, because it may be a contribution by fishing and to the best of my knowledge fishing is not agricultural but rather hunting. If you took a rifle to the game park and started shooting elephants and so on and bring meat and feed the people, you cannot say that you have obtained that meat from a cattle ranch; the two are different altogether.

Having said that, I want to note that you can improve agriculture without necessarily adding in more money by simply re-arranging what is available. You have PMA there, it does not seem to know what NAADS is doing and there is a proliferation of projects to end there, which could be put together in a unified manner and create a national thrust so as to move and prepare agriculture forward. If we do not do that, in the next few years we may experience a catastrophe on food crisis. 

Already there are people going hungry with one meal a day and it is not clear whether the calories required for their bodies is even met by those humble meals. We have the means, we have fertile soils, there is sufficient money, but we need to re-organise that sector and come up with priorities and a national thrust.

The third element I want to bring about quickly and shortly is a question of power in Kisoro. It is different from that in Kampala. For us in Kisoro, we have sufficient power but it is confined in that little town and yet people are crying; they want to see this power distributed to other areas that need it. For example, we have a radio station, functional and new, but it cannot operate simply because we cannot extend power for one kilometre to that station. I do not know who is responsible. I think the Minister for Energy could help us on that.  

Madam Speaker, I beg that if my concerns are not included in the policy statements of those respective ministries, be included so that clear statements and explanations shall be given to the public. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kiboijana and hon. Bucyanayandi, you have given us additional time.

5.56
MS JESSICA ALUPO, (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I totally support the motion on the State of the Nation Address, but I just want to make two observations.  

In his State of Nation Address, President Museveni said the LRA leader, Joseph Kony, is not in Garamba forestry as a tourist. Therefore, he has been forced to run there; he is a refugee there; he is in hiding. Honourable members, I have worked in Northern Uganda: I have worked in Gulu, Kitgum, Pader and the war in Northern Uganda has caused a lot of suffering for the people of Northern Uganda!  People in Northern Uganda have lived in very unspeakable conditions in the IDP camps. We have lost our dear ones, the soldiers, the commanders deployed there, trying to fight to defend the Ugandans of Northern Uganda. We have lost the indigenous people of Northern Uganda. The list is very long!  

Madam Speaker, when the President came and presented his State of the Nation Address, under security he said that Kony is now somewhere not very near Uganda. I breathed a very serious sigh of relief. I am beginning to imagine that eventually the war in Northern Uganda is coming to an end. In that spirit, therefore, I urge all of you to make any contribution, any facilitation, to make sure that this war eventually comes to an end. You can contribute in terms of information. You can give some guidance to the commanders on the ground but most important, information.  

I have been working in a department, which processes information into intelligence for the purposes of guaranteeing security to this country.  We have talked about this war in Northern Uganda coming to an end very many times. I am talking as a veteran soldier. I know that when given room, this leader can decide to reorganize and come back in full swing. 

From the little knowledge I have, there are so many classified attachments. So, it is incumbent upon all of us to make sure that this time round, as this LRA gentleman is caught between a rock and hard soil, we all contribute to make sure that eventually the people of Northern Uganda see what we call peace. There are some of them who do not even know how they are supposed to live a normal life. They are living under squalid conditions, which are very unthinkable for an average Ugandan. I want to make that comment on this.

Secondly, I want to comment on the statement from the Leader of the Opposition. I was stimulated when he said that in the State of the Nation Address the President said the security in eastern Uganda, that conflict that we all know about, is a simple thing.  I made my own analysis and I imagine the President is trying to compare the two. The war in Northern Uganda as far as I am concerned is too complex to be compared to that conflict of eastern Uganda.  

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, the circumstances are the same because when you go to eastern Uganda, the conditions in the IDP camps there are the same as those in Northern Uganda camps. But I imagine the President meant that the complexity of the Northern war is not the same as the complexity of this conflict in eastern Uganda. The one in eastern Uganda is out of lawlessness, and the President says it is simple. By saying it is “simple” it makes me happy because I know that the President can stop it in one day. But, Madam Speaker, when will this day come?  

Madam Speaker, for me to talk about development in my constituency I must address the security problem first. I come from a constituency where development is not very easy. I was amazed last week when I went to my constituency, I was talking to the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and he gave me information that shocked me. He was talking about donors like World Bank. They had the money for development but when they reached the camps they said, “No, these people in the camps cannot access our money because they are not ready for development.”  

To be ready for development you must be counter-productive. You should be able to repay the loan slowly. Three quarters of my people in Katakwi District are in IDP camps so they are not ready for development. I do not know up to when. Another observation was about –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have two minutes.

MS ALUPO: I am finalising, Madam Speaker. I want to make an observation on pensions. When I go to the constituency, the World War I, World War II, UNLA and UPDF veterans ask for their pensions. I think something should be done for them as a special interest group. Being a soldier you have to be a gallant person. These are people who have sacrificed their blood for national security. I think these people should be given special attention and their needs addressed too. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.03
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA, (NRM, Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion as it is, but I have some observations to make. 

First and foremost, I will try to talk about Bonna Bagagawale. I wish the minister in charge of Bonna Bagagawale clearly brings out a policy on it. The people of Luuka do not know how they are going to kugagawala (get rich) and how they are going to access the loans. Some “smart fellows” from Kampala are coming to Luuka to collect money on behalf of President’s Office and the Ministry of Micro-Finance or Bonna Bagagawale. They are conning people because there is no clear-cut policy. It is our opinion that a clear-cut policy on how we can access the money, how much money they are supposed to get, is clearly spelt out.  

In the State of the Nation Address, the President talked so much about ridding the countryside of poverty. A lot of things are being said about poverty. At times I wonder because there is a Ministry of Urban Development but we have nothing like a ministry of rural development or a fully-fledged department in charge of rural development.  

As people from rural areas, we need government to seriously address the issue of rural development so that we develop. Short of that, at times we do not understand. Sixty seven percent of the homesteads in the villages are poor, and maybe 30 percent are rich; but you have a ministry for the 30 percent and nothing for the 67 percent. I think that needs to be addressed.  

I would like to thank the President for the Universal Secondary Education, but again the people of Luuka are wondering how they are going to benefit from this. We have got only three government-aided secondary schools in seven sub-counties. Luuka is bigger than Jinja District. We clapped when they talked about Universal Secondary Education, but we do not know where those people are going to get the money, where they are going to get the schools. Whereas the policy is there and it is good, we also want to benefit. We need government to put emphasis on the schools.  

The President should be applauded! He talked about Science subjects taking root over Art subjects, but they are taking root at the expense of rural communities. We do not have laboratories. Our brothers and sisters are not going to university because they do not have laboratories. Whereas the President is very determined to improve on the Science performance, it is also important and prudent that he addresses the issue of laboratories and facilities especially in the rural areas. 

Madam Speaker, the President talked about health. He has a very good policy and strategy, but I think government is seriously trying to expand without bothering about efficiency. Luuka is bigger than Jinja District; we have seven sub-counties. There is a health centre in which they have been trying to put up a theatre for the past four years but it is not working. I think they should try hard to enhance efficiency.  

We have the problem of electricity. I applaud the efforts they are making to do something about electricity. However, in Luuka we have poles, which have been in place without transformers for the past three years. We need such things to be addressed because the poles have started falling off.  

Finally, I come from Iganga. When you come from Iganga and you do not talk about the Jinja/Bugiri road, I think it would be a disservice to our people. I thank the government for signing the contract. I only appeal to them that this time the contract should be real. Seven people have died on that road, so something serious has to be done about it. I understand some people are planning to sue government for damage of property and health due to negligence. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to stop there by supporting the motion with those observations. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I do not know whether the ministers were released by you to go away from this debate. Members are touching on very serious matters that concern their ministries and we expect a reply. I want to know who is in charge of the notes. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: First of all, as you know, every ministry should be represented but some of these people are new. (Laughter) Yes, so the honourable Princess, the Chief Whip, is taking notes where some of them are not. But we are going to address that matter. It means there is some absence of adequate knowledge, so we are going to rectify it. 

The chief whip is actually taking note of them, but we have a problem because the rules do not allow us to clarify certain issues when it is a maiden speech. The problem is that, sometimes a mistake persists and yet there is a simple clarification, like the one made by hon. Okello-Okello. He was not knowledgeable about Article 112 and other Articles. I wanted to stand and inform him only to remember that our rules do not allow us. When a terrible mistake is made, it will be better for a minister to clarify it there and then. But I normally discuss some of these things with you later. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, honourable members, I need to go back and forth.

6.11
MRS JANET MUSEVENI, (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, I was tempted to believe the Leader of the Opposition when he stood up to speak. He tried to convince us that the opposition is really here to hold hands with us to build our homeland. I wanted to say “praise”, but what came thereafter made me wonder whether the opposition is not really having an easy time. They can demand heaven and earth until it becomes ridiculous. 

In the State of the Nation Address, the President sincerely requested and said that the government would appreciate constructive criticism.  All of us thanked God that we were sitting in a Parliament with the opposition sitting right across us. This is a step in the Ugandan politics that many of us did not think we would ever live to see. We honestly thank God for that step in our political evolution! 

What I just wanted to say is that, honestly speaking, we should not forget so quickly where we have come from and how far we have come. It sounds so ridiculous when you go to the extent of idealising the grass-thatched classes as if the NRM government is doing nothing to try and modernize our primary schools around the country.  

When hon. Okello-Okello says they must do something about the power right now, one really wonders whether the opposition is living with us here in Uganda or whether they are on another planet. We all want to see Uganda change and change for the better and quickly, but we also have to be realistic about what change can happen and at what time otherwise, we are just politicking. 

I was hoping and praying that the Eighth Parliament is honestly going to turn a new leaf and talk seriously about issues that affect our people. We must all appreciate and remember that all our people in rural Uganda still live in darkness. We all want to see the whole of Uganda become light. However, this is away from where we stand right now and yet we must work for it. 

It is true that we have many problems, but I think all of us must remember that the NRM Government has taken us from where we were in 1986, where Ugandans really did not know we had a chance to change this much and we have done it. I would like to say that we should have some faith in ourselves and work together. Criticize each other, accepted, but criticize each other realistically. I support the motion, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

6.16
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by congratulating His Excellency the President through you, Madam Speaker, His Excellency the Vice-President, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, the Speaker and yourself, the honourable ministers and the Members of this august House.

I support the motion but I have a few observations to make: On the political scene, this country has moved, like the honourable member for Ruhaama has just said. In recognising that fact, I would like to thank the people of Tororo Municipality for having elected me today. That is the recognition of the core that there is democracy in this country today –(Applause)- constitutionalism and law. I am contributing to the State of the Nation Address of the President. 

Yes, we have moved leaps and bounds in the past several years but in my constituency, Tororo Municipality, till last month, there was what is termed as the Special Revenue Protection Unit (SRPS). They harass, intimidate, confiscate and even kill citizens in the pretext of collecting tax. I would like to bring it to the notice of this House that the people really wonder whether in this age of constitutionalism and law we are promoting, and the transparency that has come across, this is really justified in the pretext of collecting tax.

Security, yes, we have moved in leaps and bounds. The ages of pandagari and kitukidogo are no longer there, but we have insecurity in the neighbouring districts which has caused people to come and seek sanctuary in the municipality. When I read about the programme that is in place by the government, which His Excellency referred to, the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Fund (NUSAF), we are not catered for. People who came from Teso sub-region during the height of the insurgency are still there and they need to be repatriated back to their homes.

On the economy, there is the element that was not really addressed sufficiently. The people in my constituency today live on less than a dollar a day and they have resorted to the informal trade and as a result, they are hit by the SRPS. So, I think we have the stake at hand. 

By the time I was born, Tororo was the fourth largest industrial town of this country. It is very important, Madam Speaker, to add my voice to the honourable member from Luuka county. For the last three years, we have suffered tremendous stress without explanation because of the major trunk road that links Jinja to Bugiri. It is a menace! There are several negatives about it. 

Through your Chair, I pray that we get a ministerial statement. We have a press statement on the different current status of the contract. There is a legal case; sometimes we are told that we won then sometimes we are told there was an appeal. We would want a statement on the Floor of this House as to the state and maybe a timeframe as to when that road would be completed.

Madam Speaker, in 1972 just before they were overthrown, the government of that time saw it logical to put up a very good quality standard airstrip in Tororo Municipality. Since the overthrow of that government, it has laid idle till today. I would again want the line minister to please make a statement on its status. I am informed that about two years ago, some money was released; it is supposed to be operational but on the ground it is not. 

Madam Speaker, we have a water crisis in the municipality. The average national coverage of water is close to 60 percent, but in my constituency we are close to 47 percent. If government does not specifically intervene to address and boost our levels to match the national levels, we will always stay backwards. 

We have a hospital, which is supposed to be the district hospital, but we do not have an ambulance to-date. When there is an emergency, we have to call an ambulance from Iganga Hospital to transport the patient to Mulago, which is the national referral hospital. Madam Speaker, I beg to raise this issue to the line ministry to address and bring about corrective measures. 

Madam Speaker, last week while I was in the constituency, we visited St Anthony’s Hospital in Tororo Municipality. I know Members we all have a problem of power in our constituencies. We can do without power in this House and we can do without power in our houses, but without power in hospital! The doctor opened the fridge and there was blood, vaccines - how do they store blood and vaccines without power to refrigerate? I think government needs to come out with a deliberate policy to support medical institutions at least to preserve our vaccines and blood in case of emergencies. 

The Uganda Manufacturers Association has been given a waiver. They manufacture biscuits, tyres and sodas, but these people are manufacturing people. It is important that the hospitals, most especially those that have generators, be supported either with a similar waiver on their power bills or a subsidy on their power sector. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to react to the contribution of my honourable colleague from Chua County on the issue of the rice project. I think it is really a shame for Members of Parliament to laugh at an initiative by the Vice-President that was started to increase household income. It has successfully done this, including in his constituency. (Applause) Two, it was initiated to increase the food security of the people of this country. Thirdly, it was initiated to save forex for this country. Today there is a lot of forex being spent to import rice into this country. If the local initiative is taken up, I think if somebody stands up to ridicule such an initiative, it leaves a lot to be desired of his intentions.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, since I came into this House, on three occasions I have been rudely denied access to this House whenever His Excellency the President is coming. I have been told to jump off at the gate and walk. I have been told to hand over my phones. I do not know if that is the normal procedure that has preceded my arrival here, where we are denied access even to park our vehicles. I respected the soldiers on duty at that time because an order is an order but through your chair, I would like to seek redress. We know security is a concern, but at least allow us to bring in the vehicles, they drop us and they can go away.

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. Once again I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the Members in this House for the support and the guidance they have given me. That is all. Thank you very much. (Applause)

6.25
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE, (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, my name is Frank Tumwebaze. I do not know whether we will keep on mentioning names. I think that was for introduction purposes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will keep on.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Okay. I also want to congratulate everyone and you, Madam Speaker, the President and the Vice-President for making it in this kisanja.  I have two comments to make. I have read the State of the Nation Address by the President. I have listened to an attempt of a rebuttal from the Leader of Opposition, and I have the following comments.

The address by the President was realistic. It pointed out progress and weaknesses, and it suggested the way forward. If he says, “We will build power dams in 44 months” and you are being sceptical, tell us why. Do you have other studies that prove that? I think we ought not to unnecessarily doubt him all the time. Pessimism will not move us an inch. 

I regard that address as realistic because it brought out issues, which are a challenge to all of us, be it in government or the opposition. Look at page 24 of the address, for example, the President says that the NRM slogan that was used to seek the people’s mandate, “Prosperity for All” (Bonna Bagagawale) will not be realised unless our people are helped to access reasonable micro-finance, identify and grow crops of high value to which value addition must be made. The President is telling you that bonna bagagawale is not going to be a miracle and I agree with him.  

On this note, I wish to draw the attention of the Leader of Government Business. The honourable colleague from Luuka asked a very interesting question, which my people also asked me, “Where is the money for bonna bagagawale?” I do not regard bonna bagagawale as a new project of government neither is it an intervention. I regard it as a political aspiration, which is going to be realised through the various interventions of government that have been there. Take an example of PEAP, NAADS and so on.  

Madam Speaker, we need to critically look at these programmes irrespective of our political leanings.  Look at micro-finance; what is its target? It is not targeting the circles directly. It is actually very sceptical about the circles because these circles have no financial capacity. They want to deal with micro-finance institutions whose capacities are well built. They do not know who builds the capacity of the micro-finance institution. I am very happy the new Minister of Finance is already aware of this and is actually very perturbed. I wish he gets more perturbed so that he gets a solution to the problem. This is how we are going to achieve bonna bagagawale, looking at the various projects of government. 

I remember when I was a youth I used to go to the office of hon. Kassiano Wadri. He was commissioner in the Ministry of Gender. There was a programme called, Youth Entrepreneurship Scheme (YES), but it was terrible! I am not referring to him but to that programme. When I remember it I never want to think about it. They would tell you, in order to get money you must first train. Training would be arranged on regional basis and you would need to pay Shs 50,000 to train in order to be given money. So, we have to look at the government programmes and look at how they are formulated. 

Two, we have to look at how these government programmes are implemented and then look at how we can evaluate them. We should actually form a committee, much as we have passed that stage but we can think about it, which will be responsible for monitoring and evaluation. Much as it is an overall function of Parliament, we need to measure specific indicators. I have been saying that word but I need to continue saying it; every programme must have indicators to measure. If it is micro-finance, you should not measure the many banks that have opened in the countryside. You should be able to measure the people you have given the loans and the people that have had the capacity to pay back. This is what the President is really challenging us. Be it us in NRM, be it you in the opposition, he is saying take time and invest in thinking for our people so that we get out of poverty.

My last point is about corruption. The President talked about corruption. There is this man you have heard about, he is called Karl Marx. Karl Marx wrote very many works about capital. One time he and his wife were very broke and his wife looked at him and said, “My dear husband, I wish all this time you spent writing on capital you had spent it working capital.” We spend time talking about corruption but not talking about how to fight corruption. You politicise corruption to get votes but you never suggest how to fight corruption. 

Let me tell you how we can fight corruption. Corruption is an ethical problem so create a generation that values ethics. Advocate for the introduction of ethical studies right from schools. I have a friend in UK, he is a professor, he sent me email the other day and said, “Young man, I am very glad I am retiring from the teaching profession. Being a professor, I have achieved three things: one, I have finished paying for my mortgage, which I have been paying for the last 25 years. I feel proud and I have also educated my children.” 

Now, to this man life is not all about acquiring the whole world, it is about achieving those minimum things which are adequate for his life and he feels great about it. A generation that values ethics and morals must evolve. We should not think about taking the whole world to be rich, and this has nothing to do with whether you are FDC or NRM. Let us come up with proposals on how to inculcate a culture of being clean, not necessarily getting saved. You may get saved if you want, it is not also bad, but ethics and values are important especially for politicians. We must not only politicise them but we should also take them to make sure that a generation that values them evolves. 

Madam Speaker, the address was challenging. It is our role as Members of Parliament to contribute to the development of our country through giving proposals that are realistic, not for the sake of politicking and cheap publicity. I thank you.

6.34
MR DAVID RINGE CHAN (UPC, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, I want to register my appreciation to His Excellency, the President of Uganda for a job well done. His speech to Parliament has excited the people of Nebbi. The people of Nebbi are excited but I have a little to find out from the Floor of the House. 

We appreciate the fact that the President considered Nebbi together with the greater North when it came to the issue of constructing permanent houses. The President in his speech also talked of bubonic plague still in Nebbi District alone in the whole world. I want to say, the history of all this is not simply something which has taken place one or two days. We need to look at some of our activities. The other year the Seventh Parliament put the cotton price at Shs 300. The people of Nebbi planted cotton and they wanted to get a fair price but when you gave them Shs 300, they could not even construct mabati houses. That is why bubonic plague is still there. 

The people are so poor! This government must do something for the people of Nebbi to lift them out of their poverty. People sometimes eat once a day, and that is a fact in Nebbi. There is no physical war there but the people are poor. So, when we are given opportunity as honourable members of Parliament to determine the price of our agricultural produce, we must keep the people who are working on agriculture in our mind.   

As the power has gone, I want also to talk about the power issue. I am happy that the Minister of State for Energy is from Nebbi. On that note, we have the issue of Nyagak. I want to thank the President because when he went for his campaign, Nyagak was one of the activities he launched to show that things are going to happen. 

I want to support the government; Nyagak should be constructed this time. History should not repeat itself. We have slashed banana plantations along Nyagak River and it has overgrown several times. This time I think the government is serious, although I did not see it specifically stated that it will be constructed, but I believe the President said other small projects will be done. I hope it will be constructed this time. The government should help us so that the people of Nebbi do not migrate to Kampala but rather enjoy their stay in Nebbi town with better electricity, so that our people can thank the government of NRM.

I want to talk about the issue of Uganda hoping to go for peace talks in Sudan with Kony as an observer. You remember the President was saying that the issue of Kony is not now a Uganda issue; it is Sudan issue. I actually thought that Uganda may be going there as an observer. Well, if it is true Kony is now finished, that is good. I want to thank the government for that. 

I want to talk about the inconveniences we tolerate on Pakwach-Karuma road. We are restricted. As an honourable member I cannot rush to my constituency in the evening. I have to travel in the morning hours. If Kony is no longer there then there is no security problem. With the tarmac on Pakwach- Karuma road, we should be able to fly at night and every time. People should travel easily. The restriction is no longer necessary if it is true that Kony is no longer our problem. 

I want to encourage the government to take this opportunity to have peace talks and we finalise this issue of insecurity in the North, so that the people of the North go back to their economic activity. Life should go on there so that we do not talk of Uganda being two: the Northern and southern. Now we shall talk of one Uganda, where everyone is enjoying total peace. That would be very good! Until that is done, we are not happy.

Lastly, in the spirit of multiparty politics, we need to have respect for one another’s views. The newspapers have been flying with sarcastic information about leading personalities on the government side saying, for instance, “Those who do not support NRM should go to exile” or, at worst “hang”. Really, that was not called for. I thought since he did not refute the statement that statement stands. He should tolerate us. This is a policy that parliament has accepted. We must stay here. The press should write what makes us all sleep well. I am not willing to get a rope and hang. I am going to live in this Parliament with you and we are going to work for the development of Uganda together. Thank you very much.

6.40
MR SIMON EUKU, (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is my first submission before this House. I rise to give my submission in relation to the State of the Nation Address. What the President put forward in the address is summed up in one word called, security. We have to ask ourselves what kind of security. When we are discussing the issue of security, we have to look at the security of the economy, that is, economic security. We also have to look at the political security and at social security. 

I would like to talk first of all about political security. Uganda’s history tells us that whichever government comes leaves Uganda in perpetual fear and it is the first disease thrown into the minds of Ugandans. You keep them in fear so that you can stay long in power. As you talk, all Ugandans, even the parliamentarians here, have been thrown highly into perpetual fear – (Interjections)– Madam Speaker, the mummers are nothing other than perpetual fear. Because you fear to be heard or to be associated to opposition, you have to say “no” so that you will be heard as supporting the ruling –(Interruption)

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the honourable member contributing in order to say that Members here are intimidated and fearful when he is actually expressing his very heart freely without any hindrance? Is he in order to say this without even substantiating that so and so could not be able to talk because of this fear?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just quote what the Rt. Hon. Kaparo said when he was giving us a talk. He said he was very surprised at the level of harmony between the opposition and the NRM Members. So, I am surprised at this issue of saying that people are afraid to talk to you. I think I have been saying hullo to you and to other Members. I think this is grossly unfair to the 8th Parliament. Members are friendly and they are really working together.

MR EUKU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To react to the pre-current speaker, I talked about perpetual fear. 

Madam Speaker, I would like now to narrow down and talk about education, under the social sector. We have talked about UPE and USE, but I would like to say that the kind of universal primary education that we have today is not quality. The President said the recruitment was so high - what about recruitment?  We have to look at the quality of the students or the pupils that have come out other than talking of only recruitment. According to statistics, the recruitment rose from 7,000 to 19,000, but what will the result of the 19,000 be? 

As I talk right now, we have some students who have graduated from UPE and they cannot even write their names. It is true! We are only talking because some of us can afford to take our children to private schools where they teach well. Let us go back to the villages and see what is there. When you analyse, you will find primary seven leavers who cannot write their names. They cannot even construct a sentence in English. So, what kind of UPE are we going to inculcate in this nation? We should first of all improve on the quality of education that we get from universal primary education before we can talk of USE or universal post primary and vocational education.  

I would like to talk about part two of the social sector, that is, health. It is very unfortunate that the whole of Teso region has one referral hospital and should you go there when you are very sick, you cannot even get drugs, not even a Panadol! You are told, “Please go and buy Panadol from such and such a clinic.” What quality of health are we going to give to our people? Government talks about a policy; should I say that the Movement government is a government full of policies without action. The government should do something about the quality of health of our people.  

I would like also to zero down on the security or insecurity in Northern and eastern Uganda. I happen to be a serious victim of this. For 20 years, I have not been staying in my village, and this is because of insecurity. It has actually affected the social and economic aspect of my life and that of my constituents. 

In 2003, the Kony incursion entered Teso. In my constituency, it left about 120 civilians dead. Volunteers, the Arrow Boys, joined hands and grouped themselves in an attempt to flush out the rebellion. Seventy-nine of the Arrow Boys were killed in my constituency alone. From that time up to now, the government has kept quiet. These people had children and women who are now living in very pathetic conditions. Nobody is assisting them. What should the government do? Should we continue saying the government is doing well and yet our people in our constituencies are seriously suffering?  

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the issue of the Arrow Boys or the Amuka. When the government accepted the regrouping of the Arrow Boys and the Amukas, the policy was for them to keep security within the locality. They were not supposed to be transferred anywhere. Unfortunately, these fellows have been transferred. We even do not know where they have been taken. What will happen tomorrow if more insecurity comes to our region? Who are they going to recruit? 

We are now worried because of the recruitment that has taken place in Teso. Let me narrow it; this is the fourth time the recruitment has taken place. In the first phase they recruited LDUs and they said they were supposed to be local LDUs. Unfortunately, they were taken. In the second phase the same thing was done. The third phase was done and the fourth phase was the one of the Arrow Boys; they have already been taken. 

This has affected Teso. In my constituency, first of all, economically we cannot produce; the manpower is not there. Secondly, it has reduced our population so drastically. Let me take you back to the population statistics of 2002 and we compare the figures with the one of 1969 and 1991. Teso was the second largest population but now we are the fifth largest. Where has the population gone? We may begin thinking that the government or some few individuals have a hatched plan to depopulate Teso.

6.51
MS ROSE IRIAMA, (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Above all, let us thank God for making each one of us succeed in this recent elections including His Excellency, the President of Uganda.  

My contribution is on the disarmament in Karamoja, in particular Nakapiripirit District. Madam Speaker, none of us is regretting this exercise. Each one of us is supporting it because this enemy called a gun does not know a relative. We have lost many people, our dear ones, our parents, our husbands. What we regret is these terrible indicators that are being shown in our area, like rape. Rape carried out by the soldiers is too much! There is defilement and raping which can spread HIV/AIDS. I am appealing to the government to help us.

Madam Speaker, disarmament should be carried out peacefully not by force. They should ask for the guns peacefully instead of torturing people. The suspects are being beaten! We are all Ugandans loved by God, we should all participate in helping the Karimojong - they are human beings by the way. We cannot throw them as if they are animals. They are human beings who can listen. Let us try to use a good method to get guns from them. I strongly support the motion. Thank you.  

6.54
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI, (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): First and foremost, I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker and the honourable members of Parliament upon your successful victory to this Eighth Parliament. I stand to support the motion with the following observations. I must appreciate the President for the will the government has got to apply constitutionalism and rule of law in all the public affairs. It gives a positive gesture to the dispensation of democracy in this country.  
Under the economy, the President talked about micro- finance. He emphasized that, as leaders we should, together with all the government structures, make sure that we help our people access micro-finance. I hereby recommend that the greatest consideration be given to the youth because they are the most vulnerable to the problems of unemployment and poverty, which causes them to develop evil minds. If we do not come out to help these people, these evil minds will cause them to engage in activities, which abuse their roles and efforts to develop and empower themselves. We should make sure that we help them access this micro-finance to start their own projects, to empower themselves economically. We can then overcome the problems of drug abuse and safety. You find that it is mainly the young people who are involved.

My third point is about security. When the President talked about security, I was happy to hear that the process of disarming the cattle rustlers is being handled. It should be handled expeditiously because very many young people are losing their lives and property in the Teso area.  At the beginning of this month I was there and very many youth died when the Karimojong came and raided their cattle. They lost their cattle, property and lives. The government should, therefore, handle this case expeditiously.

Lastly, I will talk about the issue of corruption.  I highly appreciate the government’s will to make sure that this problem is eradicated. It will help us to set a precedent for the future leadership and development of this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.57
MR JORAM PAJOBO (NRM, Workers Representatives):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me a chance to speak. I rise to support the motion. Before I go ahead, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, upon your unanimous re-election. This shows that you are a very good steward. Thank you very much.

Secondly, I would like to thank the Prime Minister and the Vice-President for the good team they gave to the President to enable him win the general election. I also want to congratulate my colleagues who were in NRC together with me and have made it to this Eighth Parliament. I thank them very much. 

I also want to congratulate my colleagues who were in NRC, in the Sixth Parliament, in the CA and have managed after long leave to come back, like hon. Okello-Okello. Thank you very much! To be re-elected is an evaluation of your job. I would like to encourage my Speaker and Deputy Speaker to continue with that good work so that we can continue to elect you. Next time we are not going to let you go through your constituency and then come here. We shall borrow a leaf from Kenya so that the Speaker of Parliament and Deputy can be elected by us here. That is something I am thinking of.

Madam Speaker, let me also thank my fellow Members of Parliament who were in the Seventh Parliament, which passed the five labour laws so that we can have harmonious industrial relations in this country. The problem is that, the employers do not want to respect this law. They do not recognise the trade unions in their working place. There is no way for us to negotiate for the workers, including government workers. Government employees have got five unions but the government cannot allow these people to negotiate. Now, when will these workers decide their fate? 

I would like to call upon the ministry concerned to work out a way so that the civil servants are allowed to negotiate. They should not come here and say, “We have given five percent; we have given teachers Shs 200,000.” Let the people negotiate and decide so that they reach amicable understanding. I can help them in reaching an agreement. I am an expert in labour matters; do not worry. Approach me and I will help you get a way to negotiate with your trade unions.

I want to come to the issue of pensions later, but allow me to continue. The other issue I want to handle is corruption. Many talk about corruption but you, who is talking about corruption, how free are you from corruption? Ask yourself and then if you know that you are not free from corruption that means you are also corrupt. 

As Members of Parliament, let us first of all look at ourselves and see how we can do away with corruption. If you hear Pajobo is corrupt, do not give him responsibility to continue being corrupt. We should do away with corruption without fear or favour because it touches everybody. Some of you see me with my stomach, I came with it; it is not that I got it through corruption. (Laughter) 

If there is corruption let both sides work and clear it. There are some of our people here, either independent or opposition, who think that they will put government on tension so that they can be corrupted by government. That is very bad! We should not reward people, who cross tomorrow or today, with posts. This is also corruption. We should look into it. So and so has been in UPC or DP, now he crosses and tomorrow he is a minister. That should not be the case. That is part of corruption.  

There are many ways of corruption. We must support the President in fighting this corruption. Parliament has got an HIV Commission, why can’t we have a committee on corruption so that we deal with corruption? If I can be elected to it I can do it.  That is what I am trying to say. Thank you very much, for giving me a chance. I think I will be allowed to speak when the budget speech comes.  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not lobby. Honourable members, I think we have had quite a long day. I am not sure about the power any more so tomorrow we shall start with the following Members: hon. Najjemba, hon. Commissioner Kakooza, hon. Chelangat Tete, hon. Mugumya, hon. Tuunde, hon. Omolo Peter, hon. Wadri.

Honourable members, we start at 2.30 p.m. punctually. I do hope that we shall have power. I will try to make an effort to see that everybody speaks. I want to thank you very much for today’s work.  The House is adjourned to 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 29 June 2006 at 2.30 p.m.)





