Wednesday, 24 June 2009

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I have two matters to inform you about. The first one is that you are invited to a meeting of the African Peer Review Mechanism to be held on 7 July 2009 at 10 O’clock here in the Conference Hall. 

The Governing Council of the African Peer Review Mechanism will present the report to the Members of Parliament and parliamentarians are expected to debate it as part of their oversight role. To that extent, copies will be distributed in advance to your pigeonholes. Please find time to read that report and be ready for the debate on 7 July 2009 at 10 O’clock in the Conference Hall. Please ensure that that morning is free because it is an important part of our oversight activities.

The second one is that the Parliament of Uganda through the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee working together with Parliamentarians for Global Action invites all Members of Parliament for a two-day workshop on the implementation of the Rome Statute to discuss the International Court Bill. This workshop will take place here in the Conference Hall on 30th June and 1st July 2009 starting at 9.00 a.m. on both days. 

We shall be privileged to have judges from the International Criminal Court and the courts of Uganda who will facilitate that workshop. One of them is a very distinguished Ugandan legal luminary, Justice Dr Nsereko who has taught many prominent lawyers in this country. Please find time to attend that two-day workshop. Thank you very much.

2.50
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND HUMAN RIGHTS (Mr Hussein Kyanjo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in my capacity as minister in the shadow cabinet in charge of internal affairs and human rights. 

Three months ago I received a report that there were Ugandans who were stranded in several countries, especially in the Middle East. I made attempts to investigate further whether this was true or not. I discovered that there was a cluster of Ugandans scattered especially in Baghdad, in Iraq and most recently I was able to make a break through by having five of these Ugandans getting a telephone line and speaking to me one after the other. 

These young Ugandans who spoke to me on Monday nine minutes after 1 O’clock told me that they were taken from Uganda by a group which is purported to be called Uganda Veterans. It has offices in Muyenga. They continue to say that the individuals whom they could remember that were in charge include: Kalingili Godfrey, a one Gordon and another Kyarimpa. 

These ladies were taken as secretaries and when they reached in Iraq, they were distributed in different homesteads to be used as maids. They also add that they were used for other specifications as jobs besides what was agreed upon in the agreements. These Ugandans were promised that they were going to be given US $400 every month and none of them has so far received any payment either abroad or at home.  

When these Ugandan attempted to raise these issues with the people who were keeping them in their homes; that is when they were collected again together in a bigger group first and they were split in teams of five and the ones I talked to were now situated near the Germany Embassy in Baghdad. Because they were talking to me in secrecy on a mobile phone whose sim card was smuggled into their room – they say it is a hot room with a small toilet in there. That one of them is extremely sick; that they do not receive enough food and that their masters frequently beat them.

These Ugandans were able to give me details; one of them is Rachael Malagala and another one is Mable Malagala. These two are daughters to Mrs Joyce Semakula of Katwe II Parish in my constituency, Makindye West. The third one is Nalubwama Doreen Kisakye, daughter to Sempala Christopher of Nakulabye Eliot in Rubaga North constituency. The fourth one is Enid Tushabe, daughter to Elimiya Karuhanga of Kanyaryeru. She told me that her Member of Parliament is hon. Mary Mugyenyi. The fifth one is Nakazibwe Sanyu, daughter to Nasimbwa Sarah of Makerere Kivulu near Deliverance Church in Kampala Central constituency of hon. Lukwago.

These Ugandans are in a bad situation and they need to be rescued. For avoidance of doubt, anybody willing and able to call them could reach them –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you. The information I want to give hon. Kyanjo is that I was approached recently by a mother whose daughter was taken to Iraq and she asked me what the policy of taking female Ugandans to Iraq is. Because they are being abused; they are raped, defiled and sexually harassed and she wanted me to know what exactly Government, particularly Parliament, is doing. So, that is the information I want to give to hon. Kyanjo; that these groups that are hiring these females do not have a clear-cut policy or pattern of employment or even a safeguard and our female Ugandans are being abused. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Member, for that useful information. In conclusion of my submission, I would like to ask this Parliament to further ask the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to come out and explain some of these circumstances because I am sure they know how this arrangement is running. Otherwise, it is going to put us into trouble.

Two, I would like to ask this Parliament to find a way of stopping this purported company from further exportation of Ugandans to unknown and non-described destinations.

Three, these young ladies have appealed to me to come and appeal to this House through you, Madam Speaker, to find an express way of bringing them back home because one of them is seriously sick. I have already given this information to the Uganda Human Rights commission and the Foundation for Human Rights Initiative and the International Human Rights Watch for their attention and action. 

And I said that for avoidance of doubt, any member of this House or any other interested Ugandan could in the meantime reach these Ugandans on telephone number +9647809327353. I am sure that this number may not last long but it is still operational. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are talking about the different forms of disguise in human trafficking. So, I will ask the clerk to extract that information and give it to the Minister for Gender to examine and he will see what to do because he was not here when the matter was raised. So, the clerk will extract that information and pass it on to the Minister for Gender to track down those people. The ministries of Gender and Foreign Affairs will liaise - I think he is in charge of exports -(Laughter)- so they will decide what to do. 

2.59
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. I was attracted to read The Observer of 22nd to 23rd June of this year and on page 5, there is a very nice heading saying, “Northern MPs are jealous, says minister Ahabwe.” When you read through this article, you will be surprised to learn that the Minister of State for Local Government was addressing leaders in Kasese on 17 June 2009 and in his address, he lashed out at the MPs of Northern Uganda for not supporting any good government efforts, which efforts I have failed to understand.

Secondly, he mentioned two Members of Parliament: hon. Okello-Okello and hon. Jimmy Akena and he stated that these are some of the gangs that do not at all appreciate any government efforts and we want an explanation to this. 

In his efforts to address the corrupt officials in this country, he again suggested that it would be good for the district officials to “eat” or steal at least a small amount of money given to them. I do not know what he means by stealing small or eating a little. So, this worries me. If the hon. Minister is now giving authority to district leaders to steal, is this how you will fight corruption in this country?

Finally, he went ahead to say that district officials, especially chairpersons, CAOs and tender boards members connive. I do not know which districts have been conniving to steal government money and why they have not been arrested. In his statement, he suggests that the next time they are found doing so, they will be taken to prison, but what about those that have already done it? Are they free? 

He also made mention of the Temangalo incident. Is that how we are handling the situation in this country through our new ministers? Particularly in every address he makes, he castigates very badly the Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda. Is this how we intend to develop this country? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I can see the minister here. I do not know whether you are ready - I saw a nice picture of you in the press, I do not know whether – 

MR ANGIRO: I beg to lay this paper on the Table. This paper is The Observer for 22nd to 23rd June 2009 on page 5, headed “Northern MPs are jealous, says minister Ahabwe.” 

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Pereza Ahabwe): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, first of all it is true that I have been moving around the districts trying to understand the circumstances under which districts are operating. It is true I have been to Rukungiri, Kabale, Kisoro, Kanungu, Kabarole, Kyenjojo, Bundibugyo, Kasese and Kamwenge and in each of those districts I have been having a packaged message to the district. 

I am as surprised as my brother Charles Gutmoi and I have shared this informally with some other colleagues. I have told them, “For those of you who have known me for the number of years I have been around this Parliament, I doubt whether any of those statements can be attributed to me.” I do not really fight in the press and so I did not find it necessary even to talk back. But I want to assure you that I never said those statements and I want to convince you to ignore them with the highest contempt they deserve.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has finished. So, he did not say it. Okay, next item.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

KAMPALA CITY BILL, 2009

3.06
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Kampala City Bill, 2009, be read the first time. The Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications duly issued by the Ministry of Finance. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded by several members of the Cabinet. I will commit it to the relevant committee for perusal and report back at the earliest opportunity.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report from the Inspectorate of Government for the period, July to December 2008. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members. I hope that the Clerk has received sufficient copies for all the Members. It will be committed to the committee, which will peruse it and report back.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FOOD SITUATION IN UGANDA

3.09
THE MINISTER FOR RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Could half a minute be given for the distribution of the statement before I start reading it?

Hon. Members, Cabinet met on 22 June 2009, considered the matter of food security in the country and directed the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to work out modalities for urgent delivery of relief food to all citizens in need in all parts of the country. 

Shs 10,374,212,000 has been released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for emergency supplies to the victims of famine and people facing food shortages all over the country. Delivery of relief food supplies to famine victims has started.

Government is aware that the magnitude of the problem is big and therefore arrangements are in place to secure additional funding from the Treasury to ensure continuous relief supplies to the population up to harvest time in late October/early November. All parts of the country facing food shortages will be served.

The Office of the Prime Minister currently has five delivery trailers, with four additional trailers from the Ministry of Defence, so that it is in position to make deliveries to all parts of the country in need. The current capacity will further be built when the four new trucks in the 2009/2010 budget arrive.

Background

The Office of the Prime Minister, together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, District Local Governments and international humanitarian agencies conducted a national food security assessment during the period of April/May 2009. 

The national food security report which is regularly updated by situational food security updates from chief administrative officers and district production officers indicated that 2,938,000 people in the country are food insecure.

The food insecurity situation in the country is due to a number of factors which include: 

1.	Three consecutive seasons of poor agricultural performance in Karamoja;
2.	Continued displacement of persons living in IDP camps in the northern and West Nile Sub-regions;
3.	Areas that have not recovered from the impact of the 2007 floods in Teso;
4.	Areas that experienced crop destruction by hailstorms and windstorms in Central, Southern and Western sub-regions.

Also, dry conditions along the cattle corridor have contributed to food shortage.

Normally, the first rainy season in the bimodal season areas in the country, that is the Central, Western, Eastern and Northern regions, starts in March and ends in June/July. 

There was a nearly four week delay in the onset of the 2009 rains and the rainfall was predominantly sporadic, which hindered normal crop cultivation and livestock production across the country.

Reports by the district agricultural officers, the Department of Meteorology, field observations by USAID’s Food Early Warning System Network (FEWS-NET) and remote sensing imagery agreed that the country received overall, below-normal rainfall during the first season. The agencies also confirmed that the rainfall onset caused delayed planting and water stress for crops already in the fields including beans, maize, millet, peas, sorghum, sweet potatoes and several others. 

The first season is the major cropping season in the Central, Eastern and Northern parts of the country, contributing more than 60 percent of the total annual food production with 40 percent coming from the second season.

The first season, however, is not the main crop season in the Western and South-western parts of the country as it accounts for only 45 percent of the total annual food production in those two sub-regions, with 55 percent coming from the second season. 


This partly explains why the food stress is currently higher in the North, Eastern and Central parts of the country. The North-eastern, which is Karamoja, has got only a single season running from April to about September or October each year.

Interventions

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in April 2009, called a meeting of development and humanitarian partners and issued an appeal for international support. However, the response has been slow. Anyway, I can report that we are in continuous contact with them.

Hon. Members, the long-term solutions to hunger include mobilisation for increased production of perennial food and cash crops. And I would like to underline perennial food and cash crops, which allow harvesting over a longer period. Leaders at all levels should encourage the population to become net producers of their food needs with surplus to sell for monetary income.

Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries under NAADS and Ministry of Water and Environment should continue to support increased food production.

Hon. Members, I would like to inform you that food security is primarily a family responsibility. The government comes in only when unforeseen circumstances interfere with the normal family unit system. It is, therefore, the duty of district chairpersons and the LC system, district production coordinators, Resident District Commissioners and Members of Parliament to mobilise communities to increase food production and storage.

Food security is dependant on production and savings (keeping for unseen hard times). In areas where the population relies on perennial crops such as bananas and perennial cash crops such as coffee, tea and large scale production of crops like pineapples, the levels of food security are high.

Communities that rely on seasonal crops such as maize, millet, tobacco and cotton have low food security levels. There is, therefore, need to promote increased production of perennial cash and food crops across the country wherever soils and climate are found suitable. Conscious efforts must be made in this direction by all of us at different levels of responsibility and capacity. This, however, should be promoted alongside and not at the expense of the seasonal food crops mentioned above - also with special attention paid to expand the cultivated area moving away from peasant to large scale farming.

Conditions in the neighbouring countries that have led to attractive market prices at the moment have contributed to threat of this shortage of food. However, that should also be seen as an opportunity for us to engage in increased production for sale to neighbours. 

I, therefore, urge hon. Members of Parliament to take cognisance of this opportunity and mobilise our people to expand production to enrich households and the country.

I would like to thank our development partners who have always responded positively to our appeals especially in the case of Karamoja, which has been food insecure since 1964. 

I want to assure this House that government, through the Office of the Prime Minister, is doing all it can to provide the most possible in our circumstances. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.19
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Ms Franca Akello): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would also like to thank the Minister, for at last coming up with a statement on the food insecurity in Northern Uganda.

It is good the Minister, on page 2, notes that some Shs 10.3 billion is gazetted to feed the people in famine-affected areas for the period he has stated. However, I would like to make a comment on this because honestly speaking Shs 10 is really not enough. 

He also alluded to it in the committee when we were approving this money. He actually said it would only be enough for the Karamoja sub-region. I know he is talking about additional funding being wired from the Treasury, but how much time will it take to get this money to protect our people? It is now over one month –(Microphone disruptions) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We apologise; I think something had happened to the system. Yes, hon. Member.

MS AKELLO: I was surprised; the microphone itself was hungry and I thought that maybe the Minister would rise to make a statement on the same. (Laughter) Anyway, what I was saying is that faster action must be taken to ensure the people are fed. I am saying this because it is now about two months and some areas like my district have never received – despite our continued reminders to the ministers responsible. So, areas like the Acholi, Lango and West Nile sub-regions have never received any food supplies even with such money being gazetted for that cause.

I would like to report to this House that the level of this famine is so high that school attendance has itself reduced. For example, in Lagile Primary School, which is located in my district, the teachers have registered more than half drop out in the attendance of primary school children because of hunger. For example, primary one, last year there were about 150 pupils in class. But today there are only 70 pupils and this is attributed to the famine. So I want to request that faster action be taken to ensure that the procurement process is done and the deliveries be forwarded. 

The statement by the minister on page 3 that the first season is not the main cropping season in the West and Southern parts of Uganda is very true. That renders Northern Uganda a unique case; and that is why we are calling for quicker action because Northern Uganda normally has an earlier planting season, from March to June. So we always rely on that season and it is then that we realise bumper harvest. Now that the season has passed, we are not sure whether we shall receive enough rains in the second season. 

Therefore, this calls for further planning because it means that next years we might again have famine because people have not been able to plant. Whatever efforts made to plant have been rendered futile because all the crops are drying up, especially the food crops. 

And in the resettlement process, you know that government is encouraging people to go back home and plant so that they do not rely on food handouts. But now that their efforts are rendered useless, further planning must be made for next year to make sure that our people are not disappointed again.

Lastly, the World Food Programme is giving out food assistance to the elderly in some parts of Acholi sub-region. This is making matters worse because the little being given is not enough for the elderly and given the fact that not everybody is getting this food – it is not good to see some people getting food while others are starving. So we really call for faster action. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I just want to remind you about rule 40 that you do not debate but ask elucidatory questions. And be brief please, two minutes each.

3.28
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While the distribution of food is going on in this country, it would have been better if the minister brought a schedule of the counties and sub-counties, which have benefited from the food distribution.

Last week, hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere, the Minister of Disaster went on some radios and TVs and said that there is no famine in Pallisa, yet people in Pallisa districts can hardly have one meal a day. So I want him to bring that schedule because many people in Teso are saying that they have not seen the food being distributed. 

Secondly, where is the schedule for the Shs 10 billion food items which they have started distributing? It would be better for the minister to bring that schedule to Parliament before even the distribution started so that we can know which parishes have benefited from the Shs 10 billion. Now that the Shs 10 billion has been realised, we cannot follow up the accountability.

Then, on the issue of mobilising farmers for production, what is the plan of the Prime Minister’s Office on providing water for production? This will enable us to use that water for production when there is drought and avoid this from happening again.

Furthermore, is it not necessary for this Parliament to put up a select committee to investigate this production? It seems there is something very fishy happening. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.29
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is on the first paragraph, under the introduction, I want the minister to define to me the kind of food relief that is going to be distributed to our people. I have not understood it at all. 

Secondly, I want to find out something: in my constituency, there is a parish called Apoka, where a certain UPDF terrorised the community and caused them to evacuate the community. Now the people have returned and I reported this to him, they have failed to give any food relief to them. And if the whole country needs relief, can you assure us how you are going to succeed with about Shs 10 billion only. And how many people are affected by this food shortage? Because if you do not know the number of people affected and you have a small amount of money in your hands, how are you going to use it effectively?

Furthermore, I would like to know why this country has failed to take up small irrigation schemes that would be used in most parts of this country yet we have rivers and lakes around. Nothing has been done to this effect. When are we going to consider the importance of irrigation in this country?

The minister is aware that the food shortage problem in Karamoja has been there since 1964. To this day, we still need the donor community to help us. What are the minister and government doing to address the plight of Karamoja? Is that history for fun or to make you work? The problem of Karamoja has been there as long as you have been in Uganda, but nothing has been done to address it.

Finally, the Minister of Agriculture talked of perennial crops. In Lango, our problem is not perennial crops but rains. There has been no rain for two months and when you talk of us mobilising our people to produce, I think that is more or less an insult. We have done enough but the same cannot be said for you. Maybe it needs prayers as in some parts of Lango sub-region people are now dancing for the rains. Can you join them if that is the traditional way of praying because the modern one has failed? We have mobilised our people and they have put in a lot of effort but because of no rain - what is happening to the Meteorological Department that it cannot –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving way. The information I want to give is that for the last two months, we have not had rain in Pader and the information that is very important to the Minister of Disaster is that our people have been in the camps for 23 years and you have never found even one person begging for money on the streets of Kampala. So the information I am giving is that our people just want food for three months and we shall never come back on the Floor of this Parliament again to ask anyone for food. We just want to make a breakthrough as we leave the IDP camps and get our people back home. That is the little information that I wanted to give.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much for your information. I think the honourable minister is taking note of that. Otherwise, we don’t beg for food and if you had gone to Lango those days, there were no beggars except now. Let us address the plight of our people through irrigation schemes. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, let us just use two minutes as everybody wants to speak. No statements.

3.35
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for his paper, which is entitled, “Information Paper”. I am a little bit worried about this statement and this is why I want to seek some clarification as to the speed at which the ministry is now moving. 

Cabinet sat on the 22 June 2009, today is 24th June. I believe that on 22nd June Cabinet must have sat up to late afternoon, money was released immediately and today the 24th the minister is telling us that deliveries of relief food to victims have actually started. 

I really want to know whether a due process in the procurement of this food was done. This is because I imagine that after 22nd, paperwork started in the Ministry of Finance on the 23rd, money was released and today is 24th and the minister is coming and telling us that actually deliveries are now taking place. Has there been a due process or some people had already mobilised food somewhere and they have been directed to deliver this food and government will pay them. At least let us get this clear because there are methods of doing things that are not clear and we should avoid them.

Secondly, under the background paragraph the minister talked about a number of factors that have brought insecurity and on the second one he said that continued displacement of persons living in IDP camps in Northern Uganda and West Nile region. I don’t understand this. What kind of displacement are you referring to? Our people are moving from the camps. 

Actually in my constituency, more than 90 percent have already gone back and they are moving home. Is that displacement? Really I don’t understand because what is happening now is an orderly process. I don’t see how this can affect food security because in the camps there is no food and people who are going back home have actually cultivated. 

For the last one year, people have opened up land. I don’t understand how the movement of people from camps where they did not have land to cultivate their rural areas is now causing food insecurity because in the camps, they were being supported and supplied with food. This means that the people responsible are not serious and are not even conscious of the statements that they make. This is because - honestly speaking I am in a camp, I don’t have a garden to cultivate, I have been fed by World Food Programme and a year ago, I moved back to my village and I am cultivating in the rural area. How does that movement cause food insecurity?

Thirdly, the ministry knew of this early warning. On page 3 paragraph two, the ministry was informed through agricultural officers, meteorological departments and field observation by USAID for all this period. Don’t you have a projection? I am told that people are dying in some places. Why do you wait for Ugandans to die and then you come and convene a Cabinet meeting and say now let us release this money? Why must you wait for people to die? Why can’t you pre-empt? You were informed and knew what was happening.

Lastly, what disturbs me is the kind of intervention the minister is referring to on page 3; the medium-long term solutions to involve mobilisation. A country like Egypt is in a desert but they don’t have food crises; they rely on our Nile. Even Egypt is greener now than Kampala-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have taken more than five minutes. Clerk, please assist me and use the timer in front of you.

3.39
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Government has provided relief and we thank them for that initiative. But my concern is the strategic intervention because when you provide relief as they have done, the strategic intervention must correspond with the challenges we are going to face. We are talking of Northern and Eastern Uganda but even in his report, he has noted that in the Central and Eastern regions, there is going to be food insecurity because of the drought. 

The season has been very inadequate and the yields are going to be low in the entire country. The strategic intervention I am talking about- I will give an example. I don’t know how NAADS relates with the Ministry of Finance. This is because we pass the budget here at a time when farmers are preparing their fields to plant but money for NAADS goes in August or September when the season is ending and that is when the money comes in and they will say, it is because the budget was not passed earlier. So I think that there is need for Ministry of Finance to coordinate with NAADS and send this money as early as possible. 

The second issue is that I am surprised by the statement of the minister saying that food security is primarily a family responsibility. There is a difference between the right to food and the right to be fed –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we proceed I want to introduce the pupils and teachers of Byerima Primary School, Masindi District. They are up there in the gallery. You are welcome. Please stand up. They are represented by hon. Jalia Bintu. You are welcome.

3.42
MR PATRICK OCHIENG (NRM, Bukooli South, Bugiri): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, my problem is the Shs 10 billion. I have done a simple calculation and if they are talking about three months from now to November, it will mean that for the 2,938,000 people, you will have a total of Shs 3,000 per person for three months. I do not know what will happen. 

The other issue is to do with the traditional food that has kept this country moving. In my constituency for instance we grow cassava. Cassava has been drastically affected to the extent that now our people have abandoned the cassava and they are growing something else. They now grow some little maize; they grow some little potatoes; and the reason is one, the cassava was affected by cassava mosaic; but thereafter the attempts to revive and to give us new varieties of cassava has been frustrated. 

The NAADS group, which is the group that is helping in many cases, brings it late and they have also now designed a means. In the beginning they used to bring cassava cuttings in a sack, unpacked; nowadays they bring it together with the branches and everything else. So you find only about 10 cassava stems that fill the sack. And the person who is supposed to be a beneficiary of this 10 cassava stems is supposed to pay Shs20, 000. Sometime it is a group that is meant to benefit. 

But leaving that alone, Madam Speaker, there is a problem. A number of these varieties are developed but it appears that it is not followed –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wonekha. You should take two minutes hon. Members. Please, just ask the question and do not debate. Ask elucidatory questions. 

3.44
MS OLIVER WONEKHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you Minister for your statement. In my opinion, hon. Minister, this statement is simply glossing over the issue of food security in this country. 

We, as a Parliament, are aware of the issue of global warming. We are aware of climatic change; we are aware of the financial crisis. How do you relate food insecurity in this country to these phenomena? We want to know what strategic steps government is having. What are the long terms and short term plans that government has to address the issue of food security or food insecurity in this country? 

I think this is like fire fighting. It is fighting symptoms. With that in mind the IDPs are not a new phenomenon in this country. We know that Karamoja is perpetually with famine. For how many years have we been having IDPs? So, disaster preparedness, does it mean sporadic address of food security? 

We want to know about food silos in this country. We used to hear of silos in Jinja. What is the current situation? We want to know. Uganda is known as a food basket for the region; how are we taking advantage of this opportunity? We know that there is a maize shortage in Kenya; how are we taking advantage of the Sudanese market? These are my issues, Madam Speaker.

3.46
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you. I have three questions to the minister. The first one: on average, how much food is each family allocated? Because I have seen a situation where you give two kilogrammes of posho to a family and yes, when you give a family one bag of posho, like my family, it sustains us for only one week. (Laughter) When you talk of food relief, if you are to be relieved, you should be relieved within a certain period of time, at least in two months or three months. 

My second question: do you think all districts in Uganda, which are having food shortage, are captured in this programme? If so, is Mbale included? Because the last time I talked to the State Minister for Disaster Preparedness, my friend Musa, my place, Bungokho North, had a very bad problem and he promised to give me some bags of posho. It is now one year down the road. I do not know whether this time I have been considered.

Lastly, do you think giving food is good enough, or do you have plans to supply seeds, where each family will be given some seeds? For instance, 50kgs of maize or 20kgs of beans so that when they plant them they get enough food for their families. With those few questions, let me sit down. 

3.49
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you. Madam Speaker, this is a very serious statement noting that Uganda is a naturally beautiful country and we cannot feed people. 

On the last paragraph, on page 1, I want to add to the minister’s causes of food insecurity, and I am very happy that the Minister of Agriculture is also here. We have emerging issues of crop pests and diseases. Currently in Western Uganda we have the banana wilt which is ravaging all the banana plantations and that is an issue which we need to address.

There is the issue of the poor quality and quantity of planting materials. There is the low level of productivity in this country, especially from people who are doing nothing. The productive force has reduced. The soils are infertile. People are just engaged in politics and doing nothing. And this has led to very serious losses of food. You will find that a family of seven is just being fed by one or two persons, especially by women. Therefore, our people should be mobilised to produce. 

Finally, I want to ask both ministers of agriculture and DPR, whether we have an operational national food policy that can project for us the food requirements; that can help us to have a food map for this country so that we can look at food mobility and food productivity.

The other request I want to make to the minister of agriculture is whether we can adopt bio-technology at this level as a means of increasing food production. I thank you. 

3.50
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you. I want to thank the Minister for presenting this statement. He has ably noted that food production in the Central region has declined. And apart from what he has cited, as hailstorms, that has led to decrease in food production in the Central region. In the central region, we have been cultivators for a very long time, thus, our soils have worn out; that has partly contributed to the decline in food production. We no longer get the optimal production out of the acreage that we have. I am wondering whether the government or the ministry has any plans of ensuring that we rejuvenate our soils by possibly providing for fertilisers at cheap and affordable prices to our farmers.

Secondly, in order to boost agriculture production and productivity, government proposed a policy of agricultural zoning. I wanted the Minister to inform us how far this policy has gone in as far as implementing it is concerned. 

3.52
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for picking me. The food situation in my constituency is very appalling because there has been a very long draught and whatever the people cultivated dried; and we have never stood on the Floor of this House to ask for food. 

Hon. Minister, when we ask for food, it really means that there is a need and the people are very desperate. The draught has been there for almost five months and all that was cultivated is finished. So, I know that Shs 10 billion is not enough to buy food to supply to the whole of Uganda but we should have priorities and there are those who are really very desperate. 

In my constituency, people eat once every three days. And, Madam Speaker, they have been feeding entirely on mangoes but the mangoes are now finished. My people are poor; 60 percent of the people in Ayivu live below the poverty line of US $1 a day. So you can imagine how the people are suffering. 

So, hon. Minister, I am glad that you had a meeting and I believe that you have now planned to supply food to areas where people are really desperate. I want to thank you for recognising this need. 

3.54
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I have two questions. One is whether the Minister has tried to carry out a thorough research on the effects of sugarcane growing. 

Most of the areas that grow sugarcane, like those areas surrounding Lugazi factory, Kinyara and Madhvani, people have totally abandoned food crop growing in a bid to get money. I do not know whether you have done something to that effect. 

The other issue is to do with the procedure that one can follow to access relief from the ministry of disaster. Madam Speaker, for the last two years I have been toiling with this particular matter. Iganga has been hit twice by hailstorms. We followed the procedure that is required. The CAO wrote; the RDC wrote but nothing has materialised to date. We feel –(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to inform my colleague that most of the food and relief items are now going to Karamoja because of the good Minister that we have here. (Laughter)

3.56
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you. I only have two issues and the two issues are contradictions. 

Yesterday in our NEC meeting, we were informed that Uganda is the food basket in the region, and we are exporting food. How can we then be having people who are starving and even dying?

I was in Amuru this weekend and six people had died because they had eaten cassava, which is not meant to be eaten by human beings. At the same time I was able to find a man called Ojok in Langole village in Alero sub-country who was selling potatoes by the roadside that were as big as my head. I was intrigued and I took trouble to go to this mans garden, five kilometres away, and I found that this man had two acres of potatoes and they were of good yield. But our problem is one, how could this man called Ojok, using a hand held hoe, increase his production from the two acres he is producing with his family, to 10 acres so that the people in that area could have enough food? So, I think government must come out and solve these contradictions which are making us starve. 

In Northern Uganda we have rivers which always have water. Ojok’s potatoes were doing well because they were at the river side. How can we ensure that all these other people who are near water but have no way of irrigating their gardens can do so, so that we stop coming here year in and year out to talk about famine. It is a shame! I am sorry for the ministry of disaster because I think they are victims of a government whose system of food production is not working properly. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am not really speaking for the government but in our meeting last night, the Minister of Finance said that she has got money for commercial farming, for irrigation, so I do not know whether she will come to speak about it separately but she said so last night that there was some money. So, keep your ears open. 

3.58
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, when we were requesting for the supplementary budget, I remember that the main issue was to provide food for Karamoja but of course we are going to use this money in all those areas that have a problem. 

I would like to bring this to the attention of the House. In Busia and other areas of Eastern Uganda, we have people who originate from Karamoja. They are not settled in; they live in very funny conditions and right now they are starving. They are starving because they do not have gardens or anywhere to dig. So, I would like the minister in charge of Karamoja to take this into consideration so that when she is looking at people in Karamoja, she also considers people who are in other areas who do not have where to stay.

The Minister for Disaster told us that we should not really hold government responsible or expect the government to feed people but we would like to know the situation of the Food Security Bill. Government should not come up at this time to tell us that they are not responsible for feeding people. 

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank the Member for giving way and I would like to inform her that actually the role of government in as far as providing food is concerned is espoused in our Constitution. 

Objective 22 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy enjoins government to first of protect and respect the right to food but also it tells government to establish national food reserves. (Applause) So, for the Minister to say that it is primarily the role – and if they are there, do we have food in those food reserves?

MS MUNYIRA: Finally, Madam Speaker, recently planting materials were again distributed in Karamoja region; that is cassava materials which we really welcome but it would have been very prudent for government to also give planting materials to areas that have been cushioning –(Member timed out)

4.01
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that this House passed a supplementary budget of Shs 10.4 billion sometime last week for food to famine stricken areas. But I want to know from the Minister the people who have already received this food and which are those other places you intent to supply within this Shs 10.4 billion? And how many kilos are you targeting per household? I think it is very important that we know this. 

I would also like to inform you that my people in Bukedea have relatively grown taller. They relatively look taller than they were three years ago for one reason; they have been in a famine situation for the last three years since the time they were struck by floods in 2007. Now address the short-term measures of giving food. 

I would also want to know whether there is something in the pipeline in terms of seeds and perhaps cuttings for areas that are able to produce to enable these communities become sustainable in their own food production. I really want to know whether there is an integrated effort that the office of the Prime Minister is effecting together with other departments that would help these people to become sustainable in their own food production.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.03
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to sound my concern to what the honourable minister has told us especially about Karamoja. If you say the whole region has been subjected to hand outs for 45 years and we are thanking those who are still giving handouts to the region, what is the National Planning Authority doing for Karamoja? It is not a hobby to dig or to cultivate. So can other regions cultivate and Karamoja just be given hand outs perpetually without any –(Interruption)  

MR LOOTE: Thank you, the Shadow Minister for allowing me to give you information. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that although the Minister has said 45 years, Karamoja grows food and the soils of Karamoja are very fertile. It is only now because of the change of the climatic conditions that has brought Karamoja to its knees.

I would also like to inform you that during the spell of rain, the Karimojong were travelling to look for any place with water corridors and they can sustain the crops until the next season. So, Karamoja can grow its own food if only the water is there. So it has not always been living on hand outs.  

MRS SEMPALA: Well, I am surprised by the information because when I was on the Equal Opportunities Committee, I found truck loads of WFP giving food to the whole community. So, I think we should not delude ourselves. If you are a representative of Karamoja and there are problems for 45 years, we can help the region by planning for it adequately.

4.06
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start on a sad note by providing information to this House that we have lost a total of eight people in the District of Gulu and Amuru out of famine. Three from Nwoya County and they are: Okello Francis P.2, Ogen Eric P.1 and their mother Aballo Dora who died because of famine. We also lost two people in Kilak County and three in Omoro County. It may not sound appealing to those who do not have the heart for humanity but this is a fact on the ground and it is very painful. 

I would like to get two clarifications from the Minister. On page 1 of this statement he says that: “Deliveries of the relief food to victims have started.” I want to know how far you have reached; where has it reached, is it about to cross Karuma so that I go and tell my people to mobilize and wait for the food? 

Secondly, I would like to know under your ministry whether you have any plan for irrigation in case of emergency like we are in today. 

Busitema University has recently come out with a simple irrigation technology, which can be used by anybody at any level. Do you have any plan to acquire this technology and then supply the community so that we respond to any short fall in case of drought? Do you have any plan? Thank you so much.

4.08
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been watching the people of Teso, Karamoja and the other regions on TV crying and eating wild leaves and I felt terrible and I really wanted to cry. I watched the MPs of those regions crying but what hurt me the most was that not a single routine government programme stopped. Everything went on like clock work: batches of stationery, travels, refreshments here; and not a single programme were stopped. And people were starving. 

Government sat on the 22nd of June, a month later. I asked myself whether it was right that the people should have collected all taxes, sent them to Kampala and at the time of need they cry to Kampala and Kampala is busy looking around until the 22nd of June and all routine activities are going on. 

I asked myself, and I want to ask now: isn’t it time that we started evaluating this over centralised management of resources that makes people everything to the centre and not keep anything at home and at the time of need, they have to look to Kampala? This debate should be taking place in regional Parliaments.

I have some questions to ask the minister. What is the magnitude of the problem? How much money is really needed? How long will the Shs 10 billion last? Where is the Shs 10 billion coming from and really I want to know is there no routine Government programme that can be put on the side and sort out the hunger problem? –(Member timed out_)

4.10
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the minister aware that there is no millet, sorghum, cassava, maize, sweet potatoes, groundnuts and so better fertile ground for more famine next year?

No. 2, you are talking of Ministry of Water, Environment, Fisheries and the like fighting to improve food production. Are you aware about the level of soil depression, exhaustion, vis-à-vis the use of fertilisers that is now being practised in the country, hence lack of enough food to feed the populace?

On page 4, you urge Members to mobilise. Are you aware that the areas of Northern, Eastern and some parts of West Nile used to have ox-ploughs that boosted food production, which are no more? What is government doing to make sure this is back in place?

Quarantine is in the parts of the country where I come from. This would also in a way help as a source of food to help the rural population get some food and supplement the little food they have. Are you aware that this has lasted almost eight months and so the poverty, at the same time the drought and people are sleeping and dying of hunger?

And lastly, the criterion of distributing food - is this department really aware that there is unequal distribution of food and many areas are suffering whereas some areas are getting as much food as they can, even think of throwing away?

What criterion are you using? Can you distribute and equalise the whole country and treat all the citizens fairly? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have spent one hour on this matter, I would like to invite the Minister of Agriculture to respond, then also the Minister of Disaster Preparedness.

4.13
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Many issues were raised about my ministry and I will just concentrate on those then the hon. Minister can concentrate on his area. 

First of all, I would like to say that it is true there is famine but all of us must put our efforts together to ensure that there is high production, high productivity and value addition.

Having said that, indeed there is a policy on food security and nutrition, 2003. It is there and we are in the final stages of developing a Bill to bring before this Parliament. By and large, this policy looks at issues of production, of access and of reserve which many of you are talking about, at processing, storage and at distribution.

What my ministry is doing now is to try and operationalise that policy and we shall be putting in place a Food Security and Nutrition Council. In fact, when many of you were arguing, I did not capture people talking about nutrition. It is not enough to have food; we must have food but food that is nutritious so that our bodies can grow as well as our brains, especially for the young people.

Actually within that policy, we also recognise the right to food. Hon. Namayanja alluded to that and good enough she said that that right to food emanates from the objectives and principles of state policy in the Constitution which she very well knows as a law student that those rights are not questionable -(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I listened to the minister and she is right to say that a food policy should be in place. But if this law were enacted yesterday, how would it bring rain today to provide the much needed food; famine has been brought about by the absence of rain, since we rely more or less on rain fed agricultural system? (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please answer. Hon. Members, we have got a Vote-on-Account. I really want us to finish with this matter and deal with that.

MRS MWESIGYE: Hon. Odit, I was raising that matter to show you that we are trying to address the issue in a more sustainable manner. Hon. Kabwegyere will respond to the docket which is relief and emergence. So we are not sitting, we are thinking.

Many issues were raised about the problems of famine as a result of water for production and I agree with Members who said that we need to irrigate. As we talk now, the ministry is in the process of rehabilitating five irrigation schemes that collapsed. Among those are Olenyi, Mubuku, Doho and some other two. And we have put in place a mechanism of looking at the country, assessing it; we are going to get technical support to look at the entire country to assess the feasibility and where we must put what types of irrigation schemes.

In addition to that, we need to do water harvesting; we need to start small. If every household could harvest water, that would help us at household level to irrigate some of the crops and fight food insecurity. 

We have developed a technology under NARO which is a very simple technology, which we shall demonstrate to you. We have planned to have a seminar, Madam Speaker, if you allow, on 17 July 2009, for all Members of Parliament to talk about agriculture and NAADS specifically so that some of these questions you are asking will be clarified then and we shall demonstrate that technology.

I count on you Members to mobilise people to produce. I am glad many of you have come to me both from my side and from the opposite side wanting to work with the ministry to mobilise the people to make our population produce. I am counting on you to help me supervise these NAADS implementers in the field.

In addition to the steps we are taking for irrigation, we as government are getting US $100 million for water production and we count on this Parliament to support that request when it comes here.

Today just before I came here, I signed a request to the World Bank for technical support in terms of mechanisation covering tractors, irrigation and fertilizers. So we are moving but what I want you to do is the duty of every Member of Parliament to mobilise their constituents to produce; to sensitise them to store some food. Much as we are selling and looking for money, we should also leave some food for ourselves. 

At the same time, we will be bringing in equipment for excavation for water. At household level, people will get access and excavate their own water points but of course the Ministry of Water will continue doing the bigger water bodies. 

So many people are talking of depleted soils and so in the short and medium term, we have requested the World Bank to help us, like it is helping the other countries, to import fertilisers in bulk. In the long-term, we have requested them and we are also requesting other people to help us exploit our phosphates in Tororo so that we can manufacture our own fertilisers locally that could be cheaper and more accessible. 

But one of the strategies I would like also to bring on board is to ensure that at least every household can have a milking cow and the professionals will agree with me that a milking cow per household will produce milk for nutrition and money, manure for the gardens and therefore we promote integrated farming especially for the smaller farmers. 

I will talk about the commercial farmers later –(Interjections)– that is Bonna bagaggawale otherwise how do you achieve that? For the bigger farmers as the Speaker said, we have in the budget Shs 30 billion -(Interjections)- you do not want me to answer your questions? I said for the bigger farmers, there are facilities that were read in the budget and therefore take advantage of that.

In respect to the cassava mosaic, I understand there is a variety called Akena that has nothing to do with hon. Akena, I believe it has a problem. We are trying to concentrate on one that is called Nigeria, which I understand is better off. But we will work on the diseases and the pests.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Minister. I only want to correct the record. The variety called Akena – you know I come from Serere and we host the research station. The variety called Akena is not the one that has problems. There is a variety with a long set of initials and that is the one that has problems to the extent that the tubers become thread like and sort of totally distorted. You cannot find flour when you dry it or chop it. But Akena is still okay and we would appreciate if more is done to multiply the Akena variety.

MS MWESIGYE: Thank you very much for that information, I will take it on board. I had got that information from elsewhere and we are still investigating it. 

Maybe I will just conclude by saying that we have zoned the country into ten agro ecological zones; we will give you all that information on the 17th July and the rest of the issues, I will answer then. And I should say that within NAADS, we have been discussing with the Ministry of Finance so that part of the money for NAADS comes in the Vote on Account.

4.24
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, the figure of Shs 10 billion is a small drop in the ocean but at the same time, I did not want to frighten ourselves that that is the only amount of money that we can get. 

In a meeting with Cabinet, we zeroed in on a figure of about Shs 34 billion but in fact even that is part of a figure of Shs 170 billion if we were to address this problem fully. But if I talk of Shs 170 billion just for relief or even Shs 34 billion for relief, I do not know how many of us would say this Parliament can sit here and appropriate it given what our budget has said. What we are talking about is operating within the means that we have.

Secondly, the relief as by definition is a short-term intervention. It is not a long-term association with the people who receive relief. And certainly if it were not short-term, then we must be losing millions of people. So when we talk of the figure of nearly three million people, we are not talking of people who are dependant wholly for every drop of food in their mouth on relief. It is to complement the few resources they have and even that for a short time. Bear that in mind, please.

Thirdly, food relief is not coming only from the Office of the Prime Minister. We all know that some people do not realise that World Food Programme is a government programme. I want to say it and just know it that United Nations Programmes are country programmes and the money that World Food Programme uses to buy food is money appealed for by government. It is a government programme. It is not an NGO and even an NGO – let me say this very clearly –(Interjections)- I am not accepting clarifications. I think the Speaker indicates that the time factor is important. But hon. Wadri can go to the World Food Programme and check because we sit with them, plan, assess the situation, talk with them and we solicit money for them to administer the programme. 

Hon. Otto was of the view that if you gave three months food relief, that would be enough. I wish you were right because we have been giving food relief to people who have been leaving the camps for over two years now and yet we continue to give relief, because not only are they insecure because of resettling themselves in new places, but even what they have grown has been affected. So, that is the fact and I cannot understand how my friend hon. Okumu wouldn’t understand that displacement into camps perpetuated food insecurity and that food insecurity does not walk away with emptying the camps until people have grown food and secured security over a period of time. It is not going to be one year that they will be secure; it is going to be a longer time and that is why three months are not enough. 

Hon. Okumu was surprised about the quick action. How could we have met on the 22nd and today is 24th and the food is gone? I was in this House before and also before the relevant committee and they approved a supplementary on this money. It is some weeks ago. So, the process of purchasing food has been going on and if we had been too fast, hon. Okumu would still have come here and said, “How could you purchase without following the procedures?” So when we seem to act quickly, we are accused. I am really surprised that that would be a basis for not understanding our situation -(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, if I listened to the minister correctly, he said he appeared here a number of times and money was made available through a supplementary budget and if it is right, the Shs 10 billion that was presented to us as a Budget Committee was basically for Karamoja. But this report talks about the entire country yet Karamoja has only five districts. We are talking of 80 districts now. Is he in order to use the budget meant for five districts and expand it to cover the whole country? I don’t think so -(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really, you have ruled -(Laughter)- but when we were debating the supplementary budget members said that the problem was bigger than Karamoja and the minister asked to be assisted to get money to start the process. I think that is what he is saying.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am really surprised, if somebody prepares food in the kitchen, surely that food can be eaten by whoever is hungry. We are in position to distribute food according to need and we are not about to leave people to die just because there is supply in Karamoja. By the way, Karamoja supplies could not be dependant on the Office of the Prime Minister. We are literally feeding nearly 95 percent of the people of Karamoja on a daily basis and that is not this money; it is more than this -(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, first of all, I respect the House very much and I respect Prof. Kabwegyere and the Prime Minister, but this issue that we are discussing is very important and we have been blinded by the statement he read. 

The minister said that the situation is nationwide but there is no mention of Masaka –(Laughter)– because journalists could take this copy outside and write anything. We should have a statement, which is specific about the areas that are covered. We should not be hoodwinked by a statement like this when my area is not covered. I have people who just have one meal a day and others who do not have any food. 

So, I am trying to find out whether it is procedurally right for the Prime Minister, for government, and for the minister to come with a statement like this that does not highlight the areas that are being discussed. I need to know whether Masaka or elsewhere will be discussed next time. So, is it procedurally right to treat this matter lightly?

Madam Speaker, I also want to find out from government whether it is procedurally right to spend more money on tree planting rather than on food production. In Masaka – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you are making a contribution. Hon. Minister, please continue. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I do not want us to give the impression to the Ugandan population that government is responsible for feeding them because it would be wrong. Government comes in to intervene when the family or household, because of the circumstances beyond their control, cannot meet their food needs. But the primary responsibility is for the family or household and if hon. Namayanja sits down and does no work and expects government to feed her, it would be wrong because no government could ever do that. Even God cannot feed you unless you have worked for it. Even in the case where Jesus increased the food, he asked for what they had and they had a bit of fish and bread and he increased their quantity. But if you do nothing and expect God to give you everything or the government to give you anything, it is certainly untenable. So, having the right to survival is not the same thing as having the right not to work and be fed by government.

Some issues came up which really portray me or the Office of the Prime Minister as the answer to all questions, like global warming. Surely hon. Wonekha, how can I come here to talk about food relief and answer questions on global warming? How much food do we give? We target 12 kilograms per month and this is overall. Is that enough, is it balanced? I cannot give the answer as yes, but we try. 

If people abandon growing food and do something else, but have money to buy food, then that is okay because growing food in developed countries is handled by a handful, a small percentage - sometimes less than 3 percent and yet food is plentiful in the country. So, people abandoning food production in favour of other ways of earning income is okay. 

Well a little remark for Bukedea, “People are hungry and they are growing taller …” that cannot be true! (Laughter) People grow shorter and they die; they do not grow taller. (Laughter) 

I would like to meet hon. Oyet and we talk about these names that he has given because we are not here to be pleased about people dying. No. We are doing everything to stop people dying. Let us study this situation together and see whether it is localised and it is a problem that we are not reaching or the information is not coming to us and only information about the dead is coming to us.

However, I also said before that I get frustrated when because of delays and so forth, I send food and it arrives only to be eaten by mourners. So, a case like that can happen. 

Hon. Kamya, I think I will join you in the federation campaign if it can help with addressing the issue of food shortage. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. But who is going to answer the question of the silos? You know these silos which are in Busoga and they are empty? I do not know whether it is the Minister of Agriculture.

4.39
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Madam Speaker, I am working on a paper to operationalise the silo and food reserve system. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, do you have something to say?

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Ms Rukiya Chekamondo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members we appreciate the situations that are being experienced by the people and all the concerns that you have raised. 

I wish to inform the august House that although one Member raised an issue that the Ministry of Finance released funds for NAADS in June, it is not true. Finance released funds in mid-February for procurement of planting materials for the first season. I want to assure the august House that we shall continue to release funds for required materials on a seasonal basis. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, I think we shall remain seized of this matter and if things are not working you are free to come back and raise the matter again. Next item, please. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010 IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 129 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues. 

I beg to move that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of the Vote-on-Account for Financial Year 2009/2010.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues,
 
“WHEREAS Clause 4 of Article 154 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year, or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is earlier;

AND WHEREAS the Government financial year will end on 30 June 2009 and it is the belief of the President that by that date this House will not have approved the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the financial year 2009/2010;

AND WHEREAS it is necessary that the President authorises the issues of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditures necessary to carry on the services of Government;

AND WHEREAS Clause 5 sub-section (a) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorisation of the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of Clause 4 has to be approved by a resolution of Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, do I move that Parliament approves Vote on Account allocated to the various votes attached to this resolution, totalling to Shs 2,200,685,439,000.” Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Shadow Finance Minister.

4.43
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oduman): Madam Chairperson, I thank the honourable minister for presenting the Vote on Account motion. However, I have three concerns.

I expected that the Minister would have kept his motion very simple. Budget estimates were laid on the Floor of this House and our job at this point is very simple; to calculate one third of those estimates as by law provided. That would mark the end of the game. 

However, I notice that whereas the Minister is moving a motion for provision of a Vote on Account, he is at the same time varying the budget estimates. I will show you, Madam Speaker. I have some calculations here.

The provision of what the minister is requesting is summarised in his Vote on Account request on page 5. He indicates in the schedule that the total amount of the annual draft estimates on page 5 of the schedule is Shs 6.6 trillion. That is what I indicate in my calculation as (a) and that is what the minister indicated.

However, in addition to this, there are statutory costs which are indicated at page 6 – total recurrent expenditure that are statutory – you have Shs 964 billion. I usually call that calculation B. The sum of those gives us Shs 7.5trillion – that is called calculation C.

However, Madam Speaker, the budget ceiling – the resource envelope as indicated in the Budget Speech on page 32 is Shs 7.33 trillion. The difference is the introduction that the Minister has brought in this Vote-on-Account request, which amounts to additional or a variation of the estimates that were laid. 

My question is: is this the appropriate form of varying estimates laid before this House? I am saying this because the variation is now marked E in this calculation; it is Shs 232 billion and introduced as new estimates to this schedule.

When we carefully look at it, there is an implication, which is - if you have to appropriate or vote one third of the annual estimates and you have an introduction of Shs 232 billion, the Vote-on-Account request is overstated by Shs 69.7 billion. So, at committee stage I will be moving a motion to reduce the total request on Vote-on–Account by that amount.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Finance. Hon. Nandala, are you giving information to the shadow minister? Okay, let us have information from the former shadow finance minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my shadow Minister for Finance, for understanding this issue. In fact the one third he is talking about amounts to Shs 77 billion and not Shs 69 billion. I know your computer might have experienced an error, but we must thank you for that intelligence.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, hon. Member for the corrections on the calculations. Anyway, like I said, we shall be moving a motion at committee stage to deduct that amount from the total.

The second issue, I would like to say is that the law requires that at the point of laying estimates before this House, the Minister should indicate to us who is going to handle this money and who will be responsible to this House. 

To be specific, I can cite the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Section 15(b), which says thus: “Estimates of expenditure of Government for that year allocated between those expenditure votes, the Minister may consider appropriate and shall include, for each expenditure vote: 
1. 	A statement of the purpose for which the vote is to be used; 
2. 	The identity of the accounting officer appointed under Section 8 responsible for the vote…”

The importance of the accounting officer is also stated in Section 8(2) of the same Act, which reads as follows: “An accounting officer shall control and be personally accountable to Parliament for irregularity and propriety of the expenditure of money applied by an expenditure vote or any other provision to any ministry, department, fund, agency, local government or any other entity funded wholly through the Consolidated Fund.”

If we release this money now without knowing who will be responsible to Parliament for its expenditure, what shall we be doing? The law says as you bring estimates, you must also bring the names and identities of the accounting officers. I really need your guidance on whether we shall not be risking public funds to appropriate and vote this money for expenditure.

My third concern is on the report that was earlier issued by this House. In our report –(Interruption)

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Madam Speaker, the Minister has laid on the Table the Vote-on-Account request. I want to know under what rule is the shadow minister asking all these questions. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him ask, the Minister will answer and we move on. You ask, the Minister will answer and we move on.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The understanding should be that this is just a debate. I know that we shall vote later in the committee. 

Regarding what is indicated in the report of this House to the President about reallocation of monies from the Ministry of Health specifically earmarked for Quality Chemicals to other votes - when you look at our report – this is our report to the President – the title is, “Recommendations of the Parliamentary Budget Committee on the medium term micro-economic plans and programmes for social and economic development”, dated 14 May 2009. 

I remember we made very serious recommendations regarding proposals for funding the health sector specifically ARVs from Quality Chemicals. This Vote-on-Account includes what was recommended to be removed from that vote – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, you are now going into the details, which we have not come to, please.

MR ODUMAN: Okay, at committee stage I will be moving a motion requesting this House for a waiver on the suspension of a rule to be able to discuss and recommend the transfer of monies from the vote on health specifically for ARVs to other votes. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the Minister of Finance.

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my colleagues. I would like to thank hon. Okello, the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for raising these issues. 

I would like to inform the House that the accounting officers have been appointed and it would be inappropriate for us to parade all of them here to show their identities to the House. (Laughter) Anyway, what I can tell you is that the permanent secretary and Secretary to the treasury have signed instruments appointing all the accounting officers.

The second issue –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know that Parliament is supposed to make laws that should be for good governance. The Minister is stating that the Secretary to the Treasury has appointed accounting officers. 

The term of the current accounting officers is ending on 30th June. And as we speak now a copy has to come to Parliament, and we have not yet seen it. So is the minister procedurally right to tell us something that is not there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think the Shadow Minister is out of order to ask for something, which is premature. Your colleague is premature to bring the names. So you should not have asked for them.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue that the shadow minister raised, I would like to respond as follows. As you can see, the figures, Shs 69 billion and Shs 77 billion, they are sure of what exactly is the figure. So I would like to give the genesis of this. 

On the 11th of June this year, my senior colleague did present to Parliament a summary of estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2009/10. It was reported that the resource envelope is Shs 7,333.7 billion and of this, Shs 4.800.2 billion is domestic revenue and then external resources are Shs 2.533.5 billion. And estimate of expenditure amounted to Shs 7,566.2 billion. And this was divided into appropriation expenditure of Shs 6.602.1 billion and statutory expenditure of Shs 962.2 billion. 

As colleagues may note, the total estimates of expenditure exceeded the estimates of revenue because it included non-resource amounting to Shs 233.4 billion. 

As far as the central votes are concerned, we have a total of Shs 1,722,122,276,000 and then for referral hospitals, Shs 16,678,121,000. And Missions abroad is Shs 14,414,251,000. and development under local government votes is Shs 446,306,058,000 giving us a grant total of Shs 2,200,685,489 which we are proposing to be passed as Vote-on-Account. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we are going to appropriate this budget, and this is the time when whatever details that the Members may have are brought on board. As I prayed in the resolution, this is only to allow government to operate for a period of four months and if the appropriation of the budget can come before this, then the appropriation of the budget will take precedence. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.02
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the minister for his motion. But I would like to request that we all listen to the shadow minister. He has done his research and brought the figures. We should not put him off; he has value in that paper. 

For sometime now we have been approving Vote-on-Account very fast; and he mentioned something like appointing accounting officers; it is the usual talk. You may appoint them today, but they will not access money until the end of almost July. We feel that the point of passing Vote-on-Account is to enable the government to run as parliament goes through the budget. But there is a lot of delay which we have been experiencing. So we want assurance that the ministries will run without being starved of funds as we have always seen.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, to me this issue of accounting officers was resolved once and for all by the Constitution of Uganda. When you read Article 164, that is accountability, it says: “The permanent secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that ministry or department”. So, to me the Constitution is above the Finance Act, if it is already indicated inhere, what is the use of appointing others?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should leave that matter. The financial year will end on 30th June. That is when the permanent secretary will name new accounting officers. For now we are working with the old accounting officers. 

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Anybody who has dealt with the Ministry of Finance around the time of budget knows how frustrating it is to work with them during the time of budget. The appointment of these accounting officers takes a long time. When you go to the ministries, the answer is that there is no accounting officer. Yet the Finance Act says that there must be an accounting officer to handle government funds all the time. 

Our question now is: today is the 24th June; it is about six days to the 30th of June. We are going to pass this Vote-on-Account; the accounting officers will be in existence for exactly six days. Who will handle the funds after the six days? We know that the secretary to finance takes long before signing these instruments of appointment. Can the minister assure us that by the 1st of July, there will be accounting officers in all these departments?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, last year, we sort of mentioned this matter and there was also that fear that there would be delays in naming the accounting officers. So can you assure us of what is going to happen by 1st of July?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we shall lay on the Table the list of the accounting officers for the new financial year by 1st July 2009. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I have been listening very attentively, and a few minutes ago, hon. Jachan Omach said that the PS to finance had already appointed the accounting officers. And now he is proposing to lay them on the Table on the 1st, moreover, they are already appointed. Why can’t he promise to bring the list tomorrow? Is he in order to mislead this House that the appointment has taken place when actually there are no newly appointed accounting officers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, he said, “by 1st July”, that can be tomorrow or the 29th of June. 

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, hon. Omach said he is going to lay on the Table the list of the appointed accounting officers. Now what do we do; do we have to wait until that list is laid on the Table before we approve the Vote-on-Account? We make these laws, are we not going to be party to breaking them? We know the urgency of the Vote-on-Account but are we not going to be held at ransom by the ministries? What do we do in-between? 

MR WADRI: Hon. Members, I want to give this counsel to this august House. It is true that from now to 30th June all resources in the respective ministries will be those of the 2008/09 Financial Year. It is only from 1st July that we begin on Vote-on-Account for 2009/10 until when we approve the budget that will do away with the Vote-on-Account. But in the meantime, the practical thing that happens in the ministries is that even if government came up with a list of accounting officers for the Financial Year 2009/10, those signatories will begin to be effective when the financial year begins. 

Therefore, from now up to 30th of June, the signatories, or accounting officers for 2008/09 will continue to be honoured by government through Bank of Uganda. Therefore, even if Parliament approves this supplementary budget, it will only be accessed when the financial year commences. That is my practical experience that I can share with you. 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, much as we are willing to pass the Vote-on-Account, we are saying to the minister that this is a wake up bell. Even you, the Deputy Speaker, you have experienced it. Even if you had a very big commitment in early July, it would be a disaster. 

Secondly, we would like the ministry to be honest this time and have one minister in charge of the budget, so that he can be consistent and be answerable to this House, rather than having uncoordinated movements. Let us have the budget run properly on the planned activities. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that this House do resolve into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of the Vote-on-Account for the fiscal year 2009/10 in accordance with rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.12
COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY
VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

Recurrent Vote-on-Account for Central Government 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 603,052,627,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account to the Central Government as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recurrent Vote-on-Account for Referral Hospitals

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,011,454,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account for referral hospital’s recurrent expenditure for financial year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recurrent Vote-on-Account for Missions Abroad 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 14,414,251,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account for Missions Abroad, recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recurrent Vote-on-Account for Local Governments

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 336,903,629,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account for local governments as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Development Vote-on-Account for Central Government

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,119,069,649,000 be provided for as vote on account for the Central Government development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Vote-On-Account for Referral Hospitals

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 5,666,667,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account for referral hospitals development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Vote-on-Account for Missions Abroad

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,164,733,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account for missions abroad development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Vote-On-Account for Local Governments

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 446,306,058,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account for local governments development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am lost because the 446 that you have read is the total of recurrent and development. How can we provide like this?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I have got technical assistance from the Ministry of Finance. I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 109,402,429,000 be provided for as Vote-On-Account for the local governments development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Vote-on-Account for the Recurrent Expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 965,381,961,000 be provided for as Vote-On-Account for recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Vote-on-Account for the Development Expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,235,303,477,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account for development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Recurrent and Development Expenditure for Financial Year 2009/2010

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 2,200,685,439,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account for both recurrent and development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Chairperson, as I said earlier I would seek a motion to reduce the entire amount on Vote-on-Account from the amount requested by the honourable minister by Shs 77,501 million. The reason, as I said earlier, is that we all have the draft estimates as presented to this House as they were annexed to the Budget Speech. Therefore, I haven’t seen any additional motion that has sought to amend those draft estimates as laid in this House. 

The motion that the honourable minister has brought is one seeking Vote-on-Account on estimates already laid and, therefore, as I already showed in the calculations, the total amount indicated by the hon. minister at the budget exceeds the budget as read to the nation of Shs 7.333 billion. Therefore, the additional amount is what the Minister said earlier. He said that it is unfunded. 

My understanding in terms of appropriation and estimate is that when you are budgeting we must indicate the source of money and what the money is going to do. So when the minister says that it is non-resource, what does that mean? Where is that additional money going to come from by saying non-resource? 

The new introduction into the estimates is not consistent with the draft estimates laid here. I, therefore, move that we reduce the amount requested by the honourable minister from 2,200,685,439,000 by 77,501,000,000 to keep it consistent with the estimates presented to this House. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Shadow Minister, the sum you are seeking to alter is the total, which we have already passed. We have passed all of them. I do not know whether you want us to remove it from the Missions Abroad or from the Development Fund, but we have already passed them. What we are doing now is to put them together. You agreed to have everything together. You cannot now seek to change it; we have already passed them. 

MR ODUMAN: Madam Chair, I seek your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no! Hon. Members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,200,685,439,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account, both recurrent and development expenditure, for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you. Madam Chair and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Vote-on-Account and passed it without any amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you. 

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 June 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

