Wednesday 21 June, 2000

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon Members, I feel I have to tell you this.  It is a sad story but it ended very well.  Yesterday when our colleague, Hon. Tim Lwanga was travelling back from his constituency to the capital city, he had a serious disruption when the boat in which he was travelling capsized, and they were three in that boat. Fortunately for him he knew how to swim or still knows how to swim and he was able to swim about three miles in about three hours until he got somewhere in Entebbe, where again he was confronted with a 30 foot-cliff and he struggled and climbed.  That was about 11.00 p.m.  And he managed to get over the cliff and knocked at the door around Fisheries Institute. A kind hand managed to receive him and conducted him to some officials within the Fisheries establishment and eventually he found his way to the marines, who then gave him another boat with some of them. They had to go back to the lake to rescue the other two who did not know how to swim and were floating.  They looked for them until they located them and brought them ashore.  So the Hon. Tim Lwanga and his colleagues are well except of course exhaustion and he has been attended to and he is resting so may be you never know tomorrow he might join you.  I thought I should let you know this.

THE REFERENDUM (AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Joash Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, according to section 25, the Referendum Political Systems Act 2000, Sub article 1 Subsection 1, the Minister may with the approval of Parliament, by statutory instrument, make regulations as may be expedient to carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.  By virtue of that section Sir, I now seek the approval of this Parliament for an amendment to regulations to effect an amendment to the ballot paper, which as it stands now provides for side symbol, other political systems and of course you know that other political systems are no longer there.  They are only to this point.  So I am requesting that this amendment of the ballot paper be used next week in the Referendum, I will be given approval to issue the necessary instruments to that effect.

MR WANDERA OGALO (Bukoli South, Bugiri): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, section 25 of the Referendum Act 2000 provides the Minister may, with approval of Parliament, by Statutory instrument make regulations as may be expedient for carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.  The Referendum amendment regulations, seek to remove the words other Political Systems from the ballot paper to be used in the Referendum since no other political system has been approved by Parliament, the said words are redundant with ballot paper and may be a source of confusion to voters.  The Committee also recommends that the amendments be extended to the declaration of results form and italicise it so that the words other political systems are deleted.  The Committee recommends that the Referendum regulations be approved with the said amendments.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to report.

MR. MWANDA JAMES ERIEZER (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much Mr.Speaker.  I do not have any objection to this Bill.  I only wanted to find out from the Minister- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member is it a Bill? Or these are regulations?

MR. MWANDA: To the regulations.  But I wanted to find out from the Minister, the voting is just round the corner; if the amendments have not been carried out already, is there enough time for these amendments to be effected on the ballot papers and so on?  And considering the fact that you know we passed, I think it was a motion to say that we did not have any other political parties, why has it taken this long to come with this kind of measure?  Just clarification Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA PATRICK ALOYSIUS (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I rise to support the motion with regard to the regulations amendment to provide for deletion of the other system.  Mr. Speaker, I do remember that when we were debating a similar motion, I raised the aspect of the Minister gazetting the symbols.  Could the Minister inform the House whether now the symbols have been gazetted?  The aspect of gazetting is very important Mr. Speaker because as you know, when you look at this ballot paper, you know that the symbols are appearing in alphabetical order and that alone is very crucial.  So I am seeking clarification whether that one has been done.  

My second point of clarification Mr. Speaker is with regard to what has been stated by Hon. Mwandha, that indeed the various documents  declaration Forms  need to be also gazzeted.  I do not know if the very fact that we shall have passed the form in this format will be adequate.  Those are the two clarifications I am seeking.  Otherwise, I support the motion, Mr. Speaker.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. NYAI: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  My problem with this proposed amendment is that, Mr. Speaker, it tends to alter the frame of mind of this Parliament in preparation for the coming Referendum.  The moment we do this amendment, future generations will say that, we only had a Referendum about Multiparty and Movement Political systems.  I do not believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs wants this Parliament to appear so unreasonable in the future. 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, to say that the three words, Other Political System may be a source of confusion to voters is absolutely insulting to the people of Uganda.  In certain constituencies, there are Members of Parliament here present, where you had ballot papers with 11 names. How come the people of Uganda were not confused. 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, eight days from voting day, for the Hon. Minister to come with this amendment, is (Interruption)

MR. WACHA: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I wanted clarification from my neighbour, and I think he has granted me permission, Sir.  Mr. Speaker, I wanted Hon. Nyai to clarify to me, I understand that these other two systems have symbols; I hear there is a  yellow bus for one of them, and then I hear there is either a white or some colourless dove for the other one.  What other symbol would the other one have?

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I believe if you put a bus, a dove and a blank, I may be able to choose a blank.  But, Mr. Speaker, I am slightly intrigued by the clarification sought by Hon. Wacha, that the law cannot be turned into a laughing stock.  If we are holding a Referendum to determine from among various political systems, and this Parliament did pass a law about other political systems, it is only reasonable that that be reflected. 

The point I was making, Mr. Speaker, before Hon. Wacha came up with this clarification is that, Mr. Speaker, we are only eight days away from voting day, on 29th June.  If we pass this amendment, it will have got to be printed, it will have to be assented to, and by the time the Electoral Commission begins work on this, it will be two or three days to voting day.  Mr. Speaker, can the Minister assure me or can I assume, Mr. Minister, that the Electoral Commission has already done the correct thing and you are only coming for a validation act?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, Hon. Mwandha wants to know whether there is enough time.  My answer is, if you talk about calendar time, the time is short.  If you are talking about administrative time, I leave this to the Electoral Commission.  Our Parliament must be shown its duty and leave the rest to the Electoral Commission, who has got the responsibility to put into effect what we pass here.

Mr. Speaker, I was saying, the Hon. Mwandha asked the question, is there enough time?  My answer is that, if he is talking about calendar time, I concede the time is short; if he is talking about administrative time to carry out, implement certain orders of Parliament Resolutions, I think the time is there.  Let us leave this to the Electoral Commission.  We do our duty here, let them perform their own duty.

Then he asked me the question, why not come earlier?  -(Interruptions)

MR. MWANDHA: Point of clarification.  Can the Minister clarify to the House what will happen if the Electoral Commission complained that Parliament did not get them enough time?  If they complained?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, someone said, if ifs and ands were plates and pans, there would be no need for tinkers (Laughter).  I repeat, if ifs and ands were plates and pans, there would be no need for tinkers.  Let us come to these as our prophetical questions if need be.  Now, there is no question of ifs.

Now, the other question was, why not come earlier?  My answer is that, I came to know about the need for this during recess by Parliament.  Therefore, of course I had to wait for Parliament and of course, as you know, Mr. Speaker, I do not control the timetable for Parliament.

Now, Hon. Okumu Ringa wanted to know about the gazetting of symbols.  I leave this to Electoral Commission because that is an administrative job for it to carry out, and there, of course, the same goes for declaration forms having to be gazetted.

Now, Hon. Nyai is asking; he said that, are there no other political systems?  Of course my answer is, they are there, may be.  But for the purposes of the Referendum, for purposes of people making a choice by ballot paper, these are irrelevant; they are only two therefore.  These are where I want to effect the change.

Again he is asking the question, eight days from the voting day only; Parliament passed a law to contain other political systems.  Again the answer is the same.  The law in effect now, does not provide us with the answer.  The other political system for purposes of  next weeks Referendum are not there.  We are not of course saying they are not there.  In fact they are not there for purposes of the voters making an election.  For that reason Sir, I beg to move that Parliament does go ahead, to do it's duty, and leave the rest for the Electoral Commission.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, there is one clarification I sought Mr. Speaker, which the Hon. Minister has not answered.  Can he assure this House that the Electoral Commission has not printed - has not yet as of now?  Can he swear that that is - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dick Nyai surely, do we need to go into that?  These are administrative matters and if they fail to produce the ballot papers or whatever materials then the issue can be taken on later on. But should we really go into that?

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I understand and I appreciate that these are administrative matters.  Mr. Speaker, what I am trying to protect this House from is being a simple rubber stamp for actions earlier taken.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think I will put the question.  The motion is seeking approval of Parliament to amendment to the Referendum regulations 2000.

Question put and agreed to.

DEBATE ON THE PETITION OF 99 MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT SUBMITTED TO THE SPEAKER ON 16TH MAY 2000 IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 95(5) OF THE CONSTITUTION.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, by the time we adjourned consideration of the Draft Resolutions for concluding the debate of that item, we had reached a preamble paragraph five; which starts with 'Desirous'. You get that?  I hope you have your documents.  Now, when we got there, there was an amendment which was moved by the Hon. Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development and it was refined by the Hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to the effect that - of course after correcting the word 'Desirous'. 'Desirous of participation of Parliament in shaping and promoting the Foreign Policy of Uganda'.  Then the question arose as to whether - the Hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs argued that if you left it that way, that would mean that Parliament has hitherto not been participating in shaping Foreign Policy.  Then, - (Interruption) Yes.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Hon. Speaker my argument was slightly different from the one you are putting forward. My argument was about the word 'Peaceful' and I said if you said - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Alright.  That is right, but then we eventually ended up talking about whether until hitherto Parliament has not really been taking any part in the formulation of Foreign Policy.  And that is when I tried to broker a compromise, by saying 'supposing you said desirous of increased participation'.  I was trying to sell to both sides the word 'increase' to allay the fears of - did you say - was it Hon. Mwandha?  I thought it was you Hon. Minister who was expressing fears that if we left it that way, it would mean that until hitherto Parliament has not been partaking in shaping Foreign Policy.  Who was it?  Yes I am trying to remind the Hon. Members because; we have to find out from the mover of the motion whether that formulation is acceptable.  That is where we ended and then we had some problem, which I do not need to go into.  So we take it from there.  

Maybe I can ask the Hon. Winnie Byanyima on this one.  You remember when you complained that your motion was being watered down.  We had gone to the point of the fifth paragraph of the preamble paragraph and because of that argument, whether Parliament had actually been a known participant; a spectator and while the Executive was the one you know engaged in formulating foreign policy single handedly.  I thought to allay fears from the Government and at the same time to give you comfort, I proposed that the word 'increased' be added before participation and that is where we stopped.  I would like to ask you what you think about that.  Does that meet with your requirements, with your desires?

MS BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  For us the movers of the motion, we  were interested in - yes increasing participation of Parliament as you are suggesting. But we were also interested in promoting peace for Foreign Policy, because for us we feel that we have earned the condemnation of the United Nations for pursuing a policy that was not peaceful.  So, we presented to the House this amendment.  It can be improved by adding the word 'increased participation', but I think the word 'peaceful' also gives it the meaning that we sought.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, Hon. Mayanja Nkangi, the movers are insisting that the word 'peaceful' should be there.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker and Hon. Members, the outside world may have shown judgement of our own policies.  We too as a Country, as a Parliament must have our own assessment of these policies.  My view is that if we say, 'we start now by implication to pursue peaceful foreign policy', it is an admission that up to now, we have not been pursuing peaceful foreign policy. This admission, for me is uncomfortable, irrespective of what other people outside us including the United Nations think about us.  If we, this Parliament, the supreme body of this Country were to pass this Resolution that we want to pursue now a peaceful foreign policy, it is a covert if not an open admission, that in fact our policy has been belligerent, bellicose, war like and to me it is un-comfortable - (Interruption)

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether, because I was not there when this amendment was being made, but now I see that the Minister is talking about pursuing peaceful Foreign Policy, when the motion is talking about promotion.  I wanted to know whether now he has admitted that his pursuit was wrong - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we have spent a lot of time on this let me read the two so that we can pronounce ourselves on each one of them.  From what I understand from the Hon. Winnie Byanyima she is agreeable to your amendment except for one word namely, the word peaceful.  So the motion as amended by you and refined by Hon. Mayanja Nkangi was reading, desirous of increased participation of Parliament in shaping and promoting foreign policy of Uganda. That is how your amendment is, but the Hon. Winnie Byanyima is saying, she would still want the word peaceful to remain where it is.  Are we clear on this one?  

Now, let us first of all deal with the amendment by the Hon. Winnie Byanyima.  I am reading from your amendment, which I wrote down unless you are coming with yet another amendment. Your amendment is accepted by Hon. Winnie Byanyima except your insistence that the word 'peaceful' be removed.  So we are going to pronounce ourselves on Hon. Winnie Byanyimas amendment.  Hon. Minister, last time you spoke, the Hon. Minister for constitutional affairs spoke on your amendment. Now, I will put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Point of clarification.  I just wanted a clarification for your guidance on whether we only concentrated on the word peaceful rather than the whole meaning of the whole paragraph.  I wanted to know whether we are just talking about the word peaceful or the whole paragraph.

THE SPEAKER:  Let me explain he is entitled to this clarification.  I explained earlier on that when we adjourned last time we had reached a point where generally there was agreement on this formulation, moved by Hon. Babu and refined by the Hon. Minister for constitutional affairs.  It was reading as follows; desirous of increased participation of Parliament in shaping and promoting foreign policy of Uganda. But before this formulation the movers of the motion had the word peaceful preceding the word foreign policy.  Now the question is whether we retain the word foreign policy or we delete it; and the movers would like to maintain the word peaceful just before foreign policy and that is what we have pronounced ourselves on.  So the sentence would therefore, read as follows; desirous of increased participation of Parliament in shaping and promoting a peaceful foreign policy of Uganda. That is what we pronounced ourselves on.  Can we move to the next-(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Point of clarification. Mr. Speaker, I wanted a clarification on the meaning it really gives and how I am confusing the paragraph. I wanted to seek clarification from you. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to interprete your resolution?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Because there was a problem of having the written understanding what was the amendment which you explained and the meaning it was giving to me which I wanted clarification from you so that I get it-(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, my understanding of this is that Parliament would like to have increased participation in shaping and promoting a peaceful policy for Uganda. I do not see any.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Speaker, the point is, has it not been peaceful or has it not been promoting that because the implication is (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member. Hon. Member, whether that is how you understand it or not, that it what the House wants I can not stop them.  Can we proceed.  Now operative paragraph N0.1.  "Commend the government for the defusion of tension and reduction in the troops build up on our common border with Rwanda".  I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Two: "Request the Minister of Defence to inform Parliament about the losses incurred in recent clashes including names, ranks and districts of soldiers lost and to give to Parliament a monthly account of the situation of the UPDF  troops deployed in the DRC."  I now put the (Interjections)-  let us have the Hon. Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Speaker, I want to move an amendment on two to read that, "Request the Minister of Defence to regularly report to UPDF through the report to Parliament on UPDF presence in the DRC."

THE SPEAKER:  Is that amendment seconded?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

SPEAKER:  It is not.  Oh! It is seconded, can you speak to your amendment.

MAJ. GEN. ELLY TUMWINE:  Mr. Speaker, UPDF is deployed in Gulu, in Karamoja, in Mbarara, in Kampala, in DRC.  In all the operations of the army we have had casualties, we have had death we have had injuries. Parliament is entitled to being informed regularly. We have been insisting on asking, who is the next of kin of the soldier who died in Gulu?  Which district does he come from?  Because when I read this motion, I say, what is the purpose of this?  Are we politicising the death of our soldiers?  Are we trying to make it a district matter or are UPDF soldiers national soldiers dying in the defence of this nation regardless of which district, which next of kin they belong to?  I therefore think that just like any reporting that is entitled to the Parliament, the Minister of Defence should regularly report to Parliament on the UPDF presence in the DRC like we do in all other cases.  I beg to move Mr. Speaker.

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the matters of death are very painful and it would be even more hurting if a relative, if a comrade, if a parent heard the name of his child being discussed in the papers and in Parliament before he gets to know.  It would be very, very hurting to learn about the death of your child in the newspapers.  The method that is used world-wide and indeed used by our army has been a good method that by the time it gets reported, the next of kin would have been told.  Even in the advanced countries Mr. Speaker, that is a normal practice.  But if we went on to do what this resolution is asking us to do, what would be the message that we would be giving our dear soldiers?  What would happen to their morale if they saw a list in Monitor or Vision or any other paper of their fallen comrades just mentioned just like that or debated in Parliament just like that?

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you the speaker for giving way for me to give this information.  In order to support his argument, I wanted to inform him that it would also be very necessary at the time of deployment to specify from which districts the soldiers who are going to DRC are coming so that the parents can follow their children properly.

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Thank you very much Hon. Obiga Kania.  That is precisely my point.  Mr. Speaker, my point is that we are not here to promote, encourage, give support to the enemy to know it hurt you so much, to know that you have lost so many people, to know that a certain company or certain battalion no longer has a commander.  I think the practice that has been going on is adequate.  It is true we should be regularly informed.  But I do not think that it would be appropriate to debate, announce, parade the names of our fallen comrades.  I thank you.

MS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. We the movers were approached by different Ministers about this particular problem of giving information about the soldiers who die in this conflict.  First of all, I want to clarify two things.  One, this amendment takes it and assumes and I believe assumes correctly that UPDF always informs the next of kin of soldiers who die in battle.  We have assumed and I believe that it happens that next of kin is the first to be alerted.  Now UPDF also as a matter of accountability tells the public about the death of Ugandans and this is done through the press.  The UPDF is contacted by the press and is obliged to tell the public about Ugandans who have died defending Ugandan lives.  What has happened in the recent past is that the press comes out with conflicting information about what has happened.  

Members should recall what happened after Kisangani 1.  We got at least five different accounts of our soldiers who died in Kisangani one; coming from even different officials and different newspapers and radio stations.  What Parliament wants is an authoritative account of what has happened to our soldiers.  This does not have to happen before next of kin are alerted.  It is assumed that next of kin are alerted first.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, many ordinary people especially very poor rural people have difficulty interacting with government departments particularly the security services.  Even when you go to a mere hospital, you find rural people really feeling very uncomfortable and not being treated very nicely by medical practitioners.  When they come before security agencies, this interaction becomes even more difficult.  I have been approached by people from my constituency to intervene on their behalf with the army.  Even last week when we were debating this motion, one officer who died from my constituency, I went to Mbuya to meet the family there and I a Member of Parliament had difficulty entering the gates of Mbuya military hospital!  

This information is useful to Members of Parliament who want to be helpful to their constituents in such a time of need, in such a time when they have to travel from the remote village maybe to reach a barracks where they have never stepped. They may need the intervention of their Member of  Parliament.  

So when we were talking with the Ministers, they expressed concern that maybe they do not wish to alarm the public about heavy losses. In the spirit of wanting to compromise, we thought that we can make an amendment such that the language reads that Parliament will be given information about losses incurred. That way, the Minister can catch this information in the best possible way but making sure that there is some accountability to Parliament about the death of Ugandans abroad.  So Mr. Speaker, we want regular accountability.  

We do not want merely the word regular.  We want a monthly report for as long as our troops are in Congo.  So it would read like this Mr. Speaker, that we would request the Minister of Defence to give to Parliament a monthly account of the situation of UPDF troops deployed in the DRC including information about losses suffered.  This would give room for the Minister to present this information to Parliament in the best possible way but at the same time ensure that he knows that he must account to Parliament for every Ugandan who should die abroad.  This is a basic requirement in any democracy and I want to inform the General who is here that if it is not true in the history of Ugandan army, it better start to be, that when you see other democracies (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Now, let us do this, I think Hon. (Interruption)

MS. BYANYIMA: Whenever somebody dies, the country is informed and we salute the person.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us move in an orderly manner. There is an amendment moved on the Floor.  I would wish to have that amendment in writing so that it can be read out to Hon. Members.  Now, from the way, Hon. Winnie Byanyima, you are talking, you seem to be moving yet another amendment although you have not yet formally done so.  You are speaking to it before you have formally moved it.  Now, let us have the first amendment which was moved by the Hon. Elly Tumwine.  Let me read out an amendment which was seconded and the Mover has spoken to it. Your amendment is as follows; Request the Minister of Defence to regularly report to Parliament on UPDF presence in the DRC.  That is your amendment.  It was seconded by the Hon. Rwakoojo and you spoke to your amendment.  That is what we are debating and (Interruption)

MR. NASASIRA: You see, Mr. Speaker, when you read out the second resolution so that we can pronounce ourselves on it, Hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine moved an amendment but listening to the contribution of Hon. Winnie Byanyima, where you were trying to give guidance, she was moving another amendment.  Maybe, there will be no need to pronounce ourselves, we could eliminate two first and look at the amendment since resolution two presented by the petitioner is no longer their proposed resolution because that proposed resolution has changed.

THE SPEAKER:  Let us deal with this and see whether it is acceptable.  If you reject it, then we will move to some other amendment.  Can you debate it please?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, what the Hon. Byanyima read out and what is being read out by Hon. Tumwine is so close that trying to pronounce ourselves on any one of them will be really dragging us.  Why do the two of them not just step aside and come with one because they are already very close to each other.  It is so close.  Now, I am even having difficulty in knowing where the difference is so I think that they should just sort themselves out.  Why do you not give them a chance, sir, and they do that?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga, you are completely right but do not forget that these resolutions started off by the Movers meeting some other people to try and come up with a common position.  Now, we have noticed that, that common position actually has never been there and that is why people are coming with different amendments including the Ministers, the Movers and so on and so forth.  So, let us deal with one amendment, one by one, but I am prepared to grant permission if what you are suggesting is going to come out, out of a meeting between the Movers of the motion and the Mover of the amendment, alright?  Would you like to pursue it that way or we deal with one amendment by one?

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Speaker, I am -(Interrutption)

THE SPEAKER:  Are you prepared to hammer out a compromise?

MAJ. KAZOORA:  No, sir.  I am just seeking guidance because I do not buy Hon. Byanyimas amendment.  I stand - and I am one of the petitioners  I stand for the original resolution and I want to speak for it and I also want to oppose the Hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwines motion, if you allow me sir.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, speak to it then.  Debate it.

MAJ. KAZOORA Mr. Speaker, could I be protected from Hon. Karuhanga who is not even  (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let me tell you this, there are no two motions on the Floor, alright?  There is the original one, there is this amendment which is being promoted.  That is what we are now talking about.

MAJ. KAZOORA Mr. Speaker, I am speaking for the original 

THE SPEAKER:  No, we are - Hon. Kazoora, the procedure is this, you have the original resolution.  An amendment has been moved, speak to oppose the amendment so that you convince Hon. Members to uphold the original resolution, are we together?

MAJ. KAZOORA Mr. Speaker, I am entirely with you and I am saying, sir, that I am opposing Hon. Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwines amendment, because Mr. Speaker, when soldiers are being recruited, they are recruited on the recommendations of LCs, Local Councils of the villages, through their gombololas up to the district and there is even district quota.  So, I would imagine, sir, that when they die, the people who recommended them should know that the people went there, this is what happened.  Mr. Speaker, - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Are you willing to take that information?  Proceed.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of information.  Thank you Hon. Kazoora for giving way.  I agree with Hon. Kazzora on the issue of recruitment.  The information I want to give to this House and the reason why the Constitution found it necessary to have army representatives in Parliament is to always give you information on issues that deal with the army, so that you are all informed on the procedures of the army.  The information I would like to give is, once you have been recruited in the army, you follow the regulations of the army and the army manages, administers the army in its own way in accordance to its own laws and its regulations.  

On the issue of how to handle a dead soldier, I would like this House and the public to know that it is the obligation of the army to inform the people concerned; the next of kin, the LCs and preferably even the Member of Parliament from that constituency where possible and it has been done.  But, on the question of time when to do it; is the prerogative of the army, because the army must take into considerations on when and what to say at a particular time.  Many considerations are at stake. Hon. Members, the information I am giving is on how do we deal with soldiers who die?  One consideration, which this House should take into consideration is the morale of the soldiers at the frontline.  The army knows when to say; where the soldier has died and how and when to report to the relatives and the next of kin and the unit.  Now, once we start telling the army from this Parliament (Mr Ongom rose_)-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongom can you sit down please.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: So, that is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongom, you are a re-known Parliamentarian and I would like you to maintain that, can you proceed.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for protecting me.

MR. ONGOM:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker, for Hon. Babu to say that I am heckler when I have heckled nobody, including the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, I never heard him.

MR. ONGOM: I heard him (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER:  Now, can you finish your information please.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am concluding by saying that the information I am giving is that; the administration of the army including death is a prerogative of the army and I do not see anybody trying to say tell us within one day, tell us within a month, tell us now and here.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker I agree with Maj. Gen. Tumwine that the immediate relatives of the dead soldiers should first be informed that is okay. But after that this Parliament should also know about the death of our soldiers because they are called UPDF (Uganda Peoples Defence Forces).  And we are operating in democracy and this democracy is not only here in Uganda but world over.  There is no danger in the representatives of the people knowing what has happened to their soldiers.  Mr. Speaker, many soldiers die and officers; they are buried in their ancestral homes, here is a soldier being buried Maj. Patrick Kiyingi not elsewhere but in his home.  On the third page of the same paper, -(Interruption)

MRS. MPANGA: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I want to ask for clarification.  Mr. Speaker, since the speaker is also a major, I would like to be clarified  in which other country do legislators have information of who has died in the army.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Talk of any country, talk of American, talk of Britain, talk of China, talk of Tanzania, talk of everywhere.  Mr. Speaker, I was going on captain Kalezi buried at his ancestral home in Kigonya village near Luwero town, now what is so secretive about burying people who are already dead anyway and Hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine knows the Banyakole say,  Rufu kweba etagizire enshoin, omuziki tabwerabwera (if death cannot be shy to take your people why should you be shy to bury them anyway).  Mr. Speaker, why do we have Heros Day and we take it to various places in the country that these are the people and they are listed that these are the people we are remembering?  So, to me Mr. Speaker, I think it is really very appropriate that the nation knows by district and LCs where these soldiers are coming from.  And I was surprised to hear the Maj. Gen. Tumwine saying that our soldiers are deployed in Kitgum, in Gulu, in Kampala and we do not require these details why in Kasangani; that he could not see the common denominator that he adds Gulu, Kitgum and Kampala and not Kisangani.  Certainly, Kisangani is completely off our borders and we must be told. I thank you Sir.

THE SPEAKER: So, you have concluded, have you?

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Yes, Sir.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Sir.  We are talking about a nation; we are talking about defence of a country, we are talking about a military of a nation and we are talking about security considerations.  We are talking about military strategy, we are talking about accountability and, of course, I think everybody is right that this House should be given the accountability of our security forces at all times. 

 However, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the defence of this country, there are certain things in certain areas of security which we must be very careful of.  As I talk right now, Sir, there is a problem in one of the big developed countries where just a part of computer in a military got lost and a secretary for defence is being asked to resign.  Security of a nation is important; every ingredient  in that security is of utmost importance and therefore, Mr. Speaker, this Parliament must understand there are certain strategic areas of the army which must be secretive and these we can give them to Parliament in many different ways.  

We can have a closed door Session with a Committee and give them the areas that are not supposed to be public. To give the number of death in the army is giving your opponent  a chance to show your weakness. And it can also be an ammunition to show how strong they are against your army, there are certain things, when you are engaged in confrontation with another country in the army, that should not be given.

We have a law here which covers the NRA statute which comes out very clearly on the information to the next of kin and if possible to even the RCs of the area and whenever a body has been brought (Interjection)- yes, you will clarify when he comes to speak; he is going to be given a chance.  I am saying, you can say; ah! I  want to finish my point, I am saying, that the LC 1s of the area whenever a body of a soldier is brought he is informed to an extent that a gun salute is given to those heros who have been buried in this country.  And the LCs of the area are there, I would like, therefore, to request very strongly through you, Mr. Speaker, that this Parliament becomes aware that when you are talking about a military that special affirmative action should be given to things that give strength and confidence to our army. If it means that certain information could be given to this Parliament in a closed door session, I have no problem; but when you open some of the secrets of our army, it is not done anywhere.  You cannot for example start telling everybody the strength of your army. You cannot even go telling people who have died and who is coming in and who is going out.  I think it is important that the defence of this country becomes paramount and every Member of this Parliament -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you are now getting engaged in general debate on security matters.

CAPT. BABU:  I am.

THE SPEAKER:  We have an amendment here.  I would like you to look to the amendment.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Speaker, when others were talking, they even talked about burying the dead, they were talking about mortuary,  they were talking about other things, I did not hear anybody heckle them.  I am supporting our -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Babu, that did not come from your colleagues, it came from me.  Right?  And it is my job to guide the debate.  I am saying that let us not open a general debate on security.  General debate, we have an amendment here so you talk in reference to this amendment.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Speaker, I apologise to you but, if I read the amendment, it clearly states to request the Minister of Defence to regularly report to Parliament the presence of UPDF in the DRC and leave out other information that could create problems for our military. That is why I brought in other drifts why those should not be included in the resolution. That is why I brought the bigger drifts and the big picture of what a military situation should be especially to a nation like ours.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NDEEZI ALEX (Representative of Persons with Disabilities):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I almost got tempted to agree to support the amendments or the proposal by Hon. Byanyima, because it is moved in the spirit of accountability and transparency.  The principles are strongly given, I would certainly support the amendments, but I am worried.  Why am I worried?  It seems we are about to fall into a trap of more propaganda. It seems we are putting UPDF into a trap.  Why?  If you say only Uganda reports its casualties, at the same time you do not inform other parties or other countries in the conflicts not to report their casualties, this means the ground is not levelled.  We have heard all situations whereby Uganda loses 10 soldiers but our enemy propagandists say we have lost 100; because they say we have lost 100, our people get scared, our country gets scared.  So, if we are saying UPDF must report its losses, I feel we must also be sure or support that other people in the conflict also report their losses.  Otherwise if we say we are reporting our own losses while other people are not reporting their losses, we are simply helping other countries and we are not doing a service to our country.  So, Mr. Speaker, I feel sorry -(Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA:  Information.  I wish to inform the Hon. Member holding the Floor that what he is saying that the ground will not be level if one country is reporting its losses and another country is not reporting any losses that the ground is not level.  I just wanted to inform him that so far since these conflicts started, not one soldier has in fact been injured or killed in Rwanda as far as the information from that country is concerned.

MR. NDEEZI:  This is very good information because it strengthens my points.  Now, we are not going to leave UPDF naked, we are not going to hand over our army to die any more to propagandists.  If we agree to support this idea, we shall be saying accountability is good, transparency is good, but if this threatens the security of our country, then there is no way we can say we are legislating to put our country into a trap, to put UPDF into a trap.  So, I feel sorry, I am unable to support whereby we must always give information on whatever happens on UPDF.

MS. EGUNYU:  Thank you Hon. Ndeezi for giving way.  I am seeking a clarification and at the same time giving some information which I find very pertinent.  Mr. Speaker, what I want to point out to this Hon. House is that, if there is already a statute, a law in place which deals with how deaths in the army are handled, then I would like to know what the practical impact of this resolution will be, because it would appear this resolution seeks to amend an Act, a law which is already in place which legally is not obtainable.  In which case, if you want to amend a law, which is already in place which handles the deaths of the soldiers, we would have to move and make a law and not a resolution.  So, I am seeking clarification and guidance on that matter, and at the same time I would like this House to take a note.

MR. NDEEZI:  That is a good information.  Now, my last point, Mr. Speaker is on enforcement. If 100 soldiers die in the field and we are simply told they were 5, how can we as MPs go to verify the case?  I would think if we are making a resolution or a recommendation it should be practical.  It is very hard to come here in Parliament and I am told we lost 100 men, and if I do not feel comfortable, there is no way I can come down at the frontline to count exactly the number of people who died or who are killed in war.  So, if we are saying we need to know losses, the movers of this motion should as well tell us how they are going to verify the case, or how they are going to ensure that this actually works. Hope they will be ready to go at the battle field to count who could have died, and give the exact losses.  Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I do not know whether it is justifiable to dwell on this amendment for this long, because we still have so many other issues to go through.  This amendment is really simple. It requests the Minister of Defence to regularly report to Parliament on UPDF presence in the DRC.  That is the amendment.  It is amending that operative paragraph II.  Now, I think let us pronounce ourselves on this and we move forward.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER:  Operative paragraph III "Requests the Minister of Foreign Affairs to give to Parliament a monthly progress report on the implementation of the Lusaka Peace Accord".  Now, before you say aye or nay, will you remember that somewhere in the preamble paragraph, we had handled the question of whether the legal instrument we are really talking about is referred to as Lusaka Peace Accord or as Lusaka Peace Agreement and I think it is  what is its full name?  We were given the information already but it is just a reminder.  What is the instrument called?

MR. KAVUMA:  Yes, Sir, thank you Mr. Speaker.  It is called the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and it is different from the Lusaka Peace Accord.  The Lusaka Peace Accord relates to the situation in Angola, while the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement relates to the situation in the Great Lakes region.  So, they are fundamentally different and it is very prudent Sir, that we use the technical name that belongs to the agreement that we are talking about.

THE SPEAKER:  I am just reminding Hon. Members, it was pointed out the way you have done and we pronounce ourselves on that.  I am merely saying that this would now be a consequential amendment.  But, maybe I put the question to request the Minister of Foreign Affairs to give to Parliament a monthly progress report on the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  I would like to move that we remove the word 'monthly' in the same spirit and say, 'request the Minister of Foreign Affairs to regularly give to Parliament a progressive report on the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement' so that we give the Minister the leeway. If he wants to report once two years, three years, he can do that.

THE SPEAKER: Is that an issue now?  You see, my understanding  - unless somebody is being sarcastic, but I thought he is merely saying, at least Hon. Maj. Kazoora is saying, instead of fixing a definite period, let us leave under the umbrella of regularly.  That is what he said.

MS. KIRASO BIRUNGI: Mr. Speaker, I did not want us to put something redundant  here, because if we say, regular reports and we do not specify it means the Minister will be free to decide what is regular and what is not regular to him. I would like to propose that we leave this monthly, because I do not see any harm in us getting the information.

MR. PINTO:  Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, as a matter of procedure, when Hon. Maj. Kazoora rose to give what is supposed to be an amendment, he did not seek leave to make this amendment and when he made his pronouncements, he was not seconded.  So, I propose that we stick to the original.

THE SPEAKER:  He was seconded by his neighbour, by the Hon. Winnie Byanyima. You are debating Hon. Kazooras amendment?

MR. MWANDHA:   Exactly, Sir.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, proceed.

MR.  MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, I think this will be in light with the amendment which we have just passed, which referred to regular reports of what is going on in the DRC and I think to fix it on a monthly basis, would really not tally very well with the previous amendment which we have just passed.  I  therefore, would like to support the proposal by Hon. Kazoora.

THE SPEAKER:  Shall I put the question?  Okay Hon. Karuhanga, we will hear you.  There is an amendment on the Floor.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I am speaking with a lot of experience on the contacts we have with Ministry of Foreign Affairs and how easy it is to deal with them.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is the Ministry, which handles matters outside Uganda.  Unless Parliament gives support and active support through this resolution to get information from the Ministry, it is very difficult to find those Ministers. I want to ask the House to accept this monthly report on the Ceasefire Agreement  on Lusaka as long as it lasts, because this is not a  thing which is based on regular reporters, if you are going to be in Congo as foreign policy for ever.  

This is something.  We are there temporarily and we want a time arrangement known by everybody in the House that the Minister of Foreign Affairs is going to inform Parliament, maybe through its relevant Committee or through the House, but it is going to inform Parliament on a monthly basis. But saying regular, that is like deleting it, because we regularly get information.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Point of information.  Thank you Hon. Elly Karuhanga for giving way.  I moved this just for purposes of consistency. From what we have just passed above that the Minister for Defence gives a regular report.  If it is very difficult to get the Minister for Foreign Affairs, how easy is it to get that one of Defence.  Now, I would like to bring to the attention of this House, Mr. Speaker, with your permission   (Interjection) - I am giving information to Hon. Karuhanga, so that when he is debating he knows how the public looks at this House. 

This is a commentary, Sir, in the Saturday New Vision of June 17th and the heading was; DRC issue dominates House, ends with lousy resolutions.  Now, it seems the Congo is a subject that just will not go away.   Less than a month ago, President Museveni interacted with MPs about the issue and I am quite sure will stay on the Table for quite a long time.  The debate this week again demonstrated that apart from letting off steam, the Congo issue is too complicated  for our MPs many of whom hardly do no research before taking to the Floor.  Ugandans should not expect any serious resolution come next week and thereafter, business will continue as usual.  

Even Byanyima, the Mover expressed similar sentiments when she charged that Parliament had become a rubber stamp.  Byanyimas remarks were in reference to the lame resolutions that had been adapted by the time of adjournment.  She should have known better right from the beginning.  There is no way we can run away from this commentary, Hon. Karuhanga. When we make one Resolution just above and we come down and make a different one in terms of time, let us leave the question of time out and give the Ministers leeway to report when they feel like.  I thank you Sir.

THE SPEAKER: NPC, are you giving information to the Hon. Karuhanga?

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Yes, I wanted to inform him.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, he was on the Floor.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I wanted to inform Hon. Karuhanga and generally on the proposed amendment, that the Lusaka Agreement is time bound in various activities.  There is a D-day which was re-defined, and two weeks after that D-day this will happen, three weeks this will happen, four weeks that will happen until something like six months.  It is important that we get regular or monthly reports as to how the performance is taking place so that Parliament can be put abreast with the Executive. Maybe through it will be possible to suggest a more realistic programme for progressing the work under the Lusaka process.  I just wanted to inform the House to that effect. I prefer monthly.  I would therefore like to recommend monthly.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, Hon. Elly Karuhanga told the House that Ministers of Foreign Affairs are very busy people.  Indeed they are.  And if you fix them to a regular tight schedule of one month, it just does not work.  And at the same time regular may even mean shorter periods of report than even one month.  If the Minister of Foreign Affairs realised that there was important information to give Parliament, he should not wait for a whole month because Parliament told him to wait for a month before he can report again.  Therefore Mr. Speaker, I think it is only reasonable that we should not restrict the Minister of Foreign Affairs to a tight schedule of one month.  Let the Minister use his discretion to report to us even for shorter period on the basis of the information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Sir, can I seek clarification?  Would it be wrong if we said report regularly, but in any case not exceeding one month from one report to the next (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Now Hon. Karuhanga, can you finish please? Finish your submission.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Okay Sir.  Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful to the Hon. Members who have enriched our debate.  But you know, if some people really feel that the Resolution has been watered down in the previous paragraphs and they therefore feel that the best way to go about (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. I think nobody has said that.  What the Hon. Maj. Kazoora said was that he was moving that amendment for consistence.  He may have had other feelings, but that is what he said.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, Hon. Kazoora told us and he was relying on information from a Newspaper which was saying that this is going to be a lousy Resolution; that Congo will not go away, that we are only letting off steam, that we do not do research in what we are talking about, and that the resolution is not serious and we are a rubber stamp.  You know to me, if this paper article which he was reading was anything to go by, it was really to say that therefore let us not as a Parliament put a time where we can get a report.  Let the Minister choose his discretion, after all we are a rubber stamp.  So in my view Mr. Speaker (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, he is not taking your information that is my understanding.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I do not mind taking her information Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Alright, then so indicate.

MR. KARUHANGA:   I do not mind.

MS BYANYIMA: Point of information. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I just wanted to confirm to Hon. Karuhanga that how I understand the motion of Hon. Kazoora, he is saying that the public may accuse us of being spineless, but at least let them not accuse us of being inconsistent. At least let us show that we can have a stand on just doing what we are obliged to do by the Executive.  But not to be accused of also being contradicting ourselves, suiting ourselves in the  let us show consistency and accept spinelessness. (Applause).Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KARUHANGA:  So in other words, let us show consistence in having no spine.  But what I want to point out (Interruption)

Ms EGUNYU: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I have listened quite very patiently and I have heard references to the press and how they have judged this Parliament in their commentary.  I would like to be clarified whether or not the standard of judging the performance of this Parliament is going to be the press. Whether or not, it is the press which is going to tell us what the people think instead of us the Members of Parliament seeking these views from our people. That is the way we can correct that erroneous information which is being created and part of it is being created by the press and then we voice it here and it goes into our Hansard that we are spineless, yet in fact we are not spineless.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, I really request you to make your point.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I am winding up.  I just want to make one point, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as far as I am concerned, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs in as far as the Lusaka Cease-fire Agreement is concerned, are attending meetings concerned with the Lusaka Cease-fire. One of them is the chairman of the political committee and is almost full time either in Lusaka or in New York.  The other one is the Minister of Foreign Affairs who conducts international affairs, Hon. Mubanda.  You have noted how infrequent the Hon. Minister and the First Deputy Prime Minister is in this House, because he is attending to all our other matters regarding Foreign Affairs.  Put a Resolution and leave them to say, when you find the time is not realistic. 

In the case of the Minister of Defence, Hon. Kavuma is not someone who is going to be travelling, he is always here with us, and he is always in the House.  And when we talk about regular we mean almost weekly, we mean as often as is practicable.  It is really not being inconsistent.  In fact, once we use the word monthly towards the Minister of Foreign Affairs who is difficult to find, then the word regular is described and understood to mean more often than monthly.  

So in my view we are not being inconsistent whatsoever.  However, if that was the case, why was an amendment not made in the first one to say, let us define regular"? But it should not stop us from asking the Ministry of Foreign Affairs from describing what is going on.  And these meetings we are asking for briefings.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, you are taking far too long. The point you have made is, let us have a definite one month for the Minister of Foreign Affairs to report as opposed to the amendment proposed by the hon. Kazoora of regular report.

MR. KARUHANGA: And we can make it clear Mr. Speaker that, when we mean regular in the case of Defence, it is more regular than monthly.  Without having to move the Resolution that it is culturally understood.  Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Now I am putting the question on the motion of the Hon. Kazoora.   I will repeat the question.  I think you know Hon. Kazooras amendment.   I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

THE SPEAKER: The next one; Operative paragraph (4), urge the government to organise and orderly withdraw of UPDF troops from the Congo interior and concentrate them on both sides of our common border with DRC.  I read again; urge the government to organise an orderly withdraw of UPDF troops from the Congo interior and concentrate them on both sides of our common border with DRC.

MAG. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that this whole paragraph be deleted.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MEMBERS: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MAG. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the content of this paragraph which deals with deploy here, deploy there, move here, withdraw from this Parliament, when our soldiers and our officers and our commanders are spending all their time and sleepless nights ensuring that they move according to what is in the interest of this country and what is pro viding the security, the role that they are provided for in the Constitution. For Parliament whose role should be to pass laws and also support the troops wherever they are in a patriotic way, to try to take decisions, in my opinion, without information from the ground on what is happening, is really uncalled for.  And I would rather let the people concerned who are staking their lives, not their voices alone, in ensuring security of this country do that.

Really the relationship between Parliament and the public and the politicians and the army should take into considerations sentiments of people, who are at this time in a situation they have been defending, they have been working for; they have been strategizing for, for the interest of this country.  The strategy of the security of this country, is more than just what we like emotionally or politically.  It is deeper than that. So I really like to move that we delete this paragraph.  I beg to move.

MR. WAPAKABULO (Mbale Municipality, Mbale) Thank you Mr. Speaker, for giving me a chance to contribute.  I will support the deletion for different reasons.  There is a Lusaka Agreement, the Cease-fire Agreement called Lusaka, and it set out a number of things.  Among these things, are procedures and a timetable for withdraw from the DRC of what they call foreign troops, which includes Uganda troops. 

Only this week the UN security council while debating a motion upon a resolution moved by France, that Uganda and Rwanda withdraw from the DRC immediately and in any case not later than the 15th of October this year, in its wisdom realised a number of things.  They realised that inspite of the unfortunate Kisangini situations Uganda, Rwanda, Zimbabwe and other forces in Congo perform another role and that role is actually peace keeping.  If you go to places like Bunia, Benni, go to Banaliya, you can go to all other places where there either Zimbabwe troops or Uganda troops or Rwandase troops they are actually, apart from the unfortunate incident of Kisangini, doing a peace keeping jobs. This they will do until the UN is able to bring in troops to replace them.  

It is on that basis that the Security Council said the withdrawal of Ugandan and Rwandese troops shall be, not peculiar but must be part of the overall Lusaka process. This way all foreign withdrawal will be in accordance with the Lusaka Agreement and that was decided this week.  So if we pass a Resolution saying that we should withdraw immediately unilaterally to our borders, we shall be in fact encouraging the State of Uganda to breach an internationally agreed position and block the agreement. For those reasons I support the deletion. I thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala) Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have been very quiet this afternoon because I wanted to make my contribution on this particular Resolution.  One thing we should all accept is that, Uganda is an independent nation.  We as Parliament have, with reference to Article 210 and Article 124, powers and real powers to get concerned about any deployment of forces outside Uganda.

In this regard, Mr. Speaker, if the petition had not been moved we would not have reached this extent. We are now realising the powers we have after moving the petition.  So we do not fully trust the Front Bench that they can do anything for us. Because of this, Mr. Speaker, I still maintain that it is important as people who were elected by the people to express concern over the deployment of our forces in the Congo. 

What Hon. Wapakabulo is saying, is an international matter, which is still distant. We, as the people of Uganda deem it absolutely unnecessary that our forces should stay in the Congo and if so that alone is enough to demonstrate our concerns.  Whether those people react in October or November one thing is that as of now the people of Uganda, the taxpayers are convinced that there is no reason why we should stay on in the Congo.  We have died enough, we have lost lives and the time is now to express practical concern that we get concerned.  I, therefore, still support the Resolution as it stands.

MS. BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara) Thank you Mr. Speaker. Initially when we drafted this paragraph we were expressing a feeling that our troops have gone into Congo with the intention of defending us from the ADF, but over time have gotten themselves into other missions. Missions that have resulted in the tragedy we have seen and we were trying to call the government back to the drawing board to take care of our interests first and not to risk the lives of our children.  In order to frame it well, we have -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, I wanted clarification by the Hon. Member holding the floor on which other missions?  So that she clarifies what other missions, for purposes of record?

MS BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I am talking about what has been described as a stupid war.  We have not been able to relate it with our interests in any way. We have tried to speak with the executive.  Yesterday, I consulted with Hon. Kategaya and he gave as Minister Foreign Affairs, gave me some language that could be acceptable.  After that, he asked me to see Hon. Mubanda.  I did go to Hon. Mubanda's office; we spent there an hour and also fine-tuned that same position.   Following that today, I spoke to yet another Minister over the same issue of fine tuning this and indeed we had come up with some language that could express this need for some of us on the back bench.  But Mr. Speaker, I found it very difficult when my colleagues and me as a backbencher are trying to express a message to the executive arm.  And when you make so much progress but somewhere out of the blue, a senior member of UPDF who should be under the executive arm comes and speaks against what the executive arm have been building with the back benchers - (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN.  TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the Hon. Member holding the floor to just refer to me as a senior member of UPDF and question my participation and contribution in this Parliament, as if I am not here as a Member of Parliament by all the rights the Constitution put in place?  And by not contributing in accordance with the procedures and laws of this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, according to the rules of procedure, you are supposed to refer to one another as Hon. Member and my good friend that is what we are supposed to do Hon. Winnie Byanyima.

MISS BYANYIMA: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  In Runyankole we say ngu kogamba kainami omuhorogubakubi.  That when you talk about bent objects a panga gets annoyed.  I did not name anybody Mr. Speaker.   I did not name anybody.  I just mentioned that individual.  Mr. Speaker, I am saying that it would help this House very much if the executive could take a common stand.  Otherwise it is very hard for backbenchers to harmonise with a group that does not take one position and stay to it as they are supposed to by the Constitution.

So Mr. Speaker, in view of what I am witnessing, that it is very, very difficult to call for defence policy accountability, foreign policy accountability in this House even when we are burying children in tens, in hundreds; it is impossible for this Parliament to tell the government that this is how we would like to see our children deployed.  It is a sad moment for me.  I recall thirty, forty years ago; this Parliament was there.  People who sat here and failed to talk honestly to the government were swallowed up by the appeals that followed.

Today, hardly any is alive to tell the story.  I hope history will not judge us that harshly.  I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, say that I support the deletion of this amendment and any others because I lay my hands down we are defeated, we shall never be able to ask the foreign policy and the defence policy to be accountable to this Parliament. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, first I want to oppose the deletion of this amendment.  In my honest view, the whole purpose of this resolution; the whole purpose of our petition, and I am a Petitioner, was to see whether Parliament can speak with one voice. Whether Parliament can tell our executive, the people who are managing the affairs of our army, to try and use everything possible in their power: their initiative, their imagination, their contacts with international community, through the Lusaka Agreement, through our partners and donors and friends world-wide to get our troops back from Congo.  It is in the light of that, the day when Kisangani three broke our back.

We are very happy that UPDF, under our government, have moved out of Kisangani.  We would like to see more than that.  We as a legislature, would like to say and I am taking the words of Hon. Wapakabulo who gave us information about an orderly withdrawal, which is definite, we cannot delete something which is already in line with the Lusaka Agreement.  We are also reiterating that we need an orderly withdrawal from Congo.  We want the Congolese people to know that we were in Congo in order to defend our interests.  That we were in Congo and we are now peace keepers but we are not in Congo for ever and we must move -(Interruption)

MR. EKANYA: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I would like Hon. Elly Karuhanga to clarify whether UPDF withdrew from Kisangani simply because Parliament or government had talked or it was a result of a threat for sanction by the UN and the donor community? Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Ah my good friend Youth Ekanya, is like me a backbencher.  I cannot clarify on matters, which are not within my ambit of responsibility.  What I know is that UPDF has indeed withdrawn from Kisangani.  There are many reasons which might have brought this about.  It could have been just the threat of sanctions. It could have been anything, but the Minister in-charge of the withdrawals could probably inform this House.  And I am glad he is up on his two legs.

MR KAVUMA: I thank you very much Mr. Speaker and Hon. Karuhanga.  Sir, the information I want to give is that the plan to demilitarise Kisangani was taken long before the UN discussed the resolution which they passed, which resolution came along with some indication that a consideration could be made to apply sanctions to Uganda and Rwanda.  So Mr. Speaker, I want to assure all the members that we had already taken a position that Kisangani should be demilitarised and that meant that we should withdraw there and we are moving in accordance with that plan. We have finished with that phase.  We are going on with phase II of the general demilitarization from Kisangani sir.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you.  I am grateful to that and therefore, Mr. Speaker, for not wanting to take a long time, let me read what I understand this motion to really to mean.

MR. NDEGE: Thank you my brother.  I think No. 3 says that the Minister will tell us what has happened with Lusaka Agreement.  This four is redundant because you will be telling us where these troops are moving from or they are here in accordance with the Lusaka Agreement. It looks as if it is a reputation of what we have already decided upon.  So, I would rather request my bother to agree to delete.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, that really was not information; the Hon. Member was debating.  My understanding of this Resolution is as follows: Urge the Government to organise an orderly withdrawal of UPDF troops.  Now, orderly withdrawal, in my view, would mean the orderly withdrawal within the Lusaka Agreement.  The motion we had seen, which Hon. Byanyima was referring to, which had been synchronised by Hon. Kategaya and Hon. Mubanda, and which I have shared with Hon. Mubanda and others, was to include the words, under the Lusaka Agreement, urge Government to organise an orderly withdrawal, which in my view would suffice and maintain our position.  We should not be hard to say that we are deleting a Resolution like this.  So, I am proposing and I am seeking the permission of the Mover for deletion  the Hon. Tumwine  to accept an amendment where we say, -(Interruptions)

MR. NDEEZI: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I also thank Hon. Karuhanga for giving way.  I wish you could help me, I have a small problem.  I am happy you are also Chairman of our Committee in charge of Foreign Affairs. With me is a document entitled, A Resolution 1304, on the situation on the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Paragraph 4(a) reads as follows: hat Uganda and Rwanda which have violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of Congo to withdraw all the Forces from the territory of the Democratic Republic of Congo without further delay.  Now, the clarification I am seeking is, if we are saying that we are completely cancelling this recommendation on withdrawal, even without retaining the word, withdraw, what are we going to tell our friends in other countries.  What message is going to send?  Because I am afraid if this Parliament completely cancels the term, withdraw, people may think that we have endorsed our complete stay in Congo.  May be you could help me.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA: I really appreciate my hon. friends contribution on this, and it is in line with exactly what I am talking about.  So, if the Hon. Mover of deletion, the Maj. Gen. Tumwine, could please accept our amended version, I would appreciate it. I am requesting his gentle self as an officer and gentleman, to accept to withdraw the word, deletion and accept our amendment which really we had gone a long way to synchronise with the Front Bench. The amendment is that under the Lusaka Agreement, we urge the Government to organise orderly withdrawal of UPDF troops from the Congo.  Where they deploy them in Uganda, we do not mind. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are you moving a formal amendment?

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes, Sir, I am moving this amendment with the hope that Maj. Gen. Tumwine has agreed with me and it is not going to be difficult.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to draw the attention of Hon. Tumwine to what the Hon. Karuhanga is proposing.  Is it acceptable to you to get married or you want us to vote on this one?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, the Lusaka Agreement was signed by our Leaders before Parliament talked about it here and discussed it and urge the Government.   The Government is committed, according to the Lusaka Agreement.  There is nowhere where the Government or anybody has said; the troops are not going to withdraw in accordance with the Lusaka Agreement.  What is the purpose of this Paragraph?  I could insist on deletion.

MR. PINTO: Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, under the circumstances that there has been a very good proposal from the Chairman of the Committee of Foreign Affairs on the position that the Movers had gone a long way to harmonise with the Front Bench, and the present situation now, may I under this procedure request that you put the question?  I would like to move a motion that a question be put on Hon. Tumwines amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Was it a motion that the question be put on Hon. Tumwines amendment?

MR. PINTO: Yes, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, my procedural problem is, we cannot vote on Hon. Karuhangas amendment. We start with the amendment of Hon. Tumwine so that if it deletes the whole thing, there is nothing to amend.

THE SPEAKER: I will put a question on the Hon. Tumwines amendment, namely, to delete the entire operative paragraph 4.

(Question put and negatived)

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I move that my amendment also be put to question.  That is to say that, Under the Lusaka Agreement, urge the Government to organise an orderly withdrawal of UPDF troops from the Democratic Republic of Congo.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MEMBERS: It is seconded.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Mr. Speaker, I have a problem with wording.  This House has no competence under Lusaka Agreement to urge.  You cannot say, Under Lusaka Agreement, we urge the House You say, This House urges the Government to organise an orderly withdrawal in accordance with Lusaka Agreement.

MR. KARUHANGA: I accept the elderly advice.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have it please?  Hon. Wapakabulo, can you read it again; we have not captured it here.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Well, I had not written it anywhere, but I can try, that, This House urges the Government to organise an orderly withdrawal of  UPDF from the Democratic Republic of Congo in accordance with Provisions of the Lusaka Cease Fire Agreement.

Now the beauty about it Sir, if I may take this chance  - (Interruption) is that this House will have also added its voice to those pushing for observance of the Lusaka cease-fire agreement.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.  We have this amendment.  Can you proceed?

MR. AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia): Mr. Speaker, I agree with those who have spoken on this Clause as being very central to the motion but at the same time I support those who are conscious particularly with regard to other legislatures like the UN.  Here Mr. Speaker I want to make a proposal and perhaps seek clarification along the way.  We as a member of the United Nations are bound, regardless of what Hon. Lukyamuzi said, we are bound by the Resolutions of the Security Council, which I believe was subsequent to the Lusaka agreement.  

This is an opportunity that I would seek and urge my Colleagues that we acknowledge and confirm the Security Council's decision on the matter.  Yes.  Otherwise there is a threat behind that call by the Security Council that all foreign troops in the Congo must leave by the 15th October.  Well this is my view, you may reject it as a sovereign Parliament but I submit that there are more sovereign Parliaments in the World. And Mr. Speaker, my proposal is this: That while acknowledging that we have got to conform with the Lusaka agreement, we should also acknowledge somewhere in a word or two about the decision of the Security Council.  But instead of using the word 'orderly', I would call it 'speedy'.  Speedy withdrawal of troops because I do not imagine an army which is going to withdraw in a disorderly manner. We have been given a time limit, which we have got to respect namely the 15th October - (Interruption)

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Information if you do not mind.  The stipulation of 15th October in the French text was rejected by the Security Council in favour of a reference to the timetable in accordance with Lusaka cease-fire agreement generally without reference to a specific date.  So 15th is not there.

MR. AWORI:  It makes it even easier for me Mr. Chairman, to support what the Security Council had said in respect of us which we must find true.  But whatever Lusaka in detail says, my only call is this; that we do ask for a speedy withdrawal of our troops even ahead of what the Lusaka agreement anticipates.  This, I am trying to capture the mood in the House because from a position why we have said that our army must withdraw from there immediately to a position where we find that orderly withdrawal is requested.  I only put in the word speedy instead of orderly.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

THE SPEAKER: The amendment or - it really comes to the same thing.  It is an amendment, you delete and you substitute.  As proposed by the Hon. Wapakabulo reads as follows:  "This House urges the Government to organise and an orderly withdrawal of the UPDF troops from the DRC in accordance with Lusaka cease-fire agreement" - (Interruption)

MAJ. KATIRIMA:  Point of procedure.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  In the history of the UPDF, I do not know a time when we have withdrawn in a disorderly manner.  So, why are we bringing this word "orderly withdrawal from Congo" Is it because Parliament is worried that we can do it helter-skelterlly?  Is it because we have a record of withdrawing in a fashion that caused discontent to the people of Uganda?  I want your guidance Mr. Speaker, so that when we are going to vote on this motion, we should only be answering the question of withdrawal and not the manner, which I think is not a mandate of this House to pronounce itself on.

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not pronounce an amendment straight away?

MAJ. KATIRIMA:  I wish to propose an amendment to the motion that in the way it has been by Hon. Wapakabulo, we just leave out the word "orderly"

THE SPEAKER: This House urges the Government to organise withdrawal of the troops from the DRC in accordance with the Lusaka cease agreement - (Interruption) So, Hon. Wapakabulo what he is complaining about are two words 'an orderly' - an orderly, if those are deleted then he would be happy.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I have no problem with that Sir.

THE SPEAKER: This House urges the Government to organise withdrawal of the UPDF troops from the DRC in accordance with Lusaka cease-fire agreement.

MAJ. KATIRIMA:  Mr. Speaker, we should leave out the words 'to organise an orderly' all the others should remain and say; 'urges Government to withdraw from the DRC in accordance with the - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it Government withdrawing or somebody else withdrawing?

MAJ. KATIRIMA:  The UPDF to withdraw but to leave out to organise in an orderly

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katirima I am sorry I do not want to be as if I am debating.  If you say 'the Government to organise withdrawal' what is wrong with that?  The Government is the supreme authority - (Interruption)

MAJ. KATIRIMA:  I agree but the word 'orderly' should be left out.

THE SPEAKER: No, no let me read again. 'This House urges the Government to organise withdrawal of the UPDF troops from the DRC in accordance with the Lusaka cease-fire agreement' - (Interruption)

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would like to support the idea of removing 'organise' and 'orderly' because we have already the Lusaka cease-fire agreement, which is already organised, and orderly.  We are just following the steps. So what actually Government is going to do is not going to be contrary to the Lusaka peace agreement.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I will put the Question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Operative paragraph five 'urge the Government to utilise all established official channels including Parliament to promote a peaceful relationship with Rwanda. Let us have the Hon. Member for Kabarole and then we shall move on to the Hon. Elesu.

MS. KIRASO:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose that we delete this because of what we have already passed. This one seems to be redundant.  Actually I do not even see how if Parliament can not influence some of these other resolutions it can promote this peaceful relationship with Rwanda.  Mr. Speaker, I want us just to keep ourselves in the confines of the Lusaka cease fire agreement and leave some of these to the good people of UPDF to do their work.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you are proposing deletion of this?

MR. ERESU:  Mr. Speaker, in view of what my good Colleague has already stated, can you put the question.

THE SPEAKER:  Are you moving a motion?  Yes, the Hon. Member for Mbale municipality.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Thank you Sir.  As a back bencher, I would like to urge fellow back benchers to support the formulation as it is.  You see, Uganda is a country with neighbours and countries never choose neighbours.  Rwanda and Uganda will always be neighbours. Either we shall be at peace or at war.  But I think it is better to be at peace, and two Sir, nothing will replace diplomacy.  So anything that encourages interaction to talk to me is most welcome; and therefore, -(Interruption)

MS. KIRASO: Point of information.  Thank you Hon. Member Mbale municipality for accepting this information.  I wanted to remind you that a little while ago, one of our Colleagues Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine actually in his bid to water down this debate said, while some people are fighting with their bodies, some of us are just here fighting with our words. I was taken aback that is why I was proposing that we delete that and we leave the Lusaka peace accord to take its course.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Can I urge the Hon. Member for Kabarole not to view and handle state matters with a bit of anger because of what one Member has said. We must always take greater consideration and neighbourly consideration.  If it was said that we should fight instead of talk I would disagree.  I would like to urge Sir that we use every opportunity to re-build the relationships between our two countries our two peoples.  If there is misunderstanding may be in certain level of the leadership, there is nothing wrong that takes place between us as Ugandans and people of Rwanda and therefore, I would like to urge that we retain this formulation.

MR. KATURAMU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I support this resolution.  I support resolution 5 that Uganda should pursue all channels including official ones and any other in order to cement relations with our neighbour Rwanda. Everybody laments the unfortunate incidents that occurred in Kisangani.  However, viewing the traditional historic links between the peoples of Rwanda and the people of Uganda, it is pertinent that this Parliament should associate with this resolution by passing it knowing very well that Rwanda as a neighbour we shall live together in harmony for the good of our peoples.  I beg to support, Mr. Speaker.

MS KERWEGI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also stand to add my voice to my colleagues who are supporting this resolution.  Mr. Speaker, may be this Parliament has already forgotten in 1998, I think, when Hon Wapakabulo was still Speaker of this Parliament I had the opportunity together with Hon. Dr. Matovu and one staff of this Parliament under the invitation of Parliament of Rwanda to visit that country. We went to Rwanda and we were treated so well we interacted with them in fact we even met the then President Pasteur Bizimungu and they expressed concern to actually co-operate and exchange a lot of things with us.  So, I appeal to Members of Parliament to support this resolution.  It is possible to improve relations between Uganda and Rwanda through Parliament, and the whole government thank you so much.   I appeal to Members to support this resolution.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mudoola, remember the amendment was delete. That is the amendment.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:   Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I have a very big problem here when we say that peaceful relationship with Rwanda.  Are we indicating that we should be aggressive to other neighbours because for instance now we have a problem with Sudan.  Should we not pursue peaceful means with Sudan?  So really this is a big problem that we are recognising Rwanda as neighbours and peaceful with Rwanda and not with other neighbours.  So I think we should leave this resolution.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.WAPAKABULO:  Now I think Sir we would be departing if we begin opening up the resolution.  This resolution arises from specific circumstances of what took place in Kisangani between Uganda troops and Rwandase troops.  So what we are saying is, let us repair our relationship with Rwanda arising from the situation.

MS. EGUNYU:  Point of clarification.  I am seeking a clarification.

THE SPEAKER:  I have not given you the Floor Madam.  I was drawing your attention to the fact that he is giving an information.  Let him finish his information and we will see how we proceed.  I will give you the Floor Hon. Egunyu.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I was responding to the concerns expressed by Hon. Mudoola that if we restrict ourselves and mention Rwanda we are in fact declaring war on other neighbours that is not true.  I am saying the circumstances and background do not sustain a proposal that we should open up this particular paragraph to include Sudan, Tanzania and so on and so forth.  It is specific arising from Kisangani and our presence in Congo generally where we interact with Rwanda and where things went bad. We are saying, let Parliament take this opportunity to urge the executive of Uganda to take measures to ensure that we repair our relationship with Rwanda as a permanent neighbour.  That is what I am suggesting Sir.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, make your point.  You are seeking clarification.

MS EGUNYU:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is from the NPC and also drawing the attention of this House to the fact that it is not only Rwanda, which is an issue in the Congo.  But time and again we have referred to Sudan using the Congo.  Why is it that we have come out specifically to address relationships with Rwanda and not with the Sudan and yet this Parliament should be equally concerned about our relationship with Sudan, our sons who die because Sudan is supporting Kony and Kony is supporting ADF?  I want to be clarified otherwise I do not see the purpose of resolution No.5.

THE SPEAKER:  Maybe let me say this.  I understood the Hon. NPC to mean or to say and mean this that first of all the petition, out of which this motion arose was as a result of a specific matter and specifically a matter dealing with our relationship with Rwanda; the clashes, the skirmishes over there.  In fact it was prompted not by DRC as such.  But it takes it to mean it was sparked off by the skirmishes, the clashes with Rwandese troops  RPA.  Now that to me is what the Hon. NPC is saying and I thought that would answer your question.  Why deal with this specific issue, why not with Sudan, why not with Congo, why not with Rwanda altogether?  That is the point he has made.

MS EGUNYU:  Point of amendment.

THE SPEAKER:  Amendment to what?  We have an amendment on the Floor.  Either you are opposing it or you are supporting it.  You know the amendment?  The amendment is that operative paragraph 5 be deleted.  That is what this is all about.  Let me remind you.  I had given an opportunity to the Hon. Member for Kabarole and then I moved here to Hon. Mudhola and I said I will come to Hon. Okumu.  Now we are proceeding that way.  Hon. Okumu, you are on the Floor.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the motion that this operative paragraph 5 be deleted.  Mr. Speaker, Uganda has been, Uganda was, Uganda will be without us.  Rwanda was, Rwanda is, Rwanda will be without those leaders there today.  So the issue at stake Mr. Speaker is that all our neighbours, all countries bordering Uganda we must be friendly with them; not only Rwanda.  We are in the DRC because of security concerns.  We found ourselves there with Rwanda.  We disagreed and we fought.  Those disagreements some of us are not privy to them but as Parliament, we cannot legislate that we shall only be friendly to one neighbouring country.  It would be sending a wrong signal.  Mr. Speaker, I am on record in this House when we were in the DRC.  I will not repeat them.  History will read and be able to analyse what was spoken here and what has come to pass.  So Mr. Speaker, I propose that we delete this and we urge without having a resolution, our leaders to pursue peaceful neighbouring relationship with all countries.  Nebbi District for example borders DRC; the entire district.  Our presence In DRC has actually created peace and we would like that the peace that has been created be sustained.  So I urge those who have supported the deletion to sustain the deletion.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  I want to put the question on the deletion of operative paragraph 5.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Operative paragraph 6  "urge government to take advantage of the new information and communications technologies and provide accurate and timely information to the public about Ugandas involvement in DRC and other important policy matters."

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker, I would urge the movers to agree to take out the following words and I do not think really they add very much.  Take advantage of the new information technologies.  What you really want is urging government to provide accurate and timely information to the public.

THE SPEAKER:  If I got him right, he is saying, urge the government to provide accurate and timely information to the public about Ugandas involvement in DRC and other important policy matters.  What is objectionable to him is, take advantage of the new information and communications technologies. He wants those words out so that it reads, urge government to provide accurate and timely information to the public about Ugandas involvement in DRC and other important policy matters.  Am I correct in capturing that?

MS. BYANYIMA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I just feel an obligation to explain the rationale behind that paragraph.  Mr. Speaker, what we the petitioners observed is that the government is indeed pursuing the traditional(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Now, I do not know whether you can move it formally?  You were making a suggestion but before you formally move, let us hear the Hon. Winnie Byanyima.

MS. BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just feel an obligation to explain the rationale behind that paragraph.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.

MS. BYANYIMA:  Mr. Speaker, what, we the petitioners, observed is that the Government is indeed pursuing using the traditional tools of diplomacy, using the method of sending envoys, using the method of issuing releases now and again, using the - what do they call it? - this circular which they send to diplomatic missions, the  traditional means, the note babel and so on. But the world has changed so much that a lot of information is flowing through electronic means and the purpose of this paragraph is to urge the Government to take advantage of the new tools of information and communication to effect its foreign policy.  This requires training, it requires investing in new equipment, it requires even attitudinal change. So we are not simply talking about just the normal means, we are asking Government to engage in a new way of communicating and this is important in this paragraph.  If you remove it, you will not be saying what the intention was.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, Hon. Minister, is that expression so innocuous? It is saying, telling the Government to take advantage of the new information and communication technologies.  Yes, that is all and  (Interruption)

MR. NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker, after hon. Byanyima has explained the background of putting those words there, I will accept it otherwise as it stood there, to me, I took the thing to mean that what we want accurate information.  How we do it is another matter but now that she has explained why she put it  to urge Government (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  So, I put the question?  The Hon. Engineer John Nasasira, Minister for Works, Housing and Communication.  You have the Floor.

MR. NASASIRA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I support the proposed resolution but what I would like the Movers to remove and separate is the words after DRC because they say, in DRC  and then they say, and other relevant policy matters.  While that one is also correct, I think it is misplaced for these resolutions when we are dealing with DRC.  Parliament can say, please, other policy matters, we need them on electronic media, we need them on Internet and everywhere, we need Web sites but that will be something different. Other policy matters of Government are not connected with this situation in DRC and that last bit should be removed from this resolution so that we remain with informing the public about the situation in DRC. I move that we delete the words after DRC.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Winnie Byanyima, are you?  (Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that the Movers actually wanted to put the word foreign policy matters, it was not general matters. Important foreign policy matters which should be communicated on the (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Let us hear from them.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I am one of the petitioners, Mr. Speaker.  You did not know that I am a signatory?

THE SPEAKER:  And other foreign policy matters or foreign relations matters.  Alright, urge the Government to take advantage of the new information and communications technology and provide accurate and timely information to the public about Ugandas involvement in DRC and other important foreign policy matters.  I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Preamble paragraph seven, urge the United Nations and the international community in general to expeditiously take charge of their responsibility in the implementation of the Lusaka Accord.  I think there will be a consequential amendment to that.  Yes, the Hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

MR. NKANGI:  I would appeal to the Movers, sir, to agree to remove the words in the second line, take charge of and replace them with one word, discharge so that it would read, expeditiously discharge their responsibility, etcetera instead of saying take charge of. I think it is better to say discharge responsibilities rather than taking charge of responsibilities.

THE SPEAKER:  Are you moving a formal amendment but before you do so, let us hear the Hon. Winne Byanyima.  Did you hear him?

MS. BYANYIMA:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I heard him but if I can take from a very seasoned former diplomat, the Hon. Mubanda.  He had polished it up to read, call upon the United Nations and the international community to honour their obligations and I think it is a more appropriate phrasing, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Do we have it somewhere, Hon. Mubanda?  Where? I do not see it.  Where is it?  Is it this one? call upon - It is being proposed to amend operative paragraph seven as follows, call upon the United Nations and the international community in general to expeditiously honour their obligations in the implementation of the Lusaka cease fire Agreement.  I think, more or less the same.  Somebody wants to move it?

MR. KAVUMA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker and Hon. Members, I beg to move a very simple amendment to operative paragraph number seven to start by deleting the first two words which are urge the, replace them by the words call upon and in the first line, after the word and, insert the so that it reads, call upon the United Nations and the international community in general to expeditiously honour their obligations in the implementation of the Lusaka cease fire Agreement.  I beg to move, sir.

THE SPEAKER:  Seconded?  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER: Operative paragraph 8; further urges the Government to  take all necessary steps to improve Ugandas image abroad.  Hon. Karuhanga you are smiling. I do not know whether you are doing so out of happiness or frustration.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I just see that, further urged  Government to take all necessary steps to improve Ugandas image, when you put the word abroad it means that, there are some people who you want to jump. After deleting Rwanda, we may be miss-read to mean to say that we improve relationship with the abroad people but not those near us. Unless the word abroad  is defined now to mean Kenya is abroad and Rwanda is abroad.  I am having problems. Maybe, Hon. Mayanja Nkangi who is an international person who went to Oxford and cambridge may help  me.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Winnie Byanyima, Hon. Karuhanga is finding problems with formulation of operative paragraph 8. An explanation will help him either comprehend or provoke him to moving another amendment.

MS. BYANYIMA:  Mr. Speaker,  if he is uncomfortable with the word abroad be may delete the word abroad, what we were concerned about is that everything possible should be done to recover our image after the recent  bashing that it has had.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga is that alright?

MR. KARUHANGA: I am very happy if we could stop at improving our image so that everybody else feels comfortable instead of jumping.

THE SPEAKER: So, you would like the word abroad be deleted?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes.

THE SPEAKER:  Is there not something seriously wrong with that?

MR.  KARUHANGA: No, it is not, you know, this resolution is a very attractive resolution for the people outside; as soon as we get out people will be reading.  So, further urge the Government to take all necessary steps to improve Ugandas image.  It is very clear, so we delete the word abroad because it means we improve abroad  and locally  we just improve Ugandas image.

THE SPEAKER: Let me put the question, there is an amendment on the Floor.

MAJ. KATIRIMA:  Mr. Speaker, and Hon. Members, I propose to delete the word improve in that clause and substitute it with the word enhance. It is not totally true, Mr. Speaker, that we have a very bad image world wide and even in the region.  We have an image on which we want to improve (Interjection)-  and therefore, the word we should be using in that case should not be to improve on what we already are (Interruption)

MS. BYANYIMA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the Hon. Member really to take us in cycles he wants to improve the image of Uganda and the resolution reads to improve the image of Uganda.  Now, is it in order for him to seek to amend further when what he wants is exactly in the resolution, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I think Hon. Katirima, you are going in cycles and you are going to be caught because you did not want the word improve and in the next sentence you used it.  Now I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this brings us to the end of (Interjection)- one minute; I now remember, the Hon. Karuhanga did earlier on raise the introductory part to the resolution can you read it?

MR. KARUHANGA: I have submitted it to you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I have just received it can you move it.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, there are two things I would like to do in terms of polishing. there is that preamble which you have and there is also an amendment which I  had moved and then Hon. Wapakabulo improved on it.  But, in his improvement he made something which has to be deleted, instead of starting with urge he said this House urges, so we have to delete the words this House so that it is in conformity with do hereby called upon an urge.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is now consequential.

MR. KARUHANGA: The second one is that, with your permission, Sir, I would ask the clerk to read the preamble because he has it.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, it is associated with this why do you not read  it yourself, so that you take the glory not the clerk.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, it is even more glorious when you delegate, but Mr. Speaker, the clerk has the version.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me read it, although I will not take the glory.

MR. KARUHANGA: I will be very honoured.

THE SPEAKER: This is the title of the document it begins as follows;  "Parliament of the republic of Uganda sitting this 21st day of June 2000 in Kampala having debated the petition moved under Article 95 clause 5 of the Constitution of Uganda regarding the repeated clashes between UPDF and RPA in the Democratic Republic of Congo (Interjection)- then you are saying this House urges the Government from where again.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker,  that is the top part then you have the rest of -

THE SPEAKER: "Noting that the repeated clashes between the Uganda peoples Defence Forces and the Rwanda Patriotic Army (RPA); which has resulted in bad publicity of Uganda within the region and internationally". And then you continue with the rest that is the point you wanted to make.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER:  That brings us to the end of the debate on this motion and our proceedings for today and before I adjourn I wish to say the following that the chairman of the Committee on Rules would like to take you through the revised Rules of Procedure of this House in an informal manner before his Committee actually comes up with a report for you to discuss and approve.  I would urge you to come with your copies because they have been circulated and its a bulky document, but it should not worry you. It really reproduced even those rules which are left intact and have not been amended; but there will be a method of drawing your attention to those particular rules which have been amended, new ones which have been re-introduced and old ones which have been deleted.  Do not worry about the bulky looks of the document.  This will be here tomorrow in the Chamber at 2.00 O'clock, and therefore, -(Interruption)- Hon. Minister, if I can finish, you will take comfort.  We shall sit here and proceed from there, here in the Chamber 2.00 O'clock.  (Interruption)- We shall know how to handle it in case you are not sure whether your normal Parliamentary proceedings in the House or somewhere else in the Conference Centre, we shall tell you here tomorrow. So the House is adjourned until 2.00 O'clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.45 p.m and adjourned until Thursday 22nd June, 2000 at 2.00 p.m)

