Tuesday, 22 June 2010

Parliament met 11.05 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. We had indicated that we would start at 9.30 a.m. but now it is 11.00 a.m. I hope we will be able to finish on time.

Last week, Members raised the issue of the security of parliamentarians, and tomorrow, I will be issuing the new directives on security in the precincts of Parliament. I will also be adjusting the Order Paper to bring item six forward to four because I had already indicated to the minister that we would handle his matter this morning.

I also have a problem with item three on the Order Paper. I want to caution the Minister of Local Government that there are a number of requests which have been outstanding, such as the requests from Budaka, Bulambuli, and that from Sigulu. You should bring a comprehensive list and we deal with them together because this is selective. Please address the outstanding requests which have been in your office. Now you have brought two; then tomorrow Budaka will complain. Organise yourself and bring all the requests at once and we shall deal with them.

11.07
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Bullisa County, Bullisa): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the future of our people. All is not well in the Albertine region where we are expecting our oil. I want to bring to the attention of the House that six months ago, I came here on the Floor of the House and informed you how some infiltration of the sites that have oil had taken place with the help of foreign interests. Specific areas where oil wells have been found are being claimed by individuals. We were promised a report in two weeks by Ministry of Lands and Ministry of Energy. 

Last week, I went to the constituency and found that surveys have been done in areas of all the oil wells by the individuals claiming ownership. When I called the District Police Commander (DPC) and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), they told me that they found a surveyor with papers. There was a surveyor who did not involve the community; I think that is a recipe for disaster.

The community went on Saturday to ask the RDC and other district leaders about what was happening to their land. Unfortunately, the Police and security is now turning against the community, calling them rioters; they even threatened to bring them tear gas. As we speak, there are deployments taking place in Bullisa against the community, but the surveyors were not arrested.

Three years ago, I came to Parliament and told you of the problem of land grabbers in the area, before we even confirmed the existence of oil. We have been waiting for a report in Parliament; it is now three whole years. All this land where the herdsmen are has been surveyed. Bullisa District does not have a land office, but people are seriously surveying this land and I am saying this because I do not want a Niger Delta in Bunyoro. I am praying that the assurance which was made on the Floor of the House that we are getting a report in two weeks should yield now.

How does somebody come to know that there is oil in an area before the oil companies discover it? Who leaks that Government information? The Ministry of Lands should stop issuance of land titles in the communal land of the Albertine area.

When I had a meeting with the community members on Sunday, they told me that I have been wasting my time. They reason that these are powerful people and if I continue, I will be crushed or even eliminated. They were told that I am a nobody, and I should stop fighting those who have their interests in this region. I tried to reach the IGP yesterday and I talked to the Minister of Internal Affairs this morning. The leadership of the district is now incriminating the community which went to ask for their land. This is a very sensitive matter because these individuals who are trying to work with foreign interests to own all the land in the rift valley should be restrained by Parliament. 

I did request here that systematic demarcation of land should start from the oil area where the whole country has an interest, but unfortunately, the ministry of lands has started with different areas.

How are we going to have a blessing from oil and not a curse, if we do not address this matter. I have cried my voice hoarse; the President gave a directive but no Government department whether Lands, Ministry of Energy or even Security, is moving in the direction of the directive. 

My prayer is that this confusion is stopped; I have done my whistle blowing as usual, and nobody will say that they did not know. I am on the Hansard record many times. What is the plan against my people? What is exactly happening? We want to be told. How can security move against the community? How can you threaten an MP to be crushed because he is speaking for his people? I hope we are going to get the ministry telling us who gives information to these individuals before even Ministry of Energy comes there. They are very exact, if they come and claim four acres, that will be the spot. All the oil wells in Bullisa have been surveyed by these individuals. I thought this matter should be brought to Parliament such that those who think they can eliminate me and get away with it - people will know that I did my part. I wish we could get answers of when this will be solved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Epetait.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank my colleague for raising this concern on petroleum production. There are two other pending issues; this House has time and again demanded that a production-sharing agreement be laid on the Table. And time and again, Parliament is given hot-air promises. We are demanding that the Minister of Energy keeps the country informed on what is in that agreement so that we move in tandem, rather than leaving the country in speculation.

Secondly, I want to inform colleagues to take extra interest in the Petroleum Bill that is before this House. If we are not careful in doing due diligence on that Bill, we might end up with a law that causes more trouble than good for this country. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, this issue raised by the honourable member is very pertinent. Last weekend, on Friday and Saturday, we held a symposium on oil governance at Entebbe, and the Minister attended that symposium because he opened it. He apologised before the nation for not conducting the business of oil transparently. 

In that meeting, he promised that he would regularly brief Parliament on the developments in the oil industry. He again made another commitment before the nation, that today, he would Table those production-sharing agreements. I do not know - maybe he sent them through one of the ministers.

He made another commitment that he would arrange a visit for Members of Parliament and the civil society to know what is going on in Bulisa because they have not been informed. And this followed a directive which you gave last year – you gave a directive to the minister to table those production-sharing agreements. You again repeated that directive one month back. But this ministry is perpetually dodging the business of this House. I think the honourable member has even given his own submission that nothing is forthcoming since three years back, two years back or one year back; nothing is forthcoming. We need to move a motion of displeasure on the conduct of the minister in this matter. 

This dates back to the time when some of these production-sharing agreements were being made; and my brother, hon. Migereko, was holding that portfolio at that time. So, there is no excuse at all.

How can Members of Parliament and the Executive ignore a directive of the Speaker just like that? Parliament is being rendered useless. How can we work when Parliament is not being respected; when the directives of the Speaker, the number three person in this country, are being ignored? What is happening? Madam Speaker, we need to be assertive on this matter; we need to change our methods of work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before the minister comes, join me in welcoming the students and teachers of Gombe Senior Secondary School; they are here. You are welcome. (Applause) 

11.18
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mukitale is raising a very serious matter which needs to be attended to immediately. As far as I know, the position of Government is that no land titles are supposed to be issued in that area. The leadership of this country gave instructions to the effect that we should be determining exactly how much land will be required for the oil industry in the country and such land should not be available for issuing of titles to whoever comes in. 

So, I need to be given time to re-establish what is happening on the ground and this will require linking up with the Ministry of Energy, and the Ministry of Lands and Surveys, and we shall be in a position to ensure that corrective action is taken, and also to come up with a report as Government on this matter before this House. 

MR KIGYAGI: I would like to give information to the honourable minister standing in for the Minister of Energy that one of the biggest challenges we have is to manage people’s expectations in the exploitation industry. You are taking it lightly, but managing people’s expectations is the only challenge we have. And to manage this, we have to be transparent; we have to be quick with answers; and we have to bring everybody on board. 

Secondly, for me, waiting is sometimes very tricky. The other day, I wrote to the Ministry of Lands about greedy people who are trying to grab land which belongs to the Meteorology Department in Mbarara; working together with the Uganda Land Commission and some officials from Mbarara. Up to now, I have not got any response; these people are proceeding; by the time the minister comes, the land will be gone and we will not have a department for meteorology. 

So, when a whistle is blown, our challenge is managing people’s expectations; this is the only way forward. This issue of asking for three or two weeks – this is an emergency. Please find an answer and give it say, tomorrow – it could be true or untrue. But it will put the people who are directly in charge in a very funny situation and it can cause circus for this country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I get concerned; it is becoming a practice in this House that when a matter like this is raised, the Minister concerned asks for more time and sometimes the matter ends there. I wonder whether the government is admitting that it doesn’t know what is going on in the country. Because, if the government was aware of what is going on in this country, ministers would have answers at their fingertips. Now, the minister is asking for more time; how much more time? This is a serious matter. 

This idea of grabbing land where people suspect there is oil is very serious. Lamo became a district on 1st January this year. We have already got reports that big chunks of land are being surveyed by powerful people using GPS. We suspect that they have already known that there is oil in that land –(Laughter)– we said it when they were surveying Amuru. We made an alarm and we have been exonerated. So, who are these powerful people? We need to know them. Are they more powerful than the country or is it the government leading the way in land grabbing?

MR KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, I listened to my colleague from Bullisa with much sympathy. And the question one asks is, is Government in charge of what is going on? He said directives have been given by the President, but nothing has happened. Then where are we going to appeal to? 

Only recently, we passed a law on land to protect our people; no more evictions. How can this kind of thing take place and nothing is done about it? So, the question is, is Parliament just here to listen to statements and nothing is done? I wish the minister could tell us that something is going to be done. This is an urgent decision that must be taken immediately. Can’t we get someone to immediately make a statement on this matter and answer the specific question that my colleague has made? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I do not know whether you recall that it was in December last year when we required the government to bring the agreements and give us information. That was the last time we saw some of the ministers on the Floor of this House. I think you should accept that this is a matter that is causing anxiety in this country and it should be addressed. 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to point out that the instructions which you gave in regard to the agreements were communicated and I remember the outgoing Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources at some point had a report to present to this House in regard to those agreements. I was informed that she was not permitted to make a statement, but I am sure if she had been allowed to make a statement, maybe one would have been in position to discover that your actions were acted upon. 

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue raised by hon. Okello-Okello -(Mr Banyenzaki rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is responding to the issues raised. We need to move on to other issues. 

MR MIGEREKO: Regarding the issues raised by hon. Okello-Okello as to whether there is anybody in charge of this country, I want to remind you that the NRM has been in charge for a couple of years now and we shall remain in charge for quite some time, more so that we are now getting support from your area. There is a government in place and the issue of why the Minister of Lands and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development shouldn’t make a statement here immediately has just been raised -(Interjections)– and I have indicated that I am going to get in touch with the line ministers –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, the honourable member stated clearly that he raised this matter three years back; he raised it two years back; and one year back. Parliament itself raised this issue last month and now you are relegating the responsibility of the minister to the chairperson of the committee. When the chairperson of the committee was making the statement, the Speaker directed the chairperson not to make that statement but directed that the minister should come and make the statement himself. You are repeating the same statement as if you do not know what is happening in this Parliament. You are our Chief Whip, we expect you to be well versed with what happens here in Parliament. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I am worried and what worries me in this country is the level of greed by some people. Some time last year, an aerial survey was made in this country and areas where minerals exist were properly marked; and those with the information are now speculating and are going ahead to buy land. There is a rush in his district – Buliisa District, and people are taking over land; this is going to cause us serious problems. I want to appeal to my government – because it is the Movement Government in power and as we know, the Movement Government is not going anywhere. We are not going anywhere but we must do the right things in this country. We must do and work within the interest of this country. We should not stay in power and advance our personal interests; we must advance the interests of our people. And, therefore, I want to urge my government that this matter should be taken seriously. It is good that we have our Secretary-General here in the House. 

My Secretary-General, take this matter seriously. Call a meeting of the NRM caucus so that we handle this matter and we do not cause confusion in this country. We are going to stay for more 50 years and, therefore, we should not cause problems in this country. (Laughter) (Mr Mukitale rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you have raised your matter. The minister in charge of the sector is not here -  

MR MUKITALE: I want to give him information. Whereas the Attorney-General and Government won a case against the herdsmen, 10 months ago, no action of eviction was done. What instead has happened is that the herdsmen have surveyed the land and are now claiming payments from oil companies for the areas which they forcefully occupied with guns and this is one of the areas which I have been complaining about. That is why in one of my prayers outside government, I asked that Parliament puts in place a pastoral committee – that was three years ago. Where is the report? This is for Parliament. Where is that report chaired by hon. Ochieng, three years after the matter was brought to Parliament, and the Speaker ruled, and investigations were done in the whole country?

Two; now that these people are surveying land even when Government has already given a directive that no titles should be issued, why are the Police threatening to arrest my people who are claiming their land and not the surveyors? To date in this matter of land, I am not aware of a single land grabber who has been summoned by the Police to make a statement or to be prosecuted. Instead it is I, the MP, who is wanted for serious crime. It is my people who are being looked at as criminals and this is what raises concern. 

I am requesting that Parliament directs that this matter be solved and that an investigation of all land acquisitions in the Albertine region be done. If you check, land ownership in the Albertine area has fraudulently changed in the last four months. In Buliisa, for example, an individual was trying to get a title for communal land outside the barracks and claiming that it is public land. So, it is really a matter of national concern. Whereas the immediate sufferers are my people in Buliisa, this has a national implication. We do not want individuals to position themselves in this oil area and in future you have an Ogoni. We do not want the implication of a Niger Delta in Uganda. And this is happening when Parliament is watching; when government is watching. That is my concern. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need commitment from Government. When are we getting this information?
  
MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter and as soon as we break for lunch, I will be in position to get in touch with the line ministers, because as far as I know, there is a standing instruction to the effect that no titles should be issued for land in that area. So, I will get in touch with them and we shall be in position to get back to Parliament and update you on what is happening. In the meantime, we are also going to get in touch with the Minister of Internal Affairs so that the necessary interventions are put in place. Thank you. 

11.33 
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising to seek clarification from Government on yet another matter of national importance to do with the Ministry of Agriculture. 

As we speak now, there are attempts to conscript all the agricultural extension staff to be under NAADS, and you know agricultural extension is very wide and NAADS deals with selected enterprises. I am now wondering, if all the agricultural extension staff members are put under NAADS, is NAADS transforming into a Ministry of Agriculture? What would happen when NAADS winds up? Is Public Service aware of the move? 

I am glad that the Ministry of Public Service is here. I am wondering what is going on now that the staff members are already scheduled to get into NAADS - I think within about two weeks - and yet the Ministry of Agriculture has not told us what exactly is happening. What is going to happen to the Ministry of Agriculture? I am seeking clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, one of the Members came to me on the same matter and I inquired from the Clerk whether we had handled that issue; they said our committee had discussed that in the last budget. So, I asked them to look up the Hansard and give us the position which Parliament took on the issue so that we can discuss it.

11.35
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): We adopted a report on agriculture – I am not a member of the Committee on Agriculture, but we adopted a report saying that the extension staff of the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Industry - NAADS is under this ministry - should participate in the activities. That is when we got rid of these service providers. We said the service providers were very expensive and they were not necessary; we have our extension staff and they should come and participate in the NAADS programme. So, they are coming into the NAADS programme according to what we agreed on. It is not about getting them out of the Ministry of Agriculture. They are actually supposed to do those extension services which were provided by the service providers and we all agreed on this and unanimously passed it. So, maybe it is being conceived in another way, but as far as I know, this was a recommendation of the committee last year. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I have asked the Clerk to produce the Hansard so that we can ascertain the decision we took. 

11.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, the Cabinet has set up a sub-committee to look into this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Nevertheless, let us check what Parliament decided on that issue.  

MR KIBEDI: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give to this House is that as we are talking now, interviews have already been conducted in some districts. So, I am requesting that if we are to do anything, let us do it expeditiously. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we shall have our records this afternoon and we shall update you on what we agreed as the House, and then we shall know what to do. 

11.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I should have contacted you on this, but I thought it very important to bring this up now. We saw on the front page of our newspapers today that a very young boy, Khan Kakama, who was abducted from Bugolobi was found dead; the child of Sven and Naome Karekaho who work in URA and NEMA, respectively. 

It would be important that we recognise this tragic loss of life as we proceed with other business. And particularly, since I am on the Floor, on my own behalf, I would like to convey sincere condolences to the family for this loss, and we really urge this country to end such tragic losses.

11.39
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you. I wish to request that this august House recognises the death of this baby, Kakama, and as we grieve with this family and the country at large, this House stands up with the mothers of this nation to grieve heavily with everybody in this country, because this House has pronounced itself on child torture, child abuse, child sacrifice, child trafficking – most of us are at a loss with the direction this country is taking. 

As the Chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities, every person has a right to life. It was only on Sunday that this nation spared some time off and dedicated itself – every citizen dedicated themselves to ask the Almighty Allah to forgive each one of us of our past sins, and I was convinced that at least there is going to be a change; only to wake up this morning to hear what happened to baby Kakama. 

Everybody who has followed this story knows the psychological torture this family has gone through. Every Ugandan citizen should condemn what is taking place. Yesterday, it was baby Kasirye; today it is Kakama; tomorrow, only God knows. May the soul of baby Kakama rest in eternal peace and may the Almighty God look into the hearts of these people and everybody who has caused the suffering of many Ugandans, especially the babies and children. 

I request that the august House spares one minute of silence for this baby, Kakama, and the rest of the other babies that have passed away in the same manner. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, last week we had a debate on the status of children in the country, including child sacrifice, but now let me invite the House to symbolically stand up for a moment, for baby Kakama and all the children who have been sacrificed in this country. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATION BILL, 2007

11.43
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion that the Bill entitled, “The Regulation of Interception of Communication Bill, 2007” be read the second time. 

As honourable colleagues will recollect, the object of this Bill is to make provision for lawful interception and monitoring of certain communications in the course of their transmission through a telecommunication, postal or any other related service or system in Uganda.

It also seeks to provide for the establishment of a communication monitoring centre in Uganda. 

I am happy to say, Madam Speaker, that we appeared before the committee. There are a few areas where debate might still arise, but I am sure the report will indicate that we have generated a broad agreement on the provisions of this Bill, and I invite my colleagues to wholly and fully support it. I beg to move.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we are all aware, business of the House has to be provided to Members well in time. This particular Bill deals with matters that could potentially be difficult, in the sense that monitoring communication per se is not a problem, but using that process adversely; to members, it could be a major factor. And given that this Bill and the report have just been given to us, I suggest and request you, Madam Speaker, that we are given time to look at this report together with the Bill, so that when we come here, we deal with it objectively. Otherwise, it is an area which is not of everyday life that Members would draw on their own experiences to debate it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, the minister has just moved for the second reading and the chair has not reported. Let us listen to the report. If we find difficulties, we shall say, “This is a difficult area, hold on.”

MR PENYTOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the ICT Committee where this Bill has been handled and we informed the chairman of the committee, through the clerk of the committee, that we were making final touches to the minority report. But now we have been ambushed. The report will be ready in the evening. I do not know how we are going to proceed because some of us are not happy with the final report of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, last week the Business Committee sat and we agreed on the order of business. This is one of the items that was agreed upon to be handled. In that Business Committee, no one informed us that there was going to be a minority report. So, you will just pick your issues. Chairperson, come down and present the report.

11.48
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION & COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nathan Nabeta Igeme): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Specifically for hon. Penytoo, we met and I briefed you that we had handled the issues on the report and if you have any issues, please go and see the clerk; and if you want to, you can present a minority report. I think we met last week after the committee and I briefed you on that; that if you have any minority issues please present them to the committee or you can present a minority report -[Hon. Penytoo: “Clarification.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, you are a member of the committee. Do not bring your committee work here. Let us listen to the report and then you can respond later. 

MR NABETA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a short report.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Regulation of Interception and Communications Bill, 2007 was read for the first time on 10 April 2008 and committed to the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Committee for consideration and to report to the House on its findings.

The committee considered the Bill in accordance with Rule 113(a) and Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and now reports.                       

The objectives of the Bill are to make provision for lawful interception and monitoring of certain communications in the course of their transmission through a telecommunication, postal or any other related service or system in Uganda. 

The Bill seeks to provide for establishment of a communication monitoring centre in Uganda. 

The proposed Act will reinforce the provisions of part 7 of the Interception of Communication and Surveillance of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 and Act No.4 of 2002, whose main focus is suppression of terrorism. 

Madam Speaker, the committee held discussions on the Bill with the following:
1.	The Minister of ICT
2.	The Minister of Security
3.	Uganda Law Society 
4.	Uganda Communications Commission
5.	Telecommunications service providers, namely: MTN, Zain Warid, UTL and Orange
6.	The Human Rights Network, Uganda 
7.	Uganda Journalists Association
8.	Uganda Women Network
9.	Uganda Joint Christian Council
10.	Uganda Bankers Association
11.	Amnesty International 
12.	Uganda Revenue Authority


The committee observed that the Bill needs to be harmonised with existing laws, for example, the Uganda Communications Commission Act, to avoid infringing on UCC Act regulations. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Bill should be passed into law so as to guard civil liberties and human rights given the dynamics of crime.

The committee also recommends that subject to the proposed amendments, the Regulation of Interception and Communications Bill, 2007 be passed into law.

The committee has made a number of amendments as attached and requests that at an appropriate time, the House considers these amendments to form part of the Bill. I beg to move.

MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on an issue of the reporting by the committee. As you know, a committee of the House is meant to help Members who are not specialists in that particular area with findings that they have gathered from the public. As you can notice in their methodology, the committee met 12 institutions in this country, but in the report, there is no particular mention of the observations and the findings from these 12 institutions that met the committee.  

The committee gives the objectives of the Bill, but I already have the Bill and I have the objectives. It also gives two short recommendations. Now, the committee has left this House without the findings from meeting all these 12 institutions. What are the observations? These are technical people, MTN Uganda, Uganda Communications Commission, Warid, UTL, human rights and so on. I am sure they came to the committee with all their issues, but I am not given the benefit to know what they said, what their concerns were or what the justifications for these amendments are.

Madam Speaker, how am I supposed to debate this Bill in the circumstances? How am I supposed to support the committee’s amendments in the circumstance that they are not telling me the basis on which the amendments are made? 

I now request the committee to reorganise and bring the observations and the findings before we can debate this report, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

11.53
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Madam Speaker, in my experience, this is the shortest report I have ever seen in this House and I do not know why. It is totally naked for a technical Bill of the size that we are supposed to be discussing. But not only that, the first recommendation is interesting. “The Bill should be harmonised with existing laws for example the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) Act so that it does not infringe on the UCC regulations.” That is the recommendation.

Who is to do the harmonisation? Look, if the harmonisation has to be done, that should have been part of the report for the Members to know and be able to discuss it. If you just tell them it is part of the amendment, they do not know why it has been done; surely, how can Members deliberate on this report?

On this kind of report, it would be most unfair for this Parliament and for this country to proceed and debate and take a decision on this matter. I suggest that the details be given so that Members can discuss this matter intelligently; otherwise, this is terrible.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Having listened to my colleague, hon. Betty Amongi, and then the last -[Mr Isha Otto: “He is called hon. John Kawanga.”]- I know hon. Kawanga. We are getting the impression that we have only the first part of the report. This report is in two parts. These are just views, but we are going to get the committee’s input when we come to proposed amendments and their justifications. This is my experience of committee work -(Interjections)- yes, otherwise when they move an amendment, who is justifying? It is part of the report. This is a comprehensive report in two parts. I feel that we should proceed.

11.56
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a lawyer, I would have wanted to be helped by this committee. I notice they have put a lot of emphasis on possible amendments to the Bill. That is how it should be, but the committee should have also gone ahead and indicated in detail part of their recommendations. 

They recommend harmonisation of this Bill with other laws and they point to only one law, that is the UCC Act. But even having pointed out the UCC Act, they do not tell us which areas should be harmonised with this new possible Act so that it does not infringe on that other one. Can the committee be good enough to help us because we are all trying to help this country? If we pass this law according to the committee, it is going to infringe on other Acts. Now, which other Acts are these? Which specific areas of those Acts should be harmonised with this new Bill and what are the possible infringements? These are the areas which a lawyer would want to know so that it helps the committee and it helps the minister to implement the law; but as bare as this one is, it is going to be very impossible; not impossible, but very difficult to even argue out areas of this Bill.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Chair and your committee, you know we have been listening to many reports here, but it is really usual to have observations, your comments, recommendations and then the amendments. But even for me, you are telling me that let us harmonise the UCC Act; I do not know in what area. I am also finding difficulties finding what area you want to harmonise.

MR NABETA: Madam Speaker, what we had looked at as a committee is that - I can lay on the Table the minutes of all the meetings we had, but the issue was that we looked at most of the amendments reflected from the views we took, and in the justifications of all the amendments, we were highlighting the laws that we are infringing on and why we should amend those laws.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see hon. Chair, the amendments will come at the committee stage. What are the Members going to debate? The amendments will come at the committee stage, but before that, we need to debate so that we can deal with your amendments based on the observations and recommendations which are not here.

12.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Many times, we do things and inadvertently, we create unnecessary suspicion. It was very unfortunate that an honourable minister stood up to defend the content of this report. Based on a request which is genuine - you do not know, the state has no permanent friend and the state has no permanent enemy. Even when you think you are the friend, you could be its biggest enemy. The best thing to do is to ensure that the laws you make have adequate protection for everybody.

Secondly, I am sure as was said before, the telecommunication companies came. Did they support; did they object and what were their objections? Because it would help us to get an informed position on the law we want to pass. What about those people concerned with human rights? It is not enough for the committee to say that their amendment is to ensure human rights and so on. I am a fairly fast reader and that is why I jumped a little early. I had looked at this. The content of those amendments have nothing to do with human rights. It is important to remove suspicion from this process. Let Government not rush us. Let the committee bring the information we need to everybody in Parliament and then let people debate this matter and pass provisions of this Bill in an informed manner. It will help this country and it will help the government. That is all we are asking for.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are you suggesting hon. Chair?

MR NABETA: Madam Speaker, we had prepared a bigger report. All this information they are asking for is already in soft copy. What I am suggesting is that we shall go and put all the information - it is just really to give us the bigger report and it will be ready in three hours, and we shall send it out to all Members and business can continue tomorrow -(Interjections)- okay, at least I can have the bigger report by tomorrow which has all the views from all the people we met. We can have all that in the bigger report and have it ready for Members today, because all the information is ready. We tried to make it brief, but all that information is available and can be ready for the Members today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, hon. Chair, you as the committee are performing a delegated function for the plenary. You are doing our work, so you are supposed to give as much information as possible so that we are able to support or object to what you have written. So, really the report is insufficient. (Applause) Can you re-issue it tomorrow? 

12.04
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me the Floor. I just want to add my voice to yours and the other Members that even if one can reasonably establish the reasoning in the report that leads to the conclusions and recommendations they make, it would be better to make a full report on record, from which those decisions and proposals are derived. 

I just want to say that this Bill has been before this House for quite a while. To answer the Leader of the Opposition, it is really urgent. It is extremely urgent in light of the security threats this country faces. I agree with him – you know when terrorists begin to act, terrorism does not discriminate. I agree with him entirely that when we are talking about security, we must think of every citizen irrespective of their political opinions. Clearly, the purpose of this Bill is to afford protection to all citizens without discrimination, while providing those whose duty it is to provide such protection, with all the necessary tools to do so.

Therefore, I support the idea that the committee is given today - and the chairman says it will be ready tomorrow - so that they can distribute it tomorrow and we debate it on Thursday. [Mrs Ogwal: “Procedure”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter is deferred. Next item

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND PRIME
MINISTER BILL, 2009


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Presidential Affairs Committee. Yes, Minister?

12.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, this Bill –(Interjections)- was discussed and debated. Unfortunately, this morning, my chairperson is not available, but we had reached –(Interjections)- I am requesting for your indulgence to permit any member of the Presidential Affairs Committee to support us. We had already reached amendments of the sections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there members? Is the vice-chairperson of the committee here? 

MRS SEZI: Any member can help us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me look at the list for other members. Where are the other members? This matter should have come last week. We were requested to move it to this week; now I do not see the chair. What do you want me to do -(Interjections)- are you one of the members?

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, I am suggesting that since the chairperson of the Local Government Committee is around; we can have local government amendments and maybe tomorrow, we discuss the presidential amendments or in the afternoon, so that we save time. Otherwise, we are not moving.

HON. MEMBERS: Hon. Okello-Okello is around.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is hon. Okello-Okello a member of the Presidential Affairs Committee?

HON. MEMBERS: There is nobody. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Presidential Affairs Committee but -(Interjections)- I signed the report. I have nothing against the report. I am not going to debate the report. But the leadership was changed and I have not even met my new leaders. I know the chairperson, but I do not know the vice because when the committees were constituted, I was not in the House. I am not in a position to represent anybody without authority, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us move to the next item.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

12.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Pereza Ahabwe): Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, you will recall that this Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2009 was presented to this House by my senior colleague, hon. Adolf Mwesige. In brief, this Bill seeks to take into account the judgments of the courts in relation to local councils, and also bring the Local Government Act in conformity with the Constitution. 

When we amended the 2005 Constitution, certain elements in the Local Governments Act remained unchanged in order to synchronise them with the Constitution. Therefore, I want to move that the Bill be read for the second time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay.

12.11
CAPT. JOHN EMILY OTEKAT (INDEPEDENT, Serere County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I am the lead chairperson of the Public Service and Local Government Committee. I have a report of the sessional committee on the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2009. The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2009 – the report is being circulated - was read for the first time as the minister said, on 22 December 2009 and referred to our committee in accordance with Rule 113 of our Rules of Procedure. 

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 116(2), which states that, “The Committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill as it considers it fit, if the amendments, (including new clauses and new schedules) are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill.” 

We met a number of stakeholders: The Ministry of Local Government; the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; Members of Parliament representing Persons with Disabilities; Uganda Urban Authorities Association; Uganda Local Governments Association; and the Electoral Commission. 

The Object of the Bill

i)	To make miscellaneous amendments in the Local Government Act, Cap 243.
ii)	To take account of judgments of the Constitutional Court that had been instituted earlier.
iii)	To bring the Local Government Act in conformity with the Constitution.
iv)	To effect various improvements that have become necessary in the implementation of the Act in order to make the Act more user-friendly, fair and clearer.

Having met a number of stakeholders, we made a number of observations. Allow me to run through them because after them, we shall have our recommendations and then the amendments.

The committee noted that the clerk to council’s office is the secretariat for both the council and public accounts committee as provided for in the Local Governments Act and the Local Government Public Accounts Regulations. In some districts, the clerk to council is in some cases assigned by the CAO to take minutes of the district executive committee on his or her behalf. In this regard, this office is busy by virtue of the statutory and administrative obligations bestowed upon it. 

Assigning the clerk to council more duties than those stipulated under the law may overwhelm the designated officer and may lead to poor performance in the area of the Council and the Public Accounts Committee. 

Madam Speaker, we have noted this, and I also belong to the other committee, the Local Government Public Accounts Committee, where such instances have been cited. 

Similarly, for the CAO to be allowed to assign any senior public officer to work as clerk to Council as proposed in the Bill is superfluous.  The CAO should be restricted to assigning senior staff from the rank of administrative officer. This will also augur well for career development of the officers concerned. 

The committee also observed that lack of implementation of some of the provisions in the Local Government Act, Cap 243 notably Section 83 which relates to grants: “It is provided that transfers from the Central Government shall be remitted directly to city, municipal and town councils.” The committee learnt that these transfers to town councils have never been remitted directly. This non-implementation of the law undermines the financial autonomy of the urban local governments, which is provided for under Section 79 of the Local Governments Act.

We also observed that in Section 22, there was no provision on how a member of the standing committee of council can be removed or on what grounds, and also on how the committee can be dissolved, unlike here in Parliament, where there is a way a standing committee or a member of that committee can be replaced. In local governments, once you belong to a standing committee, even if you have committed an offence, you cannot be removed.

The Bill also seeks to provide for the election of persons to represent the youth, persons with disabilities or older persons who may be chosen on either the multiparty basis or as independents. To us, this is a welcome amendment because it is in consonance with the multiparty dispensation.

The Bill seeks to harmonise the planning period for local governments to be the same as that of the Central Government. 

The Bill seeks to provide for payment of honoraria to the chairpersons of villages, parishes and wards. This is also a welcome move which will go a long way to serve as a sign of recognition from the government for the invaluable services rendered by these leaders to their electorate. 

The committee noted with approval the good intentions in the Bill that ensure that districts have fully constituted district service commissions in time after the expiry of the terms of the preceding ones. This will go a long way in ensuring that human resources management progresses with minimal interruption. 

The discipline and removal of CAOs and town clerks of cities and municipalities has been clarified and made in conformity with the Constitution. This enhances the independence of the CAOs and town clerks, and further insulates them from local political pressures.

The committee, however, urges the Minister of Local Government and sector ministries to intensify inspections and supervisions to check abuse of power and corruption in local governments.  

It is proposed in the Bill that the Secretary to the Treasury may remit funds to a service delivery unit such as a school, hospital or similar institution under a Local Government. This is very unfortunate and should not be allowed to happen in that it does not only water down decentralisation, but will also cause a lot of accountability problems. 

It is the considered view of the committee that since CAOs and town clerks for cities and municipalities are appointed by the Central Governmnet and subsequently appointed as accounting officers by the Secretary to the Treasury, it is not necessary for the Secretary to the Treasury to by-pass them and remit funds directly to service delivery units under the charge of local governments.  In addition, since these remittances will not be captured in the local governments’ budgets because they are coming directly from the Centre, monitoring and enforcing accountability will be very difficult. 

The committee found that very unique because the last time we had a debate, our chairman, hon. Katuntu raised that issue. So, now the Secretary to the Treasury would like to send money directly, which is in violation of the Decentralisation Act. 

The Bill seeks to exclude local government officers from being appointed returning officers. This will greatly save them from reprisals and political pressure from local politicians. The same principle should be extended further to exclude local government officers from being appointed supervisors, presiding officers and polling assistants during elections organised by the Electoral Commission. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the amendment proposed under clause 20(a), the committee received objection from the Members of Parliament representing Persons with Disabilities. We met with quite a number of them and they strongly advised that the amendment be stayed until the National Council for Disability Act has been amended to streamline the functions and structures of councils for Persons With Disabilities.   

In a meeting attended by Members representing Persons with Disabilities and the Minister of State for Gender, hon. Sulaiman Madada, the committee came to the conclusion that the National Council for Disability Act needs to be amended first before any change in the modalities of elections of Persons With Disabilities to local councils can be made. 

The committee also found out that wide consultations had not taken place. Therefore, time is required to allow for consultations and amendment of the National Council for Disability Act before Section 118(a) can be amended. So, we thought that it would not be necessary to amend the Act before the National Council for Disability Act comes into force.  

Filling vacancies of local councils by way of by-elections has been very cumbersome and many vacancies have remained unfilled to date.  The proposed amendment of Section 171 is welcome as it is very necessary that by-elections be carried out within the stipulated time so that voters are not unduly disenfranchised by lacking representatives. 

We discussed this. Fortunately many of us have been in local governments and we realised that once there is a vacancy in the council, either due to death or retirement or whatever, it is not filled for the five years that council is in place.

The Electoral Commission presented reservations about the timeline for by-elections given in the proposed amendment, raising logistical, administrative and budgetary constraints. They urged that a timeline of up to six months be given. 

The committee evaluated the concerns of the Electoral Commission and observed that it would be appropriate to have by-elections take place within six months after a vacancy has been reported to the Commission because this would be in consistence with Article 186 of the Constitution. Bringing it down to 90 days violates the Constitution. The Constitution says that it should be within six months.

The committee also noted with concern the ever increasing number of villages, parishes and wards. Regrettably, neither the Ministry of Local Government nor the Electoral Commission has an up-to-date list of these administrative units. This, therefore, calls for amendment of the law to streamline the creation of new administrative units and subject their creation to approval of the Minister of Local Government. We came up with this because as we speak now, there are so many villages being created because the local governments are allowed to do that. There are many parishes being created and the ministry is not aware of them.

The committee further noted with concern that several chairpersons of local governments have faced a lot of difficulties in having their councils approve nominations of members of the executive committee. This is further worsened by the fact that there is no timeframe given by the law within which a full executive committee should be constituted by a council. There are many cases of this nature, where the chairperson has failed to constitute a committee for one, two, three years because the council has not been able to approve and yet the law says that the council must approve.

We also made general observations from the discussions we held with the stakeholders and we thought we would put them down for the information of the honourable members. 

The committee also made the following general observations on the Bill:

Kampala City has been included to directly receive funds from the Central Government.

The position of Resident District Commissioner has been clarified in accordance with Article 203 of the Constitution. The committee, however, noted that resident district commissioners and their deputies are poorly facilitated and many of them rely on those they monitor for facilitation, which compromises their effectiveness. Many RDCs run to the CAOs for fuel and yet they are supposed to monitor the work that is being done by the district or the CAO himself.

A strict provision should be put in place to ensure that the Electoral Commission carries out by-elections of local councils in time. Sometimes, it takes one or two years. There should be a timeframe allocated to it.

The committee similarly noted with concern the delays in disbursing funds to local governments, which greatly affects implementation of activities. The late releases also cause a rush to spend funds towards the end of the financial year with undesirable consequences, in order not to return the unspent money to the Treasury. 

I had a discussion with some people from ULGA who said that up to now the Minister of Finance is sending money for this quarter to the districts and today is the 22nd June. That is a very big problem. The financial year is coming to an end but lots of money are being pumped to districts at the last moment. When will they spend this money? My district, Soroti is receiving money now.

The committee recommends as follows:

All the provisions of the Local Government Act, Chapter 243, should be implemented and respected. 

The clerks to council should be left to exhaustively devote their time to Council and Public Accounts Committee work.  They should not be given any other duties just like it was suggested in the amendment.

Furthermore, the facilitation and costs related to the Office of the Clerk to Council be clearly removed from the 20 percent budgetary allocation of Council, and be catered for fully from the same budgetary provisions that cater for other departments of the district administration.

The Clerk to Council’s payment is got from 20 percent allocated to Council and we are saying it should come directly from the budget that the CAO gives out to others in terms of administration.

The committee recommends that the ministry should review the Rules of Procedure on the tenure, removal and dissolution of standing committees. The unspent balances to local governments should not be taken back to Government. This is because in most cases, the delay to utilise them is mostly blamed on late releases by the Ministry of Finance. Like I have just said, money is being sent now and yet the ministry expects the money to be sent back on 30th if it is not used.

The RDCs should be facilitated to monitor the implementation of Central and local government services in the districts as required by law.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the shadow minister here? Hon. Kawanga -

12.28
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairman of this committee for the report. This is how the report should be. I wish to only point out that in the course of the report, you mentioned that one of the objectives was to take into account judgments of the Constitutional Court. Unfortunately, no mention whatsoever is made of what judgments these are, what effects they had, and how they relate to the amendments that are being made. I do not know whether this could be done so that Members get to know this.

The observations are very good and I will only comment on the seventh one. “The committee noted with approval the good intentions in the Bill to ensure that districts have fully constituted district service commissions in time after the expiry of the terms of preceding ones. This will go a long way in ensuring that human resources management progresses with minimal interruption.”

The observation does not point out that one of the biggest problems for local governments these days is to constitute district service commissions. Many districts do not have these service commissions for two reasons. One, some of the qualifications that are required for district service commissioners do not exist in those respective districts. I know of several districts, which rely on the parent district to provide the services.

But even where the services have been constituted, the funding of those district service commissions to perform their duties is not forthcoming. Consequently, the district service commissions do not sit as regularly as they should be.

Of course, the other is that in many cases, the establishment for the employees of the district is not catered for financially. Although the positions are there, they cannot be filled because there is no mechanism for the district to fund and fill those positions. 

One of the areas, which is missing is health and that is why the health officers who should be working in the districts are not provided for. I hope the ministries of Local Government and Public Service will do something about this to ensure that these areas are catered for.

The other observation I want to handle is 10. “The Bill seeks to exclude local government officers from being appointed returning officers. This will greatly save these officers from reprisals...” This is very good, but I hope the Electoral Commission has also been facilitated to enable it to provide sufficient returning officers and handle this function because if you want to remove it from local governments, then the Electoral Commission should have the mechanism of filling these positions.

“In a meeting attended by Members of Parliament representing Persons With Disabilities and Minister of State for Gender, hon. Sulaiman Madada, the committee came to the conclusion that the National Council for Disability Act needs to be amended first before the change in modalities for elections representing Persons With Disabilities for Local Government can be made”. This is all very good, but we want to know how long it will take for this to be catered for, because unless you handle it, people with disabilities are going to be disenfranchised permanently.

So, we would have wished the committee to have asked the minister as to how quickly he can handle this aspect and then bring it to the attention of Parliament.

With regard to observation 14, the question is, who is supposed to approve these parishes, wards and other administrative units? That is where the whole thing lies. Nobody is really sure whether it is the Electoral Commission or the Ministry of Local Government who should have a say. The clear exception should be the Ministry of Local Government, but the Electoral Commission has a different view as to where the villages should be for its own purposes. So, I think there is need to harmonise and decide who takes the final decision on where parishes and villages are supposed to be and if that has to be the basis for the electoral purposes.

The committee further noted with concern under 15, that several chairpersons of local governments have faced a lot of difficulties in having their councils approved for nominations for members of the executive. This is further worsened by the fact that there is no timeframe given by the law within which a full executive committee should be constituted by Council.

I think it is necessary to review this decision. The original intention was that the chairman should be able to appoint a committee which the council feels it can work with. But in some cases, the councils just make it impossible for the chairman to ever have a council and what it ends up with is that the chairman becomes the executive. He failed to have a council and he starts doing everything – and that is not even in the interest of democracy or even administration. I do not know what observations - I would want to know from the committee: How do they propose that matter should be resolved? 

My view is that the chairman should be able to, after he has been elected chairman, to appoint his own committee and review as he sees fit just as the President does. They only come to Parliament for the approval of their qualifications for the positions - not to hold the positions that they hold. In many cases, people in the local government just say, “We do not want him.” And that is all. And consequently, terms run out. This matter has to be really resolved for the good of the stakeholders. 

About the last observation about RDCs not being facilitated; I have related to RDCs and they have a problem, but sometimes they are the problem themselves and this has to be handled. One of the problems is that some RDCs do not actually qualify to hold the positions they hold. So, they are really despised by the very people they want to supervise. The appointing authority of these RDCs should look for people who qualify, are sufficiently respectable, and who know what they want to do, so that they do not become inter meddlers. For as long as this is not resolved, even if we facilitate them, the office of the RDC will not command respect.

Finally, about the Clerk to Council, if you want to appoint the Clerk to Council and give him these recommendations, then if possible, kindly look at the qualifications of that Clerk to Council. He should have the ability to hold the responsibilities that are being assigned to him. And if the CAO has to do that, he should be given guidelines as to which kind of person should hold that position.

With that, I think I have no problem with this Bill.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, five minutes please.

12.37
MS BEATRICE AMONGI LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): I thank you. I wish to commend the committee for the job well done. I have a comment on observation two where the committee observes that transfers from town councils have never been remitted directly. 

I wonder why these transfers have not been remitted directly because it appears as if in Local Government, when transfers are made, sometimes the CAO and the local leaders – the executive - determine how to use these funds and instead of sending these funds as has been remitted to the service delivery points where they are supposed to go, they keep on changing it, not as it went; and so less money reaches the service delivery point. I have in mind the money for maintaining access roads in the sub-county. 

We found out that when this money is sent - when the Ministry of Finance sends this money and says, “This sub-county - according to the workplan, Shs 15 million or Shs 20 million.” But when the money gets to the district, then it is tampered with and a lesser amount goes to do the work it is supposed to do, and this causes problems. 

About the question of honoraria to chairpersons of the village parishes, I really do hope that the amount will be reasonable. I was concerned after the budget speech. The other day, I heard a discussion on the radio about Gulu District, that they were very happy claiming that they are now going to be paid salaries. Now, you can imagine a situation where local councilors are expecting salaries and not honoraria. I can imagine the disappointment which is going to come when the honoraria is actually paid because they do not know the difference between honoraria and salaries. Obviously, there is a difference because an honorarium is a one-off whereas a salary is monthly. I do hope – the other day when I was listening to the budget speech - I hope it was an omission. I did not hear about the bicycles for the LC1 chairpersons being talked about. I hope that when we do get the budget speech that there is actually a provision for bicycles for LC1 chairpersons because it is a concern.

The question of discipline of the CAO and town clerks, now that they are being appointed by the Centre - I hope that at some point in this Parliament, we shall get a report that because of this amendment and the changes, that actually the CAOs and the town clerks have become independent of the local council executive, because there is a big problem there.

I want to comment about the remittances for the committees; the Public Accounts Committee and district service. There is a problem; the reason we are getting bad reports on the performance of the local councils as far as finances is concerned, is because the report of the Public Accounts Committee is supposed to go to the local council and is supposed to be debated by the local council. I would urge Members to find out from their districts how many of these reports of PAC are actually debated by council. 

In my district, I discovered that out of the eight reports that the Public Accounts Committee of Oyam submitted to the district local government, none has been debated and yet there are issues. The monies that are remitted for the Public Accounts Committee are meager, and so the district does not facilitate the Public Accounts Committee to sit and the work which is there for the Public Accounts Committee becomes irrelevant since nobody debates it and, therefore, corrective measures are not taken by the council. There is really a problem there. The report is about the performance of the executive and, therefore, they ensure that it is not debated at all. I would urge Public Service to find a solution to that ­-(Member timed out.)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, before hon. Sebunya Kasule speaks, the issue of the councils failing to debate – how frequently do they actually sit? Are we providing them enough money to sit so that they can debate? It has been a very long and outstanding cry from the local councils.  

12.43
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): I thank you. I thank the chairman for this beefed up report. I have a few concerns. I have not heard the committee talk about the oversight role of Members of Parliament concerning what the local governments are doing. Many times we appropriate money to local governments and when we go back to our constituencies, demands are made of roads, water, electricity, schools and we have no direct link to the local government. They may say - you may sit in a council, which sits when Parliament is sitting. There is no formal communication between the district and the MPs who represent the people and are supposed to perform the oversight roles. 

So, I will recommend to the committee that in the provision, we put clear information as to how the MPs and the other local leaders like RDCs could get official information regarding how much has been advanced to a constituency, district or local council or even town council.

My other point relates to the unspent balances that are sent to the local governments under recommendation No.4 by the committee, in which it says that such money should not be taken back to Government. I would like to agree with this recommendation, but point out that such money should be accounted for. It should not be returned because already there will be plans on which to spend such money. You can imagine a situation where a district council will hurry to spend this money without following the normal procedures. On the basis of that, I would like to strongly argue that such money should not be taken back; it should only be accounted for. And this money should be used before the Ministry of Finance sends funds for the new budget - it will shock-absorb the time between the closure and opening of the previous and new financial year respectively.

Lastly, on many occasions, we have heard of chairpersons usurping the powers of CAOs to the extent that they even have the powers to suspend them. This has culminated into many court cases, which the CAOs have often won and resumed their offices, yet some of them might have been suspended for financial misappropriations on the recommendations of the Local Government Accounts Committee - suspended in relation to misappropriation of money. There is no formal procedure to ensure these CAOs stay out of their offices as investigations go on. There is also no official position on how the council can suspend CAOs whenever investigations regarding financial misappropriation arise.

I would like to recommend that while we legislate, we should include a provision where if a person is suspected of financial misappropriation, such a person should stay out of office until the investigative process is complete, and when not found guilty, they are free to resume their offices. This will save us from depending on court cases, which end up costing the district and Government at the same time. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.47
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County (Islands), Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson for presenting a very good report. I will begin with the late releases to the lower local governments. Members will agree with me – let me even give an example, that on a quarterly basis, Parliament is given fund release documents, and when we go to our local governments we expect money to have been released. A good example is the money for community roads. After we received letters on its release around February, we thought it would get there in time. However, I would like to inform you that this money has just been released. 

So, when I went to the constituents and started telling them that such and such community roads were going to be worked on hoping that money would be coming, the chairperson refuted this information. He began to tell people that I was just deceiving them because there was no money. I can tell you that for the last three months, we have been quarrelling until he received that money. The question is, why do the Treasury and Ministry of Works tell us about money transfers when they are not yet ready? Where is the problem? The moment we tell the people about this money and it takes six months to be released - and when you release the money in June when the end of the financial year is just 30 June, what do you expect? Definitely it will be shoddy work.

Madam Speaker, the second issue relates to the creation of lower local governments, the villages, parishes and wards. I would like to say that it would be prudent for us to first of all make a law on how these villages are supposed to be established, before we can get to pay them that honorarium. I am saying this because there is going to be a serious lacuna. Villages are created by the sub-counties; parishes by the district and sub-counties by the district, but with confirmation from the ministry.

So, if the villages are going to be created by the minister, then I do not understand that because if the districts are very many, what about these villages? You know very well that we have just created many districts of recent, which will need to expand their councils because they cannot operate as districts with councils comprising of only four councilors – everybody will be a district speaker, chairperson – there will be no district council. It is on this basis that I see a need to create the lower local governments.

My suggestion is that this Parliament, before we get into elections, makes a law on how we should have the villages and parishes created. In my case, I come from the islands; each island should be a village even if such an island has only ten people; but we must have criteria. Without that, the lower governments – the LC III chairpersons will start to have every ten homes constituted into a village and the councils will pass them – the chairpersons will be doing that because they are looking for votes. If they create villages, the chairpersons of those villages will definitely get paid that honoraria and so the LC III chairpersons will start showing off as people with authority. I think you can now see where we are going. It was very important for us to create the law before paying honoraria to the lower local chairpersons.

Regarding the district service commissions, I would like to say that I have had a very good experience in Mukono. I do not know how Parliament can safeguard the independence of these district service commissions. In Mukono, the district service commission will interview someone for a job and recommend to the CAO. A few days later, concerned citizens will petition the IGG – this becomes a vicious circle of recruiting and firing. Where shall we end? (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Gyabi contributes, we shall need some clarifications from the Minister of Local Government on the community roads money. You know I was very happy when I received a letter and I happily wrote to all my chairpersons telling them the amount that was going to their sub-counties. But for the last six months, they have been asking about this money. And last week, they rang me to say that the money had gone with new conditions and that it was less than what we passed. So, I hope you will be able to explain to us why it has gone late.

12.52
MR FRED BUKENI GYABI (NRM, Bubulo County North, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the chairperson of the committee for the report presented. On observation No.2, where the committee says that it is mandatory that money be sent to town and municipal councils and divisions, it is true that this money is supposed to be sent there. However, unless the situation changed, it is not true that all councils have the capacity and the staff to manage this fund if it is supposed to be sent directly. In fact, there is a big problem in the Ministry of Local Government. I know that they are very good at approving administrative units, but they are also very poor at ensuring that there are enough funds with enough trained people to manage these units. They do not even know the number of administrative units that we have in this country. 

I would like to give the example of Manafwa where there were 10 sub-counties. I am told they are now 28, but in the Ministry of Local Government, the record is still 10 sub-counties, yet they are the ones who approved the creation of these new lower local governments.

Under KIAP, we are supposed to have 35 percent of the sub-counties in the districts benefiting, but in Manafwa we still have only 4. The reason is that the Ministry of Local Government which creates these administrative units does not know the number of administrative units that they have in the country in order to provide for them. I do not know whether they get information before they approve, to share with the relevant ministries especially that of Finance, in order for it to provide sufficient for funds for salary for these people.

That is why in all these new sub-counties, it is people who were doing other work who are running these units. These include community development officers, parish chiefs and assistant community development officers. It becomes very difficult for this money to go to these places when people there cannot manage it.

Observation 2 and 9 are the opposite. The committee is saying money should not be sent to the hospitals and schools because it has to pass through the districts.

What is wrong with the money going to these units? When I was still working in President’s Office, we used to come here to get our salaries. Later on, money was being sent to the districts, and then finally to our accounts. Now, it has improved to money going directly to people’s accounts. What is wrong with people getting their money directly? What is wrong with money being sent to centres where it is going to be spent with information to the accounting officers that a given amount of money has been sent for this purpose in this unit, please follow up for accountability? The accountability will be sent to where the money came from. 

I agree with the point of Local Government workers not being involved in elections because it is a problem that has been affecting most of our senior civil servants, especially CAOs. That is why there are many former CAOs here in Parliament who may have left the district because of these problems. There is a problem of the leaders in the councils thinking that administrative officers especially the CAO, has not been fair in elections. 

12.58
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth, Eastern Region): I would like to thank the committee for this report, but when I go through the objective of the Bill, I expected objective C to read as follows: To effect various improvements that have become necessary in the implementation of the Act in order to make it more user-friendly and match with the growing economy. As you heard when they were reading the budget, Uganda’s economy is growing at a very fast pace. I expect that since the economy is growing fast, we should also have many more cities. Whenever I ask the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government why we are not getting more cities and districts, I have been getting information that the problem is with the Act. I thought we could amend it at the same time such that we could get more cities.

The reason we have much congestion in Kampala is because we have only one city. We have other towns that qualify when you look at what is needed for a town to become a city such as Jinja, Mbarara and Mbale. I do not see why we cannot get more cities, when counties are becoming cities.

We need to match with the growing economy such that we stop deaths of people who are killed in accidents because of congestion in Kampala. I request the committee to go and correct the objective such that – (Member time out.)
 
MR AHABWE:  Thank you Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Kibedi for raising this issue, but it may not be necessary to amend the memorandum. When you go to the Bill, Clause 1 deals with declaring an urban area a city.

There is a reason why we have put it there. If you want I can read it for you: “The minister may, with approval of Parliament, declare an urban area a city in accordance with paragraph 32 of the Third Schedule to this Act.”

The spirit behind that is that we were lacking that provision in the law on how to create cities.

MR KIBEDI: Thank you for that information, hon. Minister. I have always approached you on this matter. I think you would have done that long time ago. We need to be sincere to ourselves because for me as a leader of the young people, I feel very concerned about the way we are developing. We need not to be selfish; we need to protect even the coming generations. Let us do what we can above our selfish interests.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): My concern is on page 3 of this report, item No.8. “It says that the discipline and removal of CAOs, town clerks of cities and municipalities, has been clarified and made in conformity with the Constitution.”

Sometime back, these CAOs were responsible to the councils where they were working and then we said they needed independence. The Centre took them up and this has created a lot of problems because CAOs have become so independent that even when councils sit and pass resolutions, they are only implemented at the mercy of the CAO. As Parliament, we need to review this, because I have seen a situation where a CAO does not implement the decisions of the council.

It is like when we discuss as Parliament and the Executive decides not implement. Look at your districts and you will find that CAOs have their bosses at the Ministry of Finance. I am not using the word connive; but they have their bosses in the ministry, such as the PS or somebody whom they have pledged to. He knows he cannot be removed; the council has nothing to do with him, because he is already above it and this defeats the spirit of decentralisation. I am not comfortable with this item.

1.04
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for being that sensitive. I think if you want good administration, you have to target the women. I want to thank you for that sensitivity. 

I have two comments to make, but the most important is that of the RDCs. RDCs have been mentioned under recommendation five and in fact, the committee recommends that if the RDCs are to be facilitated better, then it has to be now. Those of us who were in the Constituent Assembly clearly identified the role of the RDCs. We said that the RDCs have to be public servants subject to the rules and regulations of the Public Service. Although they are appointed by the President, as ambassadors are, they are subject to the rules and regulations of the Public Service. 

Therefore, if we are to honour the principle of decentralisation where power is devolved to the districts - we have the district chairmen, the CAO, we the council and the Ministry of Local Government to supervise and monitor the activities of the districts and the administration of the districts. 

Mr Speaker, it is high time we re-think the role of the RDCs and I want us to focus on how the RDCs are appointed. In most cases, those who are appointed are people who have participated in elections and lost. And they are appointed to work in the same district where they lost elections. This is a recipe for conflict. It is very important that the appointing authority be made aware of this. That is why, in many areas, you find that the RDCs and the chairmen are in conflict because of the different political interests they hold.

I also want to emphasise that whoever is appointing RDCs is not aware that we are now operating under a multiparty dispensation. Therefore, if an RDC is appointed to do the work of NRM or any other party, it makes it even more difficult to monitor the Central Government’s activities in the districts effectively, and to promote unity. So, as a Parliament, we should address this issue with a lot of seriousness. 

For me to hear that you want to facilitate them further – in the entire Lango sub-region and in many other regions, may be except Kamuli - I have found that the RDCs are actually doing activities of the Movement Political Party; they are not public servants. So, we have to re-think the role of the RDCs and re-define their functional duties so that we remain responsible for the decisions we make in this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, even in Kamuli, the RDCs are busy doing other things, not even the work of the NRM; they serve some other interests.

MRS OGWAL: So, I think we need to come up with a resolution to guide the appointing authority. We are all politicians and when we are elected; we want to do the work of all our voters; those who voted for us and those who did not vote for us. Now, if you are confronted with a situation where somebody is looking over your shoulder all the time, it makes things very difficult. This matter needs to be discussed further and I strongly recommend that as we go for elections, we must understand the role that the RDCs are going to play in the electoral process. In many areas, the RDC, and his bodyguard and mobilisers are all over the place de-campaigning, not only the Opposition members, but even some NRM candidates who do not support certain ideologies. So, they have become mobilisers, facilitators of forgery, and facilitators of violence. 

1.11
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I get to my substantive contribution, I would like to refresh the House on a directive you gave when we were discussing the Women Council Amendment Bill, on the advice of the Attorney General. We said that the amendments to provide for the women council chairperson to sit on the Local Government would come today in this amendment. So, I just want to refresh the House today on that.

I would like to address myself to what I consider a very big gap in regard to the management of the local governments and an attempt to align them with a multi-party dispensation – as we all know, the Political Parties Organisations Act was passed by this House, and we also had an amendment to the Parliamentary Elections Act to the effect that a Member who crosses to another political party which is not the party he or she contested in, would automatically lose their seat. That is the provision in the Parliamentary Elections Act. Of course, that is why you see people are not very keen on crossing any how.

But what I want to address myself to is - I thought the minister would come here – he said in the Bill that he is trying to make the Local Government Act more user-friendly and more customised to the present dispensation. I thought that then the amendment would seek to align the Local Government Act to the Political Parties and Organisations Act, to the effect that even a councillor in our Local Government who contests on a ticket of a political party, if or when they cross before the term of council is over, should be like a Member of Parliament liable to losing his or her council seat. But that is not happening. The law is very quiet on that, yet it has created a lot of instability in the local governments. And it has put the Minister of Local Government in a very awkward position. The minister here knows that there are a number of petitions in his office which he has had to fear to go and preside over because the instability in the local governments would be something you cannot manage with ease. I want to implore the Ministry of Local Government to reconsider addressing that gap if we mean well for the stability of the local governments, and also for the stability and the growth of a multiparty dispensation in our country. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to accuse the Ministry of Local Government for selective implementation of their mandate. They are supposed to oversee the policies of the Central Government implemented effectively in our local governments. Unfortunately, while the ministry is watching, we have policies that are undermining service delivery. It is now a documented fact that in the case of the NAADS Programme in some districts, if you are not a member of the NRM, you cannot be selected among the six beneficiary households and here were are, using taxpayer’s money and borrowing money in the names of Ugandans and it is documented that this is happening, but the Ministry of Local Government is not coming up authoritatively to guide Ugandans and say that this is about service delivery, and it is effectively undermining the Local Government.

Lastly, I understood the report of the committee to say that there should be a review of the Disability Act to provide for a new mode of elections for people with disabilities. I want to agree, but I want to emphasise the urgency. To continue to have leaders - Members of Parliament - elected under NUDIPU is really an insult to the empowerment of people with disabilities. We disenfranchise our people; NUDIPU is a union; it is an association. We should be able as a Parliament of Uganda to empower our people at all levels to be able to make a decision on who represents them; whether you are a member of NUDIPU or not, as long as you are a person with disability. The room for enfranchisement  and participation, should be expanded to bring them on board and not to narrow it. What happens if you are not a member of NUDIPU? You probably do not participate fully then. So, Madam Speaker, I think this is urgent and I think it should be reviewed very soon. Thank you very much. 

1.16
MS JUDITH FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader):  Madam Speaker, most of my comments are on page 5 and I will begin with point No.4, where the committee says that they noted with concern the delays in disbursement of funds. You are very well aware that the Ministry Of Finance is the one concerned with disbursement of funds, and the fact that we have financial decentralisation, as a Parliament, we should all be aware that financial decentralisation is disappointing all districts of Uganda in as far as this delay in the disbursement of funds is concerned. I want to give you an example; the recent PRDP Programme that has been launched in Northern Uganda. It is almost a year since that programme started running. You find that funds for the first quarter are disbursed in the second quarter, and by the time the district is to arrange for awarding contracts and so on, funds of the second quarter are supposed to have been ready, but they have not finished work of the first quarter. So, this slows down the process of making sure that services are given to the people in time, and you know that the law requires that monies that have not been used within that specific financial year are supposed to be returned. 

I know the committee has made a comment in regard to that on the same page in the last paragraph, where they observe that the unspent balances to local governments should not be taken back to the Central Government. But the committee has not given us their clear recommendation of what they think should be done with this money, and how fast they would propose the districts to use this money, if not returned to –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information that I want to give is in regard to the disbursement vis-à-vis the procurement plan. A particular activity may have some procurement which is much bigger than what could be disbursed in a particular quarter. I think one way to go would be to review or amend the PPDA Act in order to help the Ministry Of Finance front-load some money to meet the procurement requirements of a particular district to avoid this backlog of work. 

MS AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Member, for that information. The importance of this should really be taken very seriously because the delays in releasing funds will mean delays in service delivery to our people, and I wonder whether the committee has gone ahead to ask the Ministry of Finance what really goes on. What is the bureaucracy all about and how can we as a Parliament help to reduce the bureaucracy to ensure that funds reach the districts on time? 

My second issue is on point No.2 about the 20 percent of the budgetary money that we send from Central Government to the districts. This 20 percent is not enough for the district local council. For example, should the 20 percent be used up, the council is rendered redundant. They will not be able to do any work because they are not going to get any pay. My proposal is that we pay all district councillors like Members of Parliament are being paid per month so that they are not subjected to this 20 percent; because some local governments do not raise enough revenue per se. For example, in Northern Uganda, we do not have enough resources to raise local revenue to make sure that these local councils sit every time they have to. So, to avoid the disturbances and the corruption that goes on in the local governments, we have to ensure that the payment of the district council is the duty of the Central Government directly, not from the 20 percent as it has usually been. 

As I speak, Madam Speaker, some councillors if not all, want to see that once there is a contract to be awarded, they have to benefit from it, and that will blind them from carrying out their oversight duties as members of the council. You will find that a councillor is getting a contract to build a road somewhere. He will want to make a profit out of it and yet he is the one supposed to oversee the proper construction of the road. How do you think he will compromise this? So, we have to make sure that we pay our councillors directly from the Central Government to ensure that these services are rendered properly. Madam speaker, those are the issues that I wanted to raise. 

1.22
MR LARTIF SEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three issues to raise; one concerns the payment of honoraria to chairpersons. I am very uncomfortable with this kind of payment - whatever we call it or whether it is not a salary or an allowance - but this is the befitting name. But what is known down there is that they are going to get salaries. Giving this allowance or any monies to only the chairperson is going to create disharmony. We know that these local councils have contributed greatly to the development of our nation, and the leaders at the grassroots are doing it as a team. So the moment we start this kind of arrangement and we only target the chairperson, we shall be doing a very big disservice. We know that in some areas the secretaries for defence do more work than even the chairpersons. 

MS AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that in my district, immediately after the Budget Speech, all the LC 1s got very excited because they were going to get a monthly salary of Shs 120,000 per month. 

Secondly, issues and calls were coming from my district that, “Now you are paying the chairperson only, what about us in the executive who are doing much of the work?”  

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, definitely I would not really support the move of paying only chairpersons because we live in these zones and we know whatever happens there – you go to the chairperson, he will send you to the secretary of defence, and they are the people who are really doing the donkey work. So, the moment you say, “We are paying only the chairperson”, we will be doing a very big disservice to the community. 

I would rather suggest that instead of paying the chairperson alone every month, we should find a way of how we could maybe at the end of the year or every two years, target the executive as well. Otherwise, in paying the chairpersons alone others will be demoralised. They will say, “Since you are the one who is being paid, we shall not work”.

Secondly, on page 3, the CAOs, we know that the CAOs are appointed by the centre, but I think they have a lot of power. I agree with hon. Birekeraawo that at times these CAOs are untouchable. Resolutions of council are rarely implemented simply because they have their bosses elsewhere. 

Madam Speaker, as you know the policy of local councils, eyes on, hands off; and when anything goes wrong the person who is under fire is the politician. You will rarely see a CAO coming out to defend what happened simply because he is not bothered; because you are a politician you come out to defend even what was done by the CAO. 

I would suggest that we should have a mechanism on how these CAOs can be tamed so that they implement council decisions, because we know that decisions are meant to develop these areas and the politicians are the ones who are directly responsible to the electorate. 

Finally, on page 5, the five divisions of Kampala city have been included in the electorate to receive funds from the Central Government. Madam Speaker, what is really making it difficult for these divisions to implement various decisions is not about getting money directly from the Central Government because the centre is sending money to these local governments. What is on the ground is that these local divisions cannot carry out any activity exceeding Shs 1 million unless it has been approved by the district contracts committee. Whatever is being done at the various divisions must be approved if it exceeds Shs 1 million. They have been demanding that they should have their divisional contracts committees so that whatever is going to be done in their divisions is done by them. 

The process of approval from the centre is very lengthy and we should request the ministry to ensure that the divisions are given opportunity to have their own divisional contracts committees so that whatever is going to be carried out in their divisions is handled by themselves at division level. I thank you very much. 

1.29
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Apac): I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I have only three areas to tackle in this report. First, is the payment, which has been defined as honoraria, to the chairpersons of local councils. I think at this stage it is very important for this House to know how much these people are going to be paid because immediately this statement came out, everybody in the local council, both the executive members and the chairpersons, were asking how much they were going to be paid. The term “honoraria” may be understandable to Parliament and other higher institutions but in the villages, people know salaries as something they are paid. 

Honoraria is basically a token, something to make you happy. I think it is important that it is known to the House and the rest of the public how much we are going to pay them. Since we have defined it to apply to the chairperson, what are we going to do with the rest of the members of the executive? Because I am aware that in the village where I come from, when the chairperson calls for a meeting, the rest of the executive is summoned to come and attend. But in the event that some small allowance is not given to them, they do not turn up for the next meeting. Now that we are going to give money to one person, the chairperson, the rest of the executive will not turn up for the meeting. This means that the whole of the local council will have been killed. What will now be the fate of these local councils?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you hon. Otto for giving way. The information I want to give is that when the chairpersons of district councils and the speakers formally got salaries, in some places councils almost collapsed. In fact the councils have now turned to certain activities like monitoring to get the equivalent of their pay. In the end the money that should do proper monitoring is then used to meet the commitment of the interests of councillors, incredible trips, study tours and in the end they actually do not do the work. So, we may have to consider reviewing the whole thing so that things are done formally than in a roundabout way. So the problem is even going to be bigger with the LC 1. 

MR ISHAA OTTO: I agree with you. That is already a problem that is going on. Even as we talk, the corruption we talk about in local governments at the district is as a result of this kind of facilitation. The local councillors have to look for companies to get contracts in the district through their friends and relatives so that they can access some money because they are not paid; and the chairpersons who are paid always sanction it because they know that is the only way of consoling them. 

We know an LC III chairperson who had been negotiating with a contractor for the sake of helping the councillors – saying, “Please can you help my councillors!” These people are not paid. So, Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. I think we should be able to consider this matter at another level. We have councillors at LC III and these people are not paid any money. Every time I go to the constituency, they want me to call a meeting because when I call a meeting, there are some sodas and meals, and that is all about it. 

The other day they were telling me that for six months now they have not got any allowance. “We are not even getting Shs 2,000; so how do you expect us to go to the council,” they asked. And that is why sub-county councils have now even failed to operate. You have these people, the sub-county chiefs and other technical people, who just go and plan on their own; they do not mind about these councillors, after all the councillors are not paid and they do not waste their time to go for the meetings. So, how do we help the people that we represent? This is a very serious and big challenge, Madam Speaker.

I think that instead of just thinking of giving some little facilitation to one or two individuals at some level, we should draw up a clear mechanism of giving facilitation to all of these councillors. That will save us because even the money we are giving to districts and to sub-counties is not going to benefit anybody. That is the source of the corruption that we have in local governments; it is because of poor and piecemeal facilitation of a few individuals.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I refer you to page 4, item 14, where the committee is concerned about the increasing number of villages, parishes, wards and so forth. In my constituency, recently I was told that there are about four more new parishes that have been created and I can tell you that if you go there you will find people struggling to select a person who should come from the sub-county to go to the other parish. How do we really organise these parishes? It has become extremely difficult because they are created at a time when you cannot plan. 

Now the planning process in Uganda requires that you should start from the parish. The parish development committee should sit at that level; take it to the sub-county development committee and to the district. But now that chain is distorted because at the level of the parish, you have created another one. Tomorrow -(Member timed out­_)

1.36
MR BENSON OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to, first of all, thank the committee for a good report. But I would like to point out a few things. 

Firstly, I have always expressed concern about presidential pronouncements, which eventually become policy and which eventually, as a country, we have got to implement with budgetary implications. So many pronouncements have been made but I would like to recall only two. 

When the president addressed this House at the time when there was blood bath in this city, he pledged bicycles for chairpersons of LC I and in the audience, somebody said, “But which LC I because the present one is illegal already?” Then he said, “Both the outgoing and the incoming.” 

Madam Speaker, that means two bicycles per village for the entire country. Having worked in an NGO that used to give out bicycles per village, including your district, Kamuli, I know how mind boggling the cost can be to supply a bicycle per village. I do not know where this money is going to come from and now we are talking of honoraria! 

The other day I sat down and tried to calculate using the figure put in the budget. It would come to at most 10,000 per month, per chairperson. I think this is just a mockery and given that all these other people will be de-motivated, I do not know where this will take us. And having worked with LC I chairpersons, I know that a good number of them are elected out of good will but they lack academic qualifications and so they usually use their secretaries to do the donkey work. How are we going to motivate the secretaries and the rest of the committee? We need to rethink this.

When we look at the observations on page 4, No. 14, the committee made a very good observation when they raised a concern on how district chairpersons are failing to raise executives to work with them. This is a reality. I know for instance that for the entire term, which is now ending, the chairman of Amolotar has failed to get a vice-chairperson and even some executive members. But this report stops at that concern. What are we going to do to ensure that the lives of these chairpersons are made easy? We need to look into this very critically, Madam Speaker.

Finally, the role of RDCs. Article 203, especially Section 3(a) to (c), is very clear. But I want to raise a concern here that the RDCs are over-stretching the roles assigned to them by the President or as prescribed by Parliament by law. I do not know whether it is now that particular sub-section which gives them the right to break the backs of opposition members when they hold rallies? I would be very hesitant to approve any additional budget for RDCs for as long as their role has been reduced to harassing people, especially those they do not agree with. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.41
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will first look at the objective of this Bill. The objective of this Bill is to make miscellaneous amendments to the Local Governments Act, Cap. 243, specifically looking at clause (b).  The objective of the Bill is to bring the Local Governments Act into conformity with the Constitution.

My honourable colleague, hon. Alaso, clearly brought it out that in the local governments today we are having selective action from the local leaders. I am of the view that we should come up with a punitive measure against some actors under the Local Governments Act. You find a chairman LC III with some of his cronies and the entire family working hand in hand and saying - the NAADS programme - they will take all that comes from the NAADS programmes to their respective homes, give it to their children and their wives and this is very detrimental and against any act under the local governments. So, I believe we should come up with punitive measures against such actors under the Local Governments Act. 

Looking at the general observation of the committee, Article 203 of the Constitution on page 5 are the functions of the RDCs. The functions of these RDCs I believe some of these RDCs have got a very big problem. There is a lacuna in who is who in the local governments. Where does the chairman LC V fall and where do I, as Member of Parliament, fall? In protocol, who is who?

At one time, when I was at Abayita Ababiri, the Ministry of Local Government headed by Minister Kahinda Otafiire then, delegated somebody to come and preside over a function of opening a market in Abayita Ababiri. When I got to that function, it was very unfortunate that people started fighting for the microphone. I was not brought up as such so I would not go and start fighting for the microphone. I am a very civil person but believe me, there are certain things we need to bring out clearly. The RDC will come up and believe he is on top of everything or she is on top of everything. 

The Chairman LC V, Kyeyune, as he was then, started commanding here and there, “Balikuddembe should not speak; Balikuddembe should not do that …” But that is very immoral of we leaders. So, I believe what we need certainly is, we should bring out who is who in the local governments because the Chairman LC V as he can stand, will come and try to bog down the entire process. So, I believe there is a lacuna in protocol. Who is who? I, Member of Parliament, I believe when I am in my constituency, I am on top of everything that is done there and I very much respect anybody who is brought in to stand in as chief guest.

On the recommendations, I want to be very brief. Recommendations of RDCs’ payments: the RDCs have got a number of problems that are brought before them but my own experience as Member of Parliament who dwells a lot in land conflicts, I find a bit of anomalies here and there. When I look at the RDC who would go and serve to mediate between those people conflicting, you find that the RDC would want a token of appreciation.

I will give you a case in point because I want to be straight. There was a case in Bubuli of a lady called Bwogi and the family. They have a square mile in that area where the RDC came in as a mediator but because she had offered a service to these people, she believed she had to get a token of appreciation and the token of appreciation was, she had been given an acre of land on that respective piece of land; and where she is given a piece of land that definitely kills her sight on what she is going to write. So, when you come in to ensure that there is harmony in the place, she draws her gun and shoots up in the air and says, “You know what, if you people, the Bibanja owners, do not back off this, we are going to take you in; we are going to prefer charges against you on terrorism and possession of firearms.” 

At a given point I was charged with terrorism and possession of firearms, and yet I do not know where one has got to handle a gun at the end of the butt but charges had been preferred against me of terrorism and possession of firearms until the Speaker of Parliament had to come in to put a bar against this because they were sheer lies. 

I was there to protect the people but the RDC came out boldly to say that I was in possession of firearms and I was a terrorist of sorts. I believe the recommendation as was made by the committee should be taken on. We should look at what the RDC should get specifically to avoid such trivial things like getting a gift to offer a service illegally.  So, Mr Chairman and entire committee, we should dwell on those things to ensure that we look and work within the objective of the Bill. Thank you.

1.48
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very, Madam Speaker. I wish to begin from where hon. Lagada had mentioned about the emoluments of the local councils. I am happy that the committee really recommends that the office of the clerk to council be catered for differently from the 20 percent. However, I would also add that the 20 percent to cater for the emoluments of the councillors is really too low. The committee would have looked at increasing this percentage maybe from 20 to 30 or 40 percent. 

Why am I saying this? You realise that most of the council - we are creating here many districts; we are not looking at how some of them get their revenue. Their revenue is too low that when you talk about the 20 percent, it may not even be enough to cater for one district council sitting.

Hon. Lagada was talking about the issue of councils not debating the recommendations or possibly reports of PAC. The issue is about finances. If we are to look at the effectiveness and efficiency of district councils, we need to look at improving their facilitation from the 20 percent, either to 30 percent or 40 percent but after removing the office of the clerk to council like you proposed.

Something else to be talked about is to do with RDCS. Time and again, I have said here on the Floor of this House that the RDCs in some areas are becoming a menace. If their positions are of civil servants, I would request that they stick to the rules of the game and play the role of the civil servants. 

If they will be politicians, then I would advise that the rule of political parties applies to the appointment of RDCs. Some RDCs go on radio and say, “You know our role here ….” I gave an example of my RDC in Kasese. When he went to Kasese he said, “The reason I am here is to ensure that the opposition is kicked out and dies a natural death.” And I was like, is this provision in the Constitution? If you think you are going to muzzle some sections of the Constitution then we can take you in for treason because that is what it tantamounts to.  

We are aware that the Constitution provides that RDCs should be having the qualifications of a Member of Parliament, which means the least an RDC can have is a senior six certificate. But we are aware that there are some of them who do not have even a senior four certificate [MS NAJJEMBA: “Even P7.”] even a P7 certificate. Can we be informed under which rule these RDCs without qualifications are appointed? Under which rule, Madam Speaker? 

Otherwise, I would be of the view, and I would strongly recommend that RDCs without qualifications be kicked out of their jobs and find a better place where they can go, or they go for Universal Secondary Education. Otherwise, some of them are using their lack of qualifications to begin parading programmes of individuals and ensuring that they line up the interests of certain individuals who will keep them in power. If you do not support a certain line, then you will find an RDC being on your back knowing that he does not have the qualifications that keep him in the job. He uses these harassment mechanisms to keep himself in the job. I would strongly recommend that those RDCs who do not have the requirements or the qualifications of the RDCs be retired in public interest.

Finally, is the issue of the administrative units. I am happy that the committee noted that some of these administrative units are not monitored by the powers that are supposed to monitor them. I will just give a vivid example of an administrative unit in my district. Recently, the Ministry of Local Government gave a town council status to one of my units, Lhubiriha-Mpondwe Town Council. Elections were carried out, a map of the town council was given to us and it was the basis upon which the elections were carried out. 

But to our surprise, a new map is being fronted with some other villages coming on board. They bring a village to come into the town council and they skip some villages and go to other villages and we fail to understand. How do you say you are creating a unit, you skip for example the area of Parliament here then you go and fix National Theatre to an area that is supposed to hold Christ the King? You are creating a unit called Christ the King, it is going towards National Theatre but you jump Parliament and you are creating it as a unit -(Member timed out_) 

1.54
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this report. I will make a few observations.

On page 6 of the report, observation No. 14 where the committee notes that there is an ever-increasing number of villages, parishes and wards; regrettably, neither the Ministry of Local Government nor the Electoral Commission has an updated list of these administrative units.

My concern is that after making these observations, the committee goes ahead and welcomes the idea of paying honoraria to these chairpersons. Now the question is: you do not even know how many they are; who are you going to pay? How many are you going to pay? I am simply seeing this as another loophole for what you would call ghost payments if we are not careful.

So, I urge the minister to take this as a very serious matter because these are administrative units within your jurisdiction. The committee has observed that you do not know their number; yet the same committee has proposed that these people are paid honoraria. How are you going to arrive at your figures? Don’t you see very direct linkages going to occur? I really urge you to avoid a situation where we are going to end up paying ghost chairpersons for villages, parishes or wards.

Then I want to agree with the committee on their recommendation on unspent balances. Usually, local governments are not able to spend all their money so they usually take back the money to Government. Of course, the reason usually is the delay, which should actually be blamed on Government. When this money is returned, most often than not, the concerned local governments actually lose out. So, we should look at the possibility of having these unspent balances kept at the local governments to enable projects continue in the said local governments.

Then in recommendation No. 5, the committee also mentioned the same RDCS. This time I am simply looking at the monitoring role of the RDC. According to my understanding, monitoring is not just about having eyes on; monitoring should go beyond that. Unfortunately, following what most Members have observed here, most of the RDCs are very short of that because of probably the requisite qualifications that they actually lack.

Monitoring is supposed to be a technical, managerial function that requires you to have some basic knowledge of the performance indicators you are monitoring. These days we are talking about pupil-teacher ratio, patient-doctor ratios; it is full of ratios. The RDC must be that person with the competencies to collect such information and be able to analyse such information. You find that the RDC’s role has changed with time. It is high time the appointing authority considered having only technically-competent persons for these positions. (Interjections) And they are there, they are available. We have seen and we want to depart from that general observation that these positions for RDCs are meant for people who have failed everywhere and just dumped there.

Also, how can we propose increasing the facilitation of RDCs when, again according to the committee, it has observed that the current number that we have is not well-facilitated?

2.00
MR ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I would like to appreciate the report of this committee. However, I wanted to make observations on a few issues.

One is that this report is looking at how service delivery can be improved by human resources. That is the technical and political leaders using the available resources; that is the funds that are always availed to them and then trying to use the Bill to ask and then eventually, to give the accountability. Unfortunately, the committee has recommended an increase in one sector of the technical wing that is the RDCs to get more funding for monitoring or for their service delivery in the system.

I think we have not taken into account that these RDCs, like in Lango sub-region – the new districts already have got some names because those who may not qualify to contest as area Members of Parliament or district Members of Parliament are struggling to go to these new districts. The struggle is very tense. 

We have not even taken into account the ages of some of these RDCs. When I did my research at the beginning of this year, I found that the oldest RDC in Uganda was about 85 years and comes from Oyam. Therefore, you wonder that if these people had not reached their age of pension and they are again going to be re-deployed in the service – again what I have found in Lango sub-region is that almost all of them are going to contest in the next parliamentary elections. When they fail, they will be appointed as RDCs again. Is this how we can run local governments? What they preach there is that, “You people in Lango do not support Government; you are against Government”. Are we really against this Government? This is the message they preach. How are we going to develop some of these areas with this kind of statement from these people? 

I think time has come to improve who should be the RDC of a district. If not, I do not recommend the RDCs to be appointed any more in this country because they are not supporting the cause for which this country should develop. They are one-sided. If we are to look at those who have failed, did UPC also fail? Independents also fail? FDC also will fail. So, why don’t we appoint them on merit? I think this would be reasonable instead of being biased like we have already noted. 

When it comes to division of areas into villages, parishes and so forth, Madam Speaker, there is a crisis down there. Soon every village will be divided again into two villages because they are going to be paid; they have misunderstood it. As one honourable member has said, they believe they are going to be paid Shs 120,000 per month; not Shs 120,000 per annum. So, there is total confusion and when we tell them, they say, “The President has already said it.” Like on the issue of the bicycles which were sent, they are still waiting for them but whoever is going to receive them remains the question. So, we have to use the objectives seriously. 

The objectives of this report are very good, that is, to effect various improvements that have become necessary in the implementation of the Act in order to make it more user-friendly, fair and clear. I think that if we are serious, this would be our guiding principle and the bible that we should stick to. But now when we fail to put measures like the biblical people say, measures that can stand the test of time, and next time we are coming we don’t change to embrace the multi-party system then I think the committee will have to go back to the drawing board more frequently than expected. (Member timed out­_) 

2.06
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on observation No. 14 on the concern subjecting the creation of administrative units to the approval of the Minister of Local Government. Whereas it would be logical for us to have the Minister of Local Government approving the creation of administrative units up to the district level, I would not support the proposal that we amend sections 6, 7 and 8 of the Local Governments Act to provide the minister with powers to approve the creation of a village. 

Uganda has got over 36,000 villages. The Minister of Local Government is not every person. Now when you say that you should give him powers to approve the creation of a sub-division of a village, you would be rendering this to a micro-management level. And this as a Parliament, we really cannot support it. 

Madam Speaker, I stood in this Parliament and said the people of Namuwongo wanted a district. But what is going on now is that instead of a district, Government has decided to sub-divide villages and they have created over 30 villages illegally, without following the procedures laid down in sections 6, 7 and 8 of the Local Governments Act. I would strictly not support this proposal and when the right time comes, I will oppose the proposed amendments.

Secondly, in the general observation 5.1, they are saying that the five divisions of Kampala are going to receive direct central Government funding. But there has been a problem in Kampala, maybe out of a clash or egos; we have had the divisions clashing with the City Hall over monies. City Hall, which is the LC V, has got responsibilities just like the LC IIIs or divisions. Now, this move by Government is going to increase the clashes and it is going to end up in no work finally done in Kampala and I would not support it. 

Finally, the National Resistance Government came in here by the gun. It was a revolutionary Government; I do not know whether it is still one. And in the many speeches of President Museveni I have listened to, he has been telling us that he came to change this and the other. Now, how can a revolutionary Government in the year 2010 be talking about RDCs? 

Resident District Commissioners were the blue eyed boys of the Governor. These were colonial institutions, which were repressive; they were oppressive; they were supposed to monitor villages, regions and districts during the colonial era. But it is surprising that we still have this institution in our Constitution. And the revolutionary Government of the National Resistance Movement has failed to change this one. How different are you from colonialists? You say you came to change, how different are you from colonialists? 

Today, as I talk now, the RDC of Makindye is the one involved in land wrangles, he is the one who stops rallies; he is the one who apportions estates of the deceased; he is the one who mobilises the Kiboko Squad, and he is the one who forms CHOGM pork joints. Now, is this an RDC? And I want to agree with my sister, hon. Winifred Kiiza that three quarters of the RDCs in the whole nation do not have the requisite qualifications. In fact if you probed them, most of them would be disqualified by that point alone. 

Parliament should not continue wasting a lot of time on RDCs. We should make a clear and precise recommendation that this colonial institution must be abolished. (Applause) It must be abolished because we are tired. The colonial era ended in 1962 and President Museveni told us that the problem with Obote and Amin was that they continued with some of the institutions of colonialism. Now, how different is he from Obote and Idi Amin? By continuing with the RDC institution, you are continuing with a colonial establishment and colonial institutions in the year 2010. These institutions are not relevant to development and are not relevant under a multiparty dispensation. (Member timed out­_)

2.11
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you Rat Hon. Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and I want to make my contribution with regard to No.7 of the observations, which talks about the district service commissions.

As you are aware, at every commission, including the Parliamentary Commission, although we are not yet there, we are supposed to have a representative of persons with disabilities; it is a statutory requirement. But most of the districts have failed to appoint a representative of persons with disabilities on their service commissions.  

In my constituency, for example in Jinja, for the last five years we have had no representative and so is Bududa and other districts in Eastern Uganda. I think that whereas this is a very good intent by the ministry, I would encourage them to also follow it up and see to it that if you are talking of representation, it is for real. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at mobilisation as some Members have been saying - they are wondering what the role of a Member of Parliament is in the local governments. This has been very clear because when you go down to the districts, most Members of Parliament are very powerful and most of the work done there is out of their initiative. 

Not long ago, Madam Speaker, you remember there were some districts in my constituency, which almost failed to pass their budgets because of the influence of MPs. So, if one still wonders as to what the role of the MP is, then we may need to reflect backwards and see how things have been moving. Maybe what we need to do is to create better working relationships with the CAOs and the district local authorities. Otherwise, I think we have a good working relationship.

I have heard a lot of lamentation by Members of Parliament about those who are benefiting from NAADS and other Government programmes insinuating that most of the beneficiaries are NRM members. I think as Members of Parliament we fail to play our part. We are responsible for mobilisation of our constituents so that they can benefit from Government programmes. So, somewhere, somehow, I think information is lacking and that is why people are not benefiting all through but these programmes are targeting each and every Ugandan. I might not accept this unless there is evidence and it can be laid on the Table.

A comment has been made about elections of representatives of persons with disabilities at local council using the NUDIPU structures. I think some Members of Parliament are not aware of how NUDIPU structures are elected. These originate from the village to the national level. It is like Parliament. You will not bring everybody from the village to come and vote on a matter here in Parliament because you are their representatives. 

So even with these NUDIPU structures, we have elections right from the village to the national level. So when they say in the law that it is a provision that representatives to local councils are supposed to be conducted through the use of NUDIPU structures, these are representatives of persons with disabilities right from the village. 

So I think we might need a session or workshop to induct Members of Parliament on how best practices are done with regard to the disability movement in this country. After all, most times even when we go back to our constituents, very few attend to issues of persons with disabilities. This includes even Members of Parliament. So I think we need to create awareness amongst ourselves first of all. How do we move? How is the disability movement in this country? How do we help and involve them? That way I think we will be able to appreciate what we do.

With regard to RDCs, it is true they have done a lot of good work but also as Members of Parliament, our relationship has not been good in some instances reason being that maybe we contested with them. Also, there is animosity but sometimes if we are to reach them properly I think we can go a long way. Today it is NRM in power, tomorrow it might be FDC. So shall we continue changing because it is the other party? If you give me the authority to appoint, of course, I will appoint someone who pleases me and not every Dick and Harry. So in some instances, I think –(Member timed out_)

2.17
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I am going to raise three issues. One is the relationship between the CAO, the Council and the District Service Commission in terms of employment and removal of staff members. You find that the District Service Commission employs the staff in the district and the CAO is the one to supervise them. The council monitors what they are doing but I have seen in many districts where when staff is employed, they do whatever they want and the CAO has no authority over them. 

As we sort out their accountability, the CAO cannot even collect reports from the staff as he has no power. There are some staff who are big headed and don’t even want to do work. The CAO and the council look at them but in any case where the council takes action, you will find that the same staff go to court, the council is terribly fined and the culprits are paid heavily even when at times they have really squandered money.

So I would like to see the clear relationship and how these people can be employed and interdicted otherwise they have become bosses there. They don’t do any work and nobody controls them. The district service commissions at times are too weak to do anything, so the minister should tell me exactly what we should do to such people.

The second issue is the replacement of councillors. As Members of Parliament, as soon as you die people are already campaigning and the following day you are replaced. But for councillors, they are left there for months and even years. Why don’t we put a deadline for replacement of councillors because many sub-counties miss out because they are not put in place? Can we have a clause in this Local Government Act so that when a councillor retires or dies he is replaced within a certain time frame?

The next comment is on the election of persons with disabilities. I have been in this Parliament right from 1996. I have been working with NUDIPU for the last four years and they are the ones who shaped me to come here and be what I am and I will never abandon them. But that time when we put NUDIPU as a structure for electing Members of Parliament and councillors, it brought a lot of contradiction. Many Members of Parliament did not support it because they felt that NUDIPU is an NGO. We supported it because there was no other structure. So we were looking forward to the time when Government would put its own structures, which we would use for electing persons with disabilities to Parliament. 

The opportunity came when we put in place the National Council for Disability. We begged the minister to please let us have this structure exactly like the one for women and the youth so that we could use it for elections but that time the minister refused and said that they didn’t have money for putting up such structures. 

The opportunity came again this time to restructure and amend the National Council for Disability for elections. It is very unfortunate that it didn’t come in time and it has not been amended as we wanted. Now we are going to use NUDIPU. 

I would like to see that the Electoral Commission puts all those structures of NUDIPU in place because in some districts NUDIPU is not there and neither are the structures. So let the Electoral Commission make sure that all the structures are there, and secondly they must support the election of persons with disabilities. 

I have seen in districts where people with disabilities are brought by the candidates without transport or accommodation; they are just stranded there. So, please, I want to make sure that NUDIPU together with the Electoral Commission provide services so that persons with disabilities don’t suffer when they are electing their representatives. Thank you very much.

2.22
MR SAMUEL ABURA PIRIR (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members. I would like to thank the committee for this commendable report that they have made. It is well researched and well designed.

I want to base my contribution on the objectives of the Bill, that is, 3.0. The purpose was to bring the Local Government Act into conformity with the Constitution. This document, the Local Government Act, is totally misleading. I think it was not written by a panel or team of researchers. It must have been the work of one person, because as I said it is misleading. 

Councillors, chairmen, CAOs at the district level behave in a manner as if they are more superior than us who are at the national level of governance. Take a case when you go to the district to attend a function. It is hard for the district chairperson or the CAO to include you in their programme. I attended one function in which I bled in my heart. At the function, the protocol was observed in the following manner. The RDC was the guest of honour, the chairman, the CAO, heads of departments, ladies and gentlemen and finally, the MP present. (Laughter) So in protest of this, I had to walk away because what matters is the position and not me as Abura. You may not like me but my position is what sounds. I do not know how that act even transformed this local leadership to honourable – it is everywhere: honourable – honourable, what is this? (Laughter) How many honourables are there? (Laughter) (Interjection) You rarely speak, you can give information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information, hon. Franca Akello.

MS AKELLO: I thank you my honourable colleague for giving me way. The point of clarification I wanted to find out is that last year some Members of Parliament, especially women MPs were complaining here before Parliament that they were being harassed and embarrassed by not allowing them to participate in the Women’s Day celebrations. Some of them are recognised and others are not – actually exactly what you are telling us now. So, I am wondering whether you also feel it the way the women were feeling. (Laughter)

MR ABURA PIRIR: I thank you. I am the one speaking and so I felt it. Now, I am glad that this committee is very realistic so we should amend this Bill and trim the powers. Too much power is vested in LC Vs and CAOs; and because they are given that post, that power, they are empowered like this.

Firstly, they can dictate. Look – dictating and interference, especially the district service commission really suffers. It is a mere rubber stamp for LC Vs and CAOs because when it comes to recruitment, the person they prefer is the one they recommend and that recommendation dictates whom to employ.

And then you come to what they now days call procurement. Huh!! That is where the “eating place” is – procurement. You can find that each one has a company – a construction company and so forth. If you go around and investigate thoroughly, you will find that these people have their own companies tendering all the project activities that are to be made for development. 

I am also fed up of the leadership at the district level being monopolised by one sex. We should correct this document so that we come out with a sound policy that administration at the district, especially political leadership, should be gender balanced. We should rotate it in such a way that if this term the woman is LC V, then the next term should be a man -(Laughter) (Applause)- because everywhere you go, it is a man, and yet corruption is chronic –(Laughter) ­(Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members. Twenty one Members have contributed to this report. I allowed that because I thought local government issues are very important. I think we shall end there. I want to suspend until a quarter to four to allow the Minister to respond and then we go to the Committee Stage. 

I have seen the Attorney-General and there is something I want you to explain to this House. What happened to the protection of the local governments under the Government Proceedings Act, because the local governments are being sued arbitrarily; executions are being issued against them arbitrarily. So much is being taken by court brokers and so forth under very strange circumstances. For instance, my District of Kamuli, judgement was entered by a court in Masaka. Masaka has no jurisdiction over Kamuli but judgement was entered - they came to grab our chairman’s car. I want to know what happened to the Government Proceedings Act and the protection of the local governments. 

So, I will suspend the House until a quarter to four to complete the Bill. I thank you very much.

(The House was suspended at 2.29 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.45 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, you raised an important issue on execution and attachment proceedings against Government and local governments, and in what measure each is protected or not protected.

Let us start from the Civil Procedure and Limitation Miscellaneous Provisions Act. Most lawyers and maybe most Members of Parliament are aware of this Act. It is an Act of 1969 and is operational.

As far as giving notice of 45 days is concerned, before a law suite is instituted against Government or a local authority, 48 days are required. So, I think on that one, so far so good and it is derived from Section 2 of the Civil Procedure and Limitation Miscellaneous Provisions Act. Under Section 3, on limitations of certain actions, you cannot bring a tort – you all know what a tort is; it is a civil wrong – against Government or  local authority or a scheduled cooperation after the expiration of two years from date on which the cause of action arose. On that it is also so far so good.
In clause (2) of Section 3, no action founded on contract shall be brought against the government or local authority after the expiration of three years from the date on which the cause of action arose.
Madam Speaker, as you rightly pointed out, I think the problem arises when you go to the Government Proceedings Act under Section 14, which provides for the nature of relief. And under Section 19(4) you cannot execute or attach against Government. I have looked for the definition of Government in the Constitution and the Interpretation Act, and Government means the “Government of Uganda”.

Unlike in the other law that I was referring to, in the Government Proceedings Act, they do not make a distinction between Government and local authority. Therefore, I have had to have recourse to the Local Governments Act. Under Section 6(ii) of this Act, it is provided as follows: “Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section 1, which makes the local authority a body corporate, no execution, attachment or process in such nature shall be issued out of any court for enforcing payment by a local government, of any money or costs against its fixed assets and statutory transfers, provided the executions or attachment maybe made against any other property after six months from the date of judgement, order or decree.”

To me, that is reasonable; six months after which you can do it. But, Madam Speaker, in a leading case on this matter – and that is why you maybe aware, many lawyers are aware of this judgement and you have seen where Government defaults and cannot pay, they rush to courts to get Writ of Mandamus on the basis of the popular case of Attorney-General Vs Osocraco Ltd. 

This was an appeal from the High Court in the Court of Appeal. I wish to read to you a small paragraph here of the lead judgement of Justice Mpagi Bahigeine and she says: “I respectfully subscribe to the above reasons. It is clear from the above authorities that since the 1995 Constitution, the rights, powers and immunities of the state are not immutable any more. Article 20(2) enjoins everybody including Government agencies, to protect and respect individual fundamental human rights. The Constitution has supremacy over all other laws and the historic common law doctrines restricting the liability of the state should not be allowed to stand in the way of constitutional protection of fundamental rights. Article 26 protects the respondent’s right to own property. The respondent having obtained judgement is clearly entitled to a meaningful form of redress under Article 50 as the judge so put it. Since this is not a case of compulsory acquisition in the public interest, the respondent would be entitled to have his property back. The learned Judge was moving under Article 273, which enjoins the High Court to interpret the Constitution in consonance with the 1995 Constitution and did not encroach on Article 137 as alleged by the appellant. I would thus confirm the Judge’s order of eviction and costs against the appellant.”

To me that closes the chapter. In fact, local governments have got better remedy because at least there is a limitation that you can now wait for six months. But in the case of government, with an order and you do not actually move to enforce that order, as we all know, there will be a rush to court to get Writs of Mandamus and enforce them against those orders. That is the position.

Maybe finally, I would like to urge local governments that under the Schedule to the Local Government Act, Regulation No.27, you can get legal counsel – in fact the position is very clear that legal matters should be handled in consultation with the Attorney-General. If you prefer to get your lawyers, I would advise that you still consult with the Attorney-General because more often than not sometimes, the local governments go it alone, they reach complications, and that is when they rush to the Attorney-General when the case has already been  messed up. I would like to urge local governments to involve the Office of the Attorney-General right from inception of the case. Thank you. Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister, but my concern is that six-month period you are talking about I think is not respected by judgement creditors. As soon as judgement is delivered, the following week, the brokers are at the door of the local government. I do not know whether you have issued those instructions to the local governments or you assume that they know. But this is what happening. 

MR KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, that is the fault of the local authorities. Perhaps it is due to ignorance. Many of these local authorities do not consult or engage lawyers. They also do not consult the Attorney-General to get legal assistance. That is why judgments and executions proceed. And because they do not have legal counsels, these things happen – there are people who exploit this situation. 

I think Government should be more proactive to ask the local governments to consult even state attorneys if need be, in their areas of jurisdiction, because in some areas, lawyers are faraway from some of these local authorities. So, they cannot reach them quickly for assistance.

But be it as it may, I also think the local governments and the central government itself, should be sensitive. If a judgement is surely fair, they should take steps to ensure it is honoured. They can take a statement out of court or consult, or even talk to the various people. 

Normally, execution proceeds because they haven’t shown willingness to settle what is legally due. If only they could do that – I have a case of children, and I have kept on talking to the Attorney-General about it – whose arms were cut off in an accident in 2005, where judgment has been given against Government, and it is now six to seven years, but no settlement is being done. In a situation like that one, it can be understood that execution will proceed. I think it is the absence of legal counsels in the various areas that causes local governments these problems. 

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Pereza Ahabwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for the issues raised. They are quite many, but I will try my best to rush through them.

Hon. Kawanga talked about court judgments. This is about the case of Rubaramira Ruranga Vs the Attorney-General and Electoral Commission, in which it was commented that the local government officials cannot be impartial in the electoral process - we have moved to get them out of the electoral process.

The district service commissions are not constituted - not really - because people do not have qualifications. There are basically two reasons for that. The first one is the local politics – the ego of some of these chairpersons. Sometimes, they propose names that are not agreeable to the attributes that are required by the law, and when they reach the council, some of the names are rejected. They insist, and once they go through, sometimes they go to the Public Service Commission as a requirement, where faults will be found with some of them, and they are sent back so that new names can be proposed. This prolongs the whole process. 

The Public Service Commission comes in for purposes of quality control, and if we did not have it, we would have had a lot of trouble. We already have cases in Sembabule and Moyo in that regard, which we are trying our best to handle.

As for the Electoral Commission to be facilitated to recruit its own officials, the Deputy Attorney-General is right here, and I hope he will say something about that.

The issue about the disability councils - I think I note very carefully that we had proposed the same, but because the Bill has not come before the House, we felt that it is not proper to include it in this amendment, and we agreed on that with the committee. Although I am aware Cabinet passed it – I do not know and you will guide me on that - the practice is that you cannot pass a law that is anticipating that another law will be passed. As of now, the status quo remains.

Who approves administrative units? I would like to say that Section 7 of the Local Government Act is very clear on how all these are created – right from the district, down to the village; and from the municipalities down to the town boards. And I want to agree with people who raised the comment that as we talk now, we may not actually know the number of villages that we have. Maybe a week or two ago we knew; but between then and now, it is likely that a sub-county or parish could have created other villages. So, it is cause for worry, even for us, since most of the money that supports local governments actually comes from the Centre, which disorganises us in the budgeting process. 

The reason we are saying, “No, let them do the creation like it is for counties and municipalities”, is to let our ministry have a say so that we can regulate the rate at which these villages are created. That is why we have brought this amendment; it is in good faith and it is not that the minister wants to do everything – the minister can delegate powers to some of the staff to do the control of the creation of those administrative units.

The Electoral Commission only gazettes them into electoral areas. So, I do not want to agree with anybody who says the Electoral Commission is involved in the demarcation of those local administrative units; it only gazettes them as electoral areas; the function of creating them lies with the Ministry of Local Government.

Yes, we are providing for two months – (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, on the issue of creation of villages and parishes, I think the ministry has got to make its position clear. Right now, we do not have the guidelines. The villagers can create as many villages and parishes, but who dictates and under what circumstances are these villages and parishes being created is the major question. I think it is very important that Parliament directs the ministry to come up with guidelines as to how villages and parishes should be created. This will enable the ministry to monitor these creations. That is the clarification I wanted to put forward.

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, last year the minister said he had a list of sub-counties and town councils that were being proposed to be divided. Now that we are getting into the next election, what are you doing? I think you would do us justice by clearing all of them, so long as they qualify, and thereafter, you formulate guidelines so that by the time the next Parliament gets constituted, we will all be in the know of the number of villages, parishes and sub-counties that we have - we will begin on a fresh page. I think that is better than keeping this heap until after elections.

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much. I would like to agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that we have general guidelines of course, under the Constitution and the Local Government Act. And in the case of towns, we have regulation 13; for administrative units under the local authorities and urban authorities, we have Section 7 of the Local Government Act. And generally, under Article 179 of the Constitution, these guidelines are talked about. However, as I said, I would like to agree that we really need some of these detailed guidelines so that we can regulate on the creation of some of those entities.

As per what hon. Akello is talking about, my view is that, that is really a different matter and we can talk about it later. That is the reason my counties were rejected this morning, because we have a bunch of them down there. So, we have to regroup and see how to address that. That is a governance issue in broad terms, but we shall have to reconvene and look at those proposals. This is the reason we agreed with the Speaker’s ruling to go back and look at some of those proposals and advise accordingly.

On qualifications of a clerk to council, I think we have provided for that, the committee has come up with an amendment to have a certain level of seniority to be attained, short of which that person cannot be a clerk. The committee has provided for that and we intend to agree with them. 

The RDCs are provided for under Article 203 of the Constitution. Many people - including the old law - had not realised that actually, the Constitution had changed to redefine the status of the RDCs. While the old Constitution - just before it was amended in 2005 – and it remained in the Local Government Act by omission; the RDCs ceased to be senior civil servants. Article 203 of the Constitution is very clear; the functions remained, but that qualification was amended; that they should only be qualified to be Members of Parliament. So, whoever has challenges on some of those who do not meet the qualifications, I know the process lies elsewhere other than in my office, to challenge them. Otherwise, the functions are very clear in the Constitution and in our amendment.

MRS OGWAL: It is a very serious matter that during the amendment process, we did not specifically state the role of the RDC. The Constitution demanded that an RDC must be a senior public servant by the virtue of the position they were going to hold in coordinating the activities of the government in the district. 

To remove that, somebody might have done something sinister. Otherwise, the RDCs themselves would complain. How do we allow a Ugandan to occupy that post; hold the position which carries out all these functions as detailed in the Constitution, while not specifying their position? Are they junior civil servants or what? What concerns me most is whether they are politicians or they are public servants. It is important we clear this. What are they doing in the districts? Are they working as agents of the Movement Government or presidential appointees or advisors on administration of the district? Or, are they the neutral public servants who are supposed to do the work of the government regardless of the ideological position? It is important that this matter is cleared. I think somebody played us a game, and I want this matter clarified.

MR ARUMADRI: Now, we have to deal with the aftermath of the constitutional amendment which removed some of the qualifications for one to become an RDC. It is not late for us to insist that candidates proposed to be RDCs should be vetted by Parliament, so that their papers are properly scrutinised. These loopholes are being exploited to push in political cadres who do not even have the basic academic qualifications.

MR WAMAYI-WAMANGA: I rise on the issue of RDCs. Sometime back, I had wanted to raise the same issue. An RDC as the Constitution states is a representative of the President, but in carrying out their duties, some of these RDCs do not measure up to the post.

I have an issue at hand of a deputy RDC in Mbale, when I had gone to donate to the hospital in my constituency. I was shocked when he called me and warned me that I was going to be in trouble because I had bypassed him.

Some of these people, I agree entirely with the previous speakers, are given these posts when they do not know what to do; so they embarrass Government and the President who appointed them. So, if they are working, let it be clearly stated as to whether these people are NRM functionaries or they are there to represent the President who is the head of Government for the whole country. 

When I looked at the issue of trying to raise the salaries of RDCs, I keep wondering what their role is. We have got LC Vs in the districts. I would rather say that we increase the salary of a doctor who gets Shs 640,000 because RDCs are paid Shs 2 million and have benefits such as a double cabin car, Police escort, a gun. What work do they do in the district as compared to that of a doctor, or a teacher?

This House should take this issue seriously because RDCs are there to harass people from the Opposition, and that is what they do. What do they do in the districts?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We had a lengthy debate in the morning so let us get the minister’s response.

4.30
MR AHABWE: My job here as a Minister of Local Government is to ask you to synchronise our law with the Constitution. The Constitution in Article 203 reads as follows: “1) There shall be for each district a resident district commissioner who shall be appointed by the President. 2) For a person to be appointed a resident district commissioner he/she shall be a citizen of Uganda and qualified to be a Member of Parliament. 3) The functions of a resident district commissioner are: a) to monitor the implementation of central and local government services in the district, b) to act as chairperson of the district security committee, and (c) to carry out such other functions as may be assigned by the President as prescribed by Parliament by law. 

Madam Speaker, in our amendment, we are only seeking to synchronise with this provision of the Constitution, which Constitution was amended in 2005, to remove the aspect of a senior public servant. We were here together, and I want to remind hon. Cecilia Ogwal that she was part of the decision that was made then. Anything to the contrary will definitely attract an amendment of the Constitution, which mandate I do not have as of now –(Interruption) 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: You know, as the Minister, you brought this Bill that seeks to streamline the laws governing RDCs in the Constitution, but these complaints that we hear are actually legitimate. And as you answer to what you have come to do, it would also be very kind of you and of Government, to ensure that even the concerns raised by Members are actually acknowledged. Assigning any other duties by the President – the President cannot assign an RDC duties in NRM; he can only do that as chairman of the party. And it is not provided that he can assign duties to RDCs as the chairman of NRM. In my own constituency and district - the only reason why we have not pressed harder than this is because their actions are actually counter productive. Our people believe in justice, they believe the RDC is for everybody. And when they see them doing things in a biased way, they just alienate the people even more; so it is to my advantage somehow, but it is wrong. So, Government should take notice of this and acknowledge it, and do something about it.

MR AHEBWA: Thank you, hon. Latigo. I want to assure you that there is no Government which can approve of acts which are contrary to the law. So, if there are individuals who go beyond their mandate that is prescribed in the Constitution and the law; they definitely have no support from me. I want to agree with those who are lamenting about such individuals and I am not in favour of that kind of behaviour. I will consult the relevant minister to take the appropriate action; maybe to take disciplinary measures or measures of restraint. 

Hon. Beatrice Lagada talked about the transfers to the divisions. These transfers could not be done earlier than this amendment because the Local Government Act was still requiring transfers from the Centre to go to the City Hall. But with capacity building that has happened in the last ten years or so, we are convinced that now the divisions have capacity to deliver services directly by themselves and that is why we have come up with this amendment. And we think service delivery in Kampala City Centre is going to be better than it has been.

On the honoraria for LCs being reasonable, I cannot agree with you more. Definitely, anybody else would have wanted to it to be higher than what was proposed by the Minister of Finance. But for budgetary reasons - which you know – I think something small is better than nothing at all. And I believe when you start small, you can always expand. I will give you an example. 

Many of you may have heard that the Ministry of Local Government is going to look into possibilities of having something for the district councillors every month. This started with the chairpersons and the executive. Now it has extended to the councillors. 

So, my view is that you support us on this one as we also lobby the Central Government for more funds. We can always extend to these others. But the role of the chairpersons - for sure, all of you come from the villages and you know that their work is too much. When everybody is asleep, people are knocking on the chairperson’s door and so on. So, let us start small; we can always improve. 

On the Local Government Public Accounts Committee Report – I do not know. Maybe in particular districts, they may not be debating them, but in others, they do. There is also a practice where we bring these reports and lay them before Parliament for our Local Government Accounts Committee to look at them and give a report. Once the report is given to us, we take appropriate action. And we try as much as possible to make sure that these people implement those reports. 

Certainly, where they are not implemented, that is an act of indiscipline and we normally deal with them. Indiscipline is always part and parcel of society, but we normally deal with such characters.

Now, Madam Speaker, you asked me how many times councils sit. Statutorily, we require council plenary to sit six times a year. And because they should have business, that means that committees must sit at least once every month. So, these are statutory guidelines which we have given to them; but some of them are able to sit more often, especially the committees for which we have prescribed six meetings as the minimum. But statutorily, it is six times for plenary and at least once a month for committees. 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think the minister should be a bit more open to us so that we can help him. How often should those councils meet? The truth which you know, that you do not want to tell us, is that the council meets as often as they can because that is the only way they can remunerate themselves. That is a fact you know and you do not want us to know. 

The district council is supposed to be a replica of the National Parliament. And, therefore, if the speaker is paid a salary, I do not see why the deputy speaker of a district does not get a salary. If Members of Parliament get six salaries, I do not see why district councillors do not get salaries so that it is predictable. They can know that by the end of the month, I am going to get this much by virtue of being a district councillor; and that is not happening. Therefore, the only way that a councillor gets remuneration is to hold as many meetings as possible and have as many monitoring activities as possible and as many trips as possible; that is the only way they can touch money. We are opening the way to corruption. 

Hon. Minister, be honest to us and let us help you strengthen the administration of the local government. And the only way you can do that is to propose to us that since the speaker is getting Shs 600,000 a month, which I think they do, I do not see any reason why the deputy speaker should not get at least Shs 400,000; I do not see why not. I do not see why councillors cannot get at least Shs 150,000 per month so that at the end of the month they know that as a councillor, I will go to the CAO and I will get Shs 150,000 for being a councillor. This is what I want you to do, and I will congratulate you for being a good minister; but don’t continue lamenting to us when you are the one who is failing to run the ministry properly. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Minister, the reason I asked is because I interact with the local governments in the ULGAs and I met some of them who said they had failed to meet even the minimum six meetings required under the law because there was no money. That is why I asked how often they actually meet. Some of them do not even meet for those six meetings you are talking about because you do not give them the money. 

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Cecilia Ogwal. It is –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: This financial year, the honourable minister is seeking to pay the LC I chairpersons. What rationale can he give for paying an LC I chairperson and leave an honourable councillor for LC V?

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker and Members, I may not have been clear enough, but I said that in this year’s budget, we have provided some money to pay councillors at the districts per month and [HON. MEMBERS: “How much?”] I can tell you how much it is if you insist because it is already there in the budget anyway. That is why I said that we started with the chairpersons and the entire executive and we have now moved to the district councils. So, slowly by slowly, we can also reach the executive of the LC villages, having started with the chairpersons. 

We have budgeted for payment of Shs 100,000 per month for each councillor at the district and we have budgeted for payment of Shs 200,000 per month for a deputy speaker of every district. The principle is that we really appreciate the problem of these councillors because they give up their jobs – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us not get into the quantum now. Let us deal with the principles. We are going to discuss the budget; you can debate it when we are discussing the budget. 

MRS OGWAL: Who gave you those figures? How did you arrive at Shs 100,000 per month for the councillors and Shs 200,000 for the deputy speaker when the speaker is getting Shs 600,000? How did you arrive at that figure? You have to be humane. So, can you tell us who is giving you those arbitrary figures?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, let us leave the figures. Let us deal with this Bill. We can discuss that when dealing with the budget.

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for that guidance; that is why I was insisting on the principle and I did not want to go into the figures. Following your guidance, allow me to proceed and respond, but we have good intentions for these people as Government and as Local Government. I want to assure you on this one. But certainly, I agree with you that there are districts which may not have enough revenue to pay for those sittings as satisfactorily recommended, but there are also those districts that actually have a lot of money that if we went into issues of lifting the 20 percent ceiling, we would possibly be in trouble. That is why we insist that we look at this alternative of getting these councillors paid at least a predictable amount of money per month. Let the ceiling of 20 percent remain so that we do not move into excessive expenditure by those very rich districts; but we also require that the minister approves any proposal to spend beyond the 20 percent in case they have money. We have all those flexibilities and I think we are really doing a very good job. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, try to wind up. You know we have to go to the committee stage. 

MR AHABWE: There are so many things which they raised; I don’t know how fast I can be and they keep interrupting me. Please colleagues, let me proceed; don’t interrupt me. 

What is the linkage between district councils and MPs? There are issues of protocol here. I do not think I should enter the issues of protocol because that is not my mandate. But what we also know is that the Act provides for Members of Parliament sitting in councils, and I think it is provided for in the law. I can read the law for you here.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, that law says “A Member of Parliament may…” but Members of Parliament should be ex-officios of the district councils; but the law says “may” which means that you can decide to or not to attend, and I think that is ambiguous. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime last year in October, there was an urgent matter in my district council and the council was meeting on matters that involved a decision of the IGG on some appointments, and I was told of the intention of the council, which was really contrary to the law. So, I decided to go and help the council; but when I reached there, the assumption was that I had come to block them from doing what they wanted to do, and we ended up in a very embarrassing situation. When I went to the council, they asked me to sit with the observers - more less in the gallery - and I asked why, because previously, they would provide a sit for me and I found that they had divided the council in a multiparty setting and I asked, when I come as an ex-officio, where do I sit? It became a big argument and in the end the speaker said I must leave the council, and I said no, you cannot chase me out of the council. He adjourned the House. 

So, I realised then that doing that with those people would just make life more difficult. I actually contacted the honourable minister, who said, “No, you are entitled to sit in the council”, and I told him that I had just had this embarrassment, but I have gone through the laws also and I do not see the ex-officio that was in our understanding. The ex-officio is actually not there; even David Pulkol’s scorecard assesses your attendance of local councils and it turns out that the law is inadequate to tell us what to do. So, as a matter of fact, I intend to move an amendment so that it is quite clear that we are ex-officio members of the council. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the Seventh Parliament, the Public Relations Officer of Parliament did circulate the national order of hierarchy to Members and I remember that starting from His Excellency the President who is No.1 downwards, the Member of Parliament is placed under position No.17 and the chairperson of the district falls in position No.35; the RDC No.36. I think it would be prudent for our Public Relations Office, once again to update Members on the national order of hierarchy to avoid confusion that is obtaining in various districts. I thank you.

4.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, this is just a caution, particularly to the Leader of the Opposition, who intends to move an amendment on this matter. 

I am in agreement in principle, but we have to be cautious in the way we structure that amendment, so that it does not also become stringent on our part as Members of Parliament, to be obligated to attend council meetings at LC V, because if we become obligated, mind you, it will not only be in respect of the ordinary meetings of the council, but even in sessional meetings, we shall still be obligated as ex-officios to be there. In other words, maybe we should be careful in the way we structure it so that, that element of “may” is retained, but whenever we are there, we are there in our ex-officio capacities. In any case, what does it mean? It only means being there by virtue of our offices, so that it is taken into consideration. Thank you.

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much. I do not think I am going to repeat anything beyond what the Attorney-General has advised. 

Just as a reminder, the provision under Section 10(2) says that “A Member of Parliament may attend sittings of a local council in his or her constituency.” So, this provision, in my view, does not even allow you to attend a district council meeting unless it is in your constituency - (Interjections)- the Attorney-General has already said that and I have said that I am not going to repeat what he has already advised and guided. 

The unspent balances – I do not think I have the competence to comment on them because I think there are financial regulations and rules that are followed by every department and agency of Government. And the Ministry of Finance, probably the Attorney-General, is best suited to respond to this, but I think we shall keep respecting the existing rules in case of unspent balances. The issue of saying they should be retained – I am not aware whether we have the mandate to amend certain provisions of other laws using our own law.

CAOs who are under investigation for impropriety; why don’t they step aside? I think that is really what happens. Once a CAO has been implicated – we normally interdict these people and investigations are carried out. 

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you. I have listened to the minister keenly with regard to not changing the issue of unspent balances. We heard from the submissions of Members that at times when the ministry is releasing the money to the districts, at times the money reaches the district very late. 

I know in the last quarter, members of the district councils or the district were receiving this money this month, and they might not be in position to finish this money within this month; and the law says by the end of the financial year, all the moneys unspent should be sent back to the source. 

The minister is saying we might not do away with that if it is the problem of the Ministry of Finance sending this money very late to the districts. As soon as the money arrives, the financial year ends and the districts are obligated to send this money back. Who in this situation is supposed to bear the blame?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Bukeni comes in, about 10 days ago, didn’t we discuss something about unspent balances in this House - from the Budget Committee? I thought there was a recommendation about unspent balances being retained by the districts. 

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, I think there are about two or so issues here. The issue of workplans; the issue of procurement plans; and the issue of recruitment plans. I want to confess that some of these local governments, like other departments of Government, sometimes do not submit these documents in time for those releases to be made, and it is a requirement –(Interjections)- now I am telling you what I know without necessarily -   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, how can you explain that sometimes UPE funds do not go until the last three weeks of the term? Is that because of plans? 

MR BUKENI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the honourable minister should help this House so that we can help our people. Right now as we talk, there is some money being released to districts. Accounting officers are not supposed to commit Government unless they know that there is money, and the money has not been released. Money is being released now and that is when the accounting officer is going to commit Government on some contracts. Even if they have procured, they have not signed any contract because the money is not there. How can you now say an accounting officer can sign a contract and pay before the end of this month? On a certificate? Supposing it is a road construction? So, I think, whether it is the Ministry of Local Government or the Ministry of Finance or any other concerned organ of Government, the law should be adjusted so that we can give these districts that time within which to spend the money that has been released to them late. Because, the Ministry of Finance does not also have the money; maybe they had just collected the money this month and that is the money they are releasing. So, let them be given time to spend the money within the law. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Katuntu comes to the Floor, join me in welcoming citizens from the new Kiyunga District represented by hon. Mulumba and hon. Zirabamuzaale. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Apparently, both the minister and hon. Bukeni are right. It is true that actually, sometimes the local governments submit their workplans late. That is a fact. For those of us who have been visiting to the local governments to investigate their accountability, we found it to be a big problem. But it is also true that sometimes Ministry of Finance releases the money late -(Interjections)- it is not most times; but this is also true, because I have the figures. 

But at the same time, the financial regulations are clear. The accounting officer will seek permission from the Accountant-General who is in Ministry of Finance, to retain the unspent balances. It is there provided for under the regulations. So, if you have got an accounting officer who actually knows his regulations, this problem is curable. She will write to Ministry of Finance and say, “This money was released two weeks to the end of the financial year. So, there is no way I am going to spend this money because there is a procurement process.” The law envisaged that problem and that is why they gave that option of seeking permission from Ministry of Finance - the Accountant-General, to retain the unspent money at the end of the financial year.  

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, I am saved -(Laughter)- because I am also aware that surely, for monies that have been committed in the process of being used, you can seek permission and you retain the money. So, that one has been clarified. Hon. Katuntu, thank you very much for helping me out; you are a very good Chairman of Local Government Accounts.

Hon. Kibedi, I think I responded very well. There is provision for the minister to have guidelines on how to create cities. What I want to assure Members is that we have applications and we have recommendations for some of the cities that we intend to look at. Jinja, I think, is one of them. So, once this law is passed, be sure we are going to put those parameters and then use those parameters to see how we can make recommendations to you for the creation of other cities other than Kampala. 

Most of the issues were repeated. Hon. Alaso says the chair of the Women Council should sit on the council and I think the committee has captured that. To the best of my knowledge, the committee has captured that and I do not think we shall have any objection.

Regarding, if the councillor leaves the party for another party while in council, Attorney-General do you want to assist me on that one?

The Constitution, in the case of Parliament, says that once you have been elected under a political party or once you have been elected an independent and you decide in the middle of your term to move from one party to another or to leave that independent position for a party, you lose your seat. The Parliamentary Elections law says the same. There is no such provision in the Local Government Act. I think our assumption, to the best of my knowledge, was to create as much harmony at the district as possible -(Interjections)- but you are the ones who -(Interjections)- so, I note carefully that that provision is absent in the Local Governments Act and that is why I was seeking for the assistance of the government legal advisor on this one.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you hon. Minister. I know that your concern may have been to maintain harmony, but I think even the law provides for you to act. Under the Local Governments Act, Section 172 says, “Application of laws relating to Parliamentary Elections: For any issue not provided for under this part of the Act, the Parliamentary Elections law in force for the time being shall apply with such modifications as are deemed necessary.”

But I also agree with you that since it is so hidden, it may not be easy to see. So, we need to provide for it in a more explicit way.

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much. The Attorney-General agrees with the Leader of the Opposition, so I will proceed.

Yes, I have talked -(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable minister for giving way. Actually, the point the honourable minister is brushing aside seems to be cardinal and I thought the Attorney-General should assist this House to come up with a proper interpretation of the law, because Members are thinking of providing for an amendment to cater for what looks as a lacuna - a gap, within the law. The constitutional principle is that if you have been elected on a National Resistance Movement ticket and along the way, as a councillor, you defect to some other party, you have actually lost the basis for your election. 

I think that was the principle in the Constitution regarding Parliament, which should actually be applied to the local governments because it is the same principle upon which they were elected councillors. They present themselves as candidates standing on party tickets. They also present themselves as independents. So, along the way, if you join a party - and Madam Speaker, why I raise this is that it is going to be a big problem. I see there are many colleagues who are independent in this House and tomorrow, before the end of this term, they are going to offer themselves in the primaries of other parties. Once you do that, you have actually ceased being an independent and you are now really a party card holder -(Interjections)- and I know one Member may be affected and that is why he is saying, “You are wrong.” But that is the point. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I was reluctant to stand up because I thought that the Leader of the Opposition had the correct position on the matter, under Section 172 of the Local Governments Act, because it is clear that for any issue not provided for under this part of the Act, the Presidential Elections Act and the Parliamentary Elections Act in force shall apply to the elections of local councils with such modifications as may be deemed necessary by the Electoral Commission. Should any Member wish to move an amendment for the avoidance of doubt, I believe that amendment will be welcome. But in my opinion, there is no ambiguity. This is a clear provision.

However, I wish to add that the position of creating harmony at the lower levels in a multiparty dispensation does not work. You may recall that at one point, when we were making amendments, I think to the Local Governments Act, I think that was 2005 or before that time, we tried as much as possible to ensure that the local councils at I and II were not under the multiparty dispensation. We tried the debate and we deliberately did it. But you know what happened in the Rubaramira Ruranga case. It was challenged and it was defeated. So, in the same vein, the voice should be clear, and it should be one voice that certainly, if you join another party, you have ceased, under Article 83 of the Constitution and related electoral laws. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please try to hurry. 

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much hon. Attorney-General. Hon. Sebaggala was complaining about CAOs being insubordinate because they have new points of allegiance. But Section 64 of the Local Governments Act is very clear about the roles and functions and where the CAO is supposed to report. The CAO is subordinate to the council. There is no way the CAO cannot carry out the roles and functions outside Section 64 of the Act. The CAO is only responsible to the central government in cases of appointment and discipline; but in cases of day-to-day functioning, the CAO is responsible to the council; so the CAO cannot be insubordinate to the council.

Political leaders who involve themselves in financial impropriety; Article 164 of the Constitution is very clear about that one and I know hon. Abdu Katuntu can pursue these people and catch them. There is no way you can abet financial mismanagement and you go away with it just because you are a political leader. That is not possible and Section 90(a) of the Local Government Act is also very clear on matters of accountability involving political leaders. So, that one is already provided for.

Creation of administrative units which are not in one piece - hon. Winnie Kiiza, this is completely unbelievable. I want to follow-up that case and I want to make sure such a town council is not gazetted. You cannot gazette such a kind of thing. Otherwise, how do you define gerrymandering that - that is not possible? We cannot do that. 

We have our competent officers who must go to the field before the town council is even proposed for creation. We must know the boundaries and we must inspect them. Any attempt to alter what we have inspected and recommended to Cabinet for creation is strictly unacceptable. So, I want to know that case so that we make a follow-up.

Hon. Balyejjusa, I agree with you entirely that Section 54 of the Local Government Act provides that at least one member of the district service commission must be a person with disability, and I want to promise that I am likely even to carry out a census of all district service commissions. As soon as I find that there is somebody who qualified in the area to be a member of the service commission, and is disabled, and in one way or the other got interested and applied and was rejected, that is an act that really should be reprimanded in my view.

Hon. Baba Diri, I have already talked about the new National Council for Disability and NUDIPU. We cannot amend to create for disabilities when the Bill has not come to Parliament. So, the status quo will remain.

Hon. Colleagues, those whose comments I have not responded to somehow should be related to those others that I have responded to. I want to thank you very much for the excitement and for those who have amendments; we need them in writing so that we can really sit and look at the way they are drafted, and then we agree to them because these laws are for all of us. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but Minister, can we require you to issue the protocol guidelines to the local governments so that our Members are not embarrassed when they go for these functions, because you have heard it repeatedly? 

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, what I can promise is that we shall consult the Minister for the Presidency and then we come up with some brief statement, because as far as I know, there are functions that are district-based like Independence Day. It is a practice under the current administration that the RDCs preside over those functions -(Interjections)- wait; I am saying it is a practice -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ahabwe, supposing you went to Rubanda on Independence Day - you the Minister of Local Government - would the RDC preside when you are there? You as Ahabwe, tell us.

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, I want to assure you that it has happened to me -(Laughter)- yes, I have been accorded my rightful position as a minister and I have been respected, and I have been given the opportunity to talk to the public. But on presiding Independence Day, Liberation Day and those others, it is the practice.

However, -(Interjections)- colleagues, I have already said that you allow me to consult the Minister for the Presidency. We shall come up with a position so that we clear this one in this Parliament before we issue those guidelines to the local governments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question -

CAPT. OTEKAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On clause 1, in order to streamline and also control the unchecked increases in the number of administrative units, the committee has introduced a new amendment to re-draft provisions of Section 7 and sub-sections 6, 8 and 9. I do not know whether you have that copy to read as follows:

(6); “A sub-county or city division council may within its area of jurisdiction with the approval of the district and city council, and at the request of or in consultation with the relevant parishes or wards with the approval of the minister, alter the boundaries of or create a new parish or ward.”

On amendment of 7, it is already taken care of. If you have the report from the committee - and we agreed with the minister that we strike off No.7 because issues of creating counties are vested in the minister with approval from Parliament. So, the committee struck No.7 off. 

On that No.7, counties are supposed to be created with the mandate of Parliament and we thought it was of no use bringing it here to be regulated by the minister. Instead, we went to 8. “A municipal division or town council may within its area of jurisdiction and at the request of or in consultation with the relevant wards with the approval of the minister alter the boundaries of or create a new ward”.

Again, to regulate on the creation of wards unnecessarily by municipalities.

And on 9, “A parish or ward council may with the approval of a sub-county, division or town council and at the request of or in consultation with the relevant villages may with the approval of the minister alter the boundaries of or create a new village”. So, we are trying to regulate the creation of parishes, wards and villages by inserting “With the approval of the minister” concerned with that area. But for counties, we left it out because that is the mandate of the minister who will bring it to Parliament for approval. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Chairperson, under sub-section 9, I would like to move that we delete “with the approval of the Minister,” so that it reads, “A parish or ward council may, with the approval of a sub-county division or town council, and at the request of or in consultation with the relevant villages as the case may be, alter the boundaries or create a new village.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Mabikke -

MR AHABWE: Madam Chair, that is exactly what is obtaining as of now, and what we are trying to cure is what hon. Mabikke has been complaining about, that in his area in Makindye, people decided to demarcate villages. We are not aware, and it has implications on the government’s budget. I am required to come and defend these people who demarcate those villages without my knowledge. This is what we are trying to cure. My view is that hon. Mabikke should be supporting us on this issue. This is the amendment we are trying to make by introducing the element of the ministry having a hand in approving creation of these administrative units. That is exactly what we are saying. So, I want to plead with Members to reject hon. Mabikke’s amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mabikke, you know villages can sit every week and create new villages. Where will it end?

MR MABIKKE: What has been happening in Makindye is that the two ministers have not been helpful at all. In fact, they are even being more confusing. The procedure of sub-dividing a village is clearly laid out in the Local Government Act. I would not see the minister intervening in each and every village because there are many issues, which are going to come up. We have got over 36,000 villages in Uganda. I do not see every case of sub-dividing a village going to the minister. The Minister of Local Government is very busy. I have been through this and the ministers have not been helpful at all. 

I would move –(Mr Yiga rose_)- can you hold on? At least you have no experience in this one. Can I conclude? 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to move that the minister and the deputy are too busy to take decisions on village - case-by-case consideration. I think we should retain what has been provided for in the Local Government Act.

MR YIGA: Madam Chairperson, I am also perplexed by the submissions of my colleague hon. Mabikke because he is on record for having complained about the mushrooming villages in his constituency. Basically, it has been so because the Ministry of Local Government had no hand, and it cannot disapprove because the law gave the powers to create villages to the parishes and the minister is not mentioned. Now that we want to cure that problem, he is refusing. 

In addition, right now, we cannot leave the matter of creating villages to the parishes to do so at will because as we are talking now, creation of a village has financial implications to the Central Government.

One; the chairperson has to be given a bicycle. We are also discussing the issue of honoraria. If you are going to leave every parish to determine the number of villages, will Government manage? That is why we are saying that Government should come in now so that they know and even plan for these villages rather than allowing everybody to come up with the number of villages they want.

I would like to say that we reject hon. Mabikke’s submission and amendments. Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the submission of hon. Yiga. These matters are going to have financial implications and it is important that – do not underrate the capacity of the Ministry of Local Government in whichever hands it will be or it is.

There is an error under sub-section 7. I think it is “recasting.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hasn’t it been deleted?

MR RUHINDI: It is “recasting.” I do not know whether this amendment was made. It is “recasting” in sub-section 7 in the principal Act and, therefore, the last expression should not be “alter the boundaries of or create a new parish or ward.” It should be, “alter the boundaries of or create a new county or city division.”

Does the chairperson agree with me? We are talking about, “A district or city council may, within its area of jurisdiction, with the approval of Parliament and in consultation with or at the request of the relevant county council or city division council, with the approval of the minister,” Was this deleted?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR RUHINDI: All this? (Interjections) Was (7) deleted?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 1 as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 2

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, Hon. Alice Alaso brought the issue of representation of district women council chairpersons and –(Interruption)

MR GUMA: It is the chairperson. If you read clauses 2 and 3 - and there is no objection as it stands in the report. Let us move on; unless the Minister or any other Member has a differing position. But for the chairman to stand and read each and everything as if we are illiterate is wastage of time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Commissioner; there is a new amendment, which the chair has introduced in clause 2. It is in the report. (Interjections)

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, the committee suggested an amendment called (g); the rest are okay if you have the copy. If you look at clause 2, it says, “Redraft the provision to read as follows.” The rest is okay - Section 10; but the one I am interested in is on page 2. That is (g); that, “Chairpersons of district women councils and chairpersons of sub-county women councils who shall be ex-officio members of the councils.” The justification being, to enable the members participate in matters pertaining to their constituencies. Again, this was raised in the morning.

MS ALASO: I thank the committee for that provision. In part, it does it, but there was also the issue about how Members of Parliament who are women, who are district representatives, and who are members of constituencies, are expressed. I do not know whether it was to be captured here or it was left out completely.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you recall that? There was a further amendment when we were discussing the women council.

MR AHABWE: Hon. Chairperson, I think hon. Alaso is right that it is under this provision that hon. Latigo’s amendment comes in. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I had intended – maybe I got my procedure wrong. I thought you would clear the chairman’s amendment and then I would rise to make my submission. But since you have already invited me, I would like to propose an amendment to section 10(2) in the main Act, to read as follows: “A Member of Parliament may attend meetings of a local council in his or her district and constituency as an ex-officio member of the council.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is okay. I think that is what we discussed in your absence. 

MR AHABWE: Madam Chairperson, from the general debate and the general consensus of the House, I think the amendments are agreeable to us.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 3

CAPT. OTEKAT: We were particularly interested in – I will read it as a whole - section 11 of the principal Act is amended by: (a) substituting for subsection 6(c) the following, “6(c) a notice made under subsection 6(a) shall be submitted to the minister or his or her representative by the clerk to council, and the minister or his or her representative shall evaluate the notice for the removal of the speaker, and if satisfied that there are sufficient grounds for doing so, shall, within 30 days after receipt of notice, convene or cause the convening of a meeting for the removal and election of a speaker”; and (b) Inserting immediately after sub-section 12 the following: “(13) a deputy speaker of a district council shall be paid emoluments and allowances in accordance with the first schedule to this Act.” 

The justification is error in numbering the provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, it is a consequential amendment? I have not quite understood what the amendment is. 

DR EPETAIT:  Madam Chairperson, I find a bit of difficulty in that proposed amendment. The principal Act says, “A notice made under Section 6 (a) shall be submitted to the minister or his or her representative by the clerk to council, and the minister and his or her representative shall within 30 days of receipt of the notice convene or cause the convening of a meeting for the removal of a speaker.” As far as I think, within those 30 days, the minister will have actually evaluated. Why must we legislate for the process? 

I find that proposed amendment of including, “shall evaluate the notice for removal and if satisfied that there is sufficient ground for doing so...,” I think all that is really contained within the judgement of the minister. He just does not really wake up to cause a meeting without evaluating the grounds for such a meeting to be convened. 

MR AHABWE: Madam Chairperson, we have had these experiences. The law as it exists now does not give a minister any opportunity to evaluate and understand whether the process being done by the council is actually legally or politically tenable. What happens is that the law commands that within 30 days, you as the minister must convene the council for the removal of a speaker. 

What we are saying is that just as it is provided for a chairman LC V, the minister should have an opportunity because this is my ministry. Let me have an opportunity to evaluate the grounds. When I am satisfied - because I have the Attorney-General to advise me - then I can convene council within 30 days after receiving the notice. But there are certain situations where there are actually no grounds. I can assure you, there might be no convincing grounds. And I think hon. Alaso is likely to stand up and challenge me on this because there is a case where we, in the ministry, and her, did not agree on sufficient grounds and Soroti District Council is now stable. But we refused to preside over and managed to convince both parties - you see it was because of some kind of expedients.  

We are saying that the law should provide for that so that some of these people are really protected. Surely, look at your Rules of Procedure and what the Constitution says about the speaker and deputy speaker. They are politicians like us, but the moment you put trust in them, you cannot simply stand up one morning and say, “Get out.” There must be a process and that process must be convincing enough that these people must be removed. And this is what we are providing for here.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Alaso seems to be on fire.
  
MS ALASO: Really, Madam Chairperson, if you look at the Local Governments Act and the Rules of Procedure governing local councils, it is clearly stipulated as to what shape the petition should take. It clearly stipulates - I do not have the Act here - the number of members of council who must sign the petition and how the process of signing the petition should be done. The sergeant-at-arms of council should witness. Then it says that it should be transmitted by the chairperson LC V, for the case of a speaker. 

What the minister is asking here is an opportunity to veto the decision of petitioners, which is not within his powers. What is within his powers is to act within 30 days. For us to put here a provision for evaluation is actually to create a hiding room. It is good the minister himself has said that in the case of Soroti, they actually hid. This stability they are talking about was not created by the Minister of Local Government, because the moment he reached Soroti, if he did, if he had sat in that council, that speaker would not still be the Speaker of Soroti District Local Government; because you cannot have more than two thirds of council appending their signatures for your removal and then you continue presiding over that council.  But the minister is looking for space to manoeuvre so that he vetoes the decision of the petitioners in our local councils.

I think the framing that gives him 30 days does not really need more time for him to evaluate, think or do otherwise. But the moment you add the word “evaluate,” you are giving him powers to veto and it will undermine the strength of our councils. There is actually more acrimony in Soroti. If you had gone there, you would have sorted it. Now you have left them in a very acrimonious state. 

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also find a problem with the amendment he is trying to move, particularly in a multiparty dispensation where political parties are competing for power. I presume that a minister is a minister of the political party that is in power, where he will always evaluate either in agreement, to make sure that the petitioners have grounds to favour his government. That is likely to happen until we attain that maturity. I would still think that we leave – I find what is provided for in the law sufficient enough.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, it seems the minister is behaving like a court of appeal under some disguise. I do not know whether you can clarify because it seems he has the power to say, “I am not satisfied.”

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, if I could make the request I was making to the Attorney-General to help the House, because I know that the local councils are legal entities. They have their powers provided for in the Constitution and in the laws. How does a provision like this impinge on those legal provisions and how tenable is this proposal in law?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I have been advised that under such circumstances, I need to consult. So, I beg that you stand over this provision as I consult with the Leader of Government Business and the sector minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us stand over that provision and move to the next one.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, under Clause 3, my thinking was that we would bring in the issue of councillors who cross. I do not know and need to be helped.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, the issue hon. Alaso is referring to was also referred to by the minister. We now face a situation where councillors elected under tickets of various parties or its independents, cross to other parties and still remain in council when their mandates have ended. I looked through the main Act during the break for where to fit this and I thought that we could bring this amendment under clause 21 where we are amending section 71 of the main Act. So, maybe if we come there, I will propose the amendment.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, the committee is proposing that we substitute the words “payment of allowances for the LC I and IIs” with the words “payment of honoraria”. The justification being that the money paid to the chairpersons of LC I and LC II is so meagre that it should not be subjected to tax.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

CAPT. OTEKAT: We propose that in clause 8(b) we insert the words “without reasonable cause” immediately after the words “district service commission”. The justification is that reasons for not attending the meeting must be clearly indicated to avoid unnecessary absence from the meeting. Instead of just saying in clause 8, “failure to attend” as a committee we are adding that it should be “without reasonable cause”.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I am not a lawyer, but even science definitions have to be very clear. When you start talking about “reasonable cause”, it becomes a big problem. When you say failure to attend five consecutive meetings, if I am unable to attend and I send my apologies, I have not failed to attend because I have sent apologies. Absence with apology is not failure to attend. It is not attending with reasonable cause. So, as it is, this is very clear, and we do not need to add anything.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But Leader of the Opposition, supposing with the view to causing a collapse of the quorum, I persistently do not attend? You invite me, I do not let you know and I just do not come? We cannot sit, no apologies, the meeting collapses this month, the next, the third month?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Actually, any commission that ignores the fact that somebody did not send an apology is not competent because you are required to attend. If you will not attend because of a reason, you write an apology to say, “I am sorry.” Five consecutive meetings could take place in six months. They could meet for two days and another two days four months away. Anyway, since you lose nothing by adding, I concede.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Is it not possible to have “reasonable cause” throughout the year? It is possible. I would rather we fix the number of meetings missed to terminate membership because it is very easy to get reasonable cause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But if I have seen you in town or walking around in a bar then in the morning you are not in the meeting; but I saw you alive and walking - really.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, then who in this case determines the reasonable cause? Is it the Chair? I am just borrowing an illustration somebody gave me, who said if I have fled to exile for two years, it is also “reasonable cause”; so wouldn’t we go by way of the proposal by hon. Okello-Okello and fix the number of meetings? Because, just as he said, you will have a reasonable cause. Six months in exile is reasonable cause. You cannot substitute me, but if you put six consecutive meetings and you stop there, even with my “reasonable cause” you have reason to act.

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, the argument from hon. Okello-Okello and hon. Alaso hold, but the law has already fixed the number of meetings to five consecutive meetings. Why we are saying “reasonable cause”, like Madam Chairperson you said, in many instances in local governments the member will absent him or herself for very simple reasons. Maybe he has got a hangover or he has gone for a marriage party when there are very important issues to discuss. He will not even send an apology. So, we are saying, the chairperson of the committee should know that this is “reasonable cause”. He may communicate to you that, “On Friday you said you were not coming and that what you were going for was very important; therefore, you may go.” But if the chairman says, “Please come for the meeting because the cause stated is not justified” then that person should come for the meeting. That is what the committee means.

MR OCULA: I am a member of the committee. When we were bringing this up, we looked at situations; for example, in case somebody is sick, should somebody just lose the seat because the person is sick for about two, three or four consecutive meetings and cannot attend? So, basically, by adding “reasonable cause”, we are trying to cure such situations and we are giving the chair of the committee the powers to cross-check and see that the cause is reasonable or not. I think we actually lose nothing by adding “reasonable cause.”

MR RUHUNDI: I would like to agree with hon. Ocula because the expressions, “reasonable cause” and “reasonable person” are already defined in our legal jurisprudence. In most of these laws that we have made - and you can read them - these expressions run through. “Reasonable cause” is simple as here said, “justification that you are not able or you have not been able to attend and you give reasons accordingly.” Therefore, leaving it out would jeopardise the functioning of these councils. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that clause 8 – 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I have some amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Under clause 8?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Yes. I have two amendments to the proposals under clause 8, regarding 2(c). I am proposing that we delete “the electoral college of the urban council”, because the process does not involve an electoral college, but just the executive sitting and agreeing on who to present to the district as a representative of the urban council. Electoral colleges have various implications. In fact, under Section 118 of the Local Government Act, the meaning of electoral colleges is totally different, and I do not see why we should include it –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know, in the case of a town council, I think the town council will have to sit to nominate somebody to go to the district council. The town council would have to sit separately to name somebody to the district council and that council is an urban authority.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: But calling that sitting an electoral college is inappropriate because in the first place, they are not electing. They will just sit, consider names and agree on a name. It is already happening in my district, where we have three town councils and the procedure that they have adopted is that for one district service commission, town council A will nominate, and that person will be adopted by the rest. Then the next one will be the next town council. So, they rotate representation and that does not cure any lacuna in the practice of nominating representatives of town councils where there is more than one town council. To suggest an electoral college would mean that in an electoral process you may require a presiding officer and all these processes which are totally unnecessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But doesn’t the town council meet as a council to name a person? Anyway, minister, you explain.

MR AHABWE: I can understand the concerns of the Leader of the Opposition because to me, the idea we are trying to introduce does not really change. What is changing is the nomenclature. What do we call that? Hon. Atubo is saying we call it urban council executive committee members. In case they are many, maybe we can call it councils’ executive committee members; that is all we need. These executive committee members of the various urban councils within that district can then recommend a person. His concern is that when we use the term “electoral college”, it pre-supposes that it is constituted by law, which I do not think we have in the main Act. So, I really have no objection with the idea of just saying, “These urban executive committee members come together and do recommend a person.”  

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, madam Chairperson, and I also thank the hon. Minister for that concession. The other amendment is to 2(d). I am proposing that we delete, “the nomination of the representatives of Persons With Disabilities.” We remove, “on the recommendation of the district council for disability,” simply because we do not provide that for the women representative in the district service commission, and that is also a special interest group. But more importantly, where you do not have a district council for disability, the constitution of that commission can be bogged down because you have now put an express provision that must be complied with. My proposal is that leave it open and let the poll practice be. Obviously, the district council leaders will informally consult and arrive at a name. Otherwise, on this one, there are many districts without district councils for disability and people will just get stuck without anybody being nominated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister.

MR AHABWE: In view of my earlier submission that this council for disability is not yet in place, I think I agree with him. But also, I think it is even better drafting, because you avoid a lot of politics within the other group. So, let us leave it to the district council to appoint somebody with disability. 

MR NDEEZI: I thank you. For the first time, I want to say that I agree with what the other side is saying. Why? We mentioned somewhere in the report of the committee that in order to be able to utilise the structure called the council for disability in this new arrangement, the executive must bring a Bill to amend the National Council for Disability Act. 

Right now, we are told that the Bill to amend the Act is still upcoming. We have never made a decision on the basis of a Bill that is still in Cabinet. I, therefore, agree that the use of the words, “this council for disability,” here is very dangerous. I propose that these words be removed - “this council for disability.” If you have another alternative, it is okay with me; but I believe these words, “this council for disability,” are redundant, unnecessary and a waste of time. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 9 -

DR EPETAIT: Clause 9 seeks to amend Section 65 of the principal Act. I beg for clarification in regard to sub-section 4 of Section 55. In the principal Act, it states that the district service commission shall in relation to its function spelt out in sub-section 1, act only upon the request and submission of the relevant council.” But now the Bill wants to substitute the word, “relevant council” with “the responsible officer.” In this case, I have checked on the interpretation clause of the principal Act, but did not find who the responsible officer is. Can a principal personnel officer, the CAO or the chairperson LC V start giving directives to the district service commission? I would feel comfortable with the provisions in the principal Act, which gives the district service commission powers to act upon submission by the relevant council. I think that is better, because I now do not know who the relevant officer is going to be in this case. I beg for clarification there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the rationale? Yes, minister.

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, submissions for Public Service Commission and district service commissions should be done by the responsible officer who is the head of that institution. In this case, it should be the CAO or the town clerk to make the submission like at the centre where the permanent secretaries do so. The CAO does it because he is responsible to council. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Minister, suppose I am not backed by the council resolution and I wake up one day and just submit because I am the CAO; wouldn’t you have given me a license?

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, there is a license because the CAO will make submissions based on the available vacancies and resources for those posts; he is also the accounting officer. He can only make submissions when he has the wage bill for those positions.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support hon. Epetait’s position that we should stop at the responsible council. When you talk of a responsible officer, we are now talking about the CAO who is not employed by the district council. Assuming he uses that maliciously to cause problems to the council? And since the CAO submits on behalf of the council, let us leave it to – (Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Hon. Members, we should admit the fact that a CAO will not make a submission to any authority whatsoever without reference to an approved structure of a given district, which is approved by the council you are talking about. That is the information I would like to give.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Yes, Madam Chairperson; then there is no reason why we should change from council to a responsible officer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know it is like saying Parliament will make a resolution then at the same time the Clerk to Parliament will actually sign it. Yes, because if it is well known that a Parliament resolution is signed by the Clerk, you do not have to put it in the law; you say it is Parliament.

MR TINKASIMIRE: The amendment that the honourable minister is trying to look for does not help us in this case. I am saying this because the CAO works for the council and in the parent law, this is well defined; we are using the word “council.” I am seeing a situation where the CAO who is being appointed by the Centre, can out-smart the district executive and start operating with only the minister, which should not be the case. We would like to keep all matters of the council under it. Let the word “council” remain and I think that is a better way to move.

MR AHABWE: Madam Chair, I think members are not getting the idea properly, as we meant it here. What we are saying is that if there is a vacancy in say, the department of health, who should notify the Public Service about its existence? It should be the responsible officer. The service commission will then advertise it. And it is after that, that the process will get to council. But more often than not, what has happened is that many political leaders have taken advantage of this provision. A chairperson of the district goes to the district service commission and says there is a vacancy here and he/she wants it filled. 

Using that approach has proved that at the end of the day, the district service commissions have been coerced into recruiting only those people in the interest of the chairperson and the executive committee. That is what we are trying to cure. The CAO of a district must be in charge of the technical positions. It should be him/her to declare that such positions are vacant to the district service commission for it to advertise such a vacancy. This will allow the process of recruitment and approval by the council to take place; this is what we are saying. There is nothing else on this one.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have had situations where we get to deal with very cantankerous CAOs who submit names when actually the council does not know. Those situations have occurred in some of our districts.

I think the best way could be to maintain both the council and the responsible officer so that the submission is done by the council through the responsible officer, to enable both to get involved. Otherwise, that provision might be abused by some officers.

MR YIGA: Madam Chair, we need to be very careful with what we are doing here, because like the minister has said, there is a lot of confusion in districts. There are districts where submissions are signed by the speaker of the district council. At other times, you find they are signed by the chairperson. So, after the district service commission has recruited somebody, then it is supposed to be the CAO to initiate changes on the pay change reports, to include that person on the payroll; no other person can do that. I know they have been colliding over those issues. So, since the person that the Minister of Public Service knows is the CAO, let him take responsibility to notify the district service commission about the existence of a vacancy, before it advertises and recruits. Otherwise, if you remain vague then we are going to get problems.

MR BALYEJUSA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think what we are looking at is who heads the Civil Service in the district, and the right person to handle all issues pertaining to civil servants there. And if anything, this issue should be left to the CAO, because he is fed with information from all the heads of departments on what goes on there. If we do otherwise, we will have no checks and balances in the system. All we need to do is to be vigilant to the extent that he is not dissuaded to do otherwise. I pray we leave it to the CAO, him being the accounting officer and head of the Civil Service in a district.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I think Members would debate more with the benefit of the provision referred to in (4) – 55(4) says that the district service commission shall, in relation to its functions spelt out in sub-section (1) – I am not sure how Members have actually looked at sub-section (1). Anyway, for the benefit of the House, read it out so that you can then appreciate whether it should be the council or relevant officer to implement that directive in (4), sub-section (1).

55(1) says that, “The power to appoint persons in office in the service of a district or urban council, including the power to confirm appointments to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices, and to remove such persons from office, is vested in the district service commission (DSC)”.

So, council in the first place has no powers, but it is the DSC that has powers; but to administratively enable the DSC to exercise those powers, the person who supervises all those officers who are appointed by the DSC, should be the relevant person to inform, that so and so has misbehaved, could you take disciplinary action.

This does not pre-exclude the right of district councils to express themselves on the conduct of any particular member of the district service. They can express that, but they should leave it at that level and refer the matter to the CAO for appropriate action.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think I am persuaded to allow the accounting officer, who knows how many positions are available, to be the one to make the submissions. I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

CAPT. OTEKAT: Clause 10 - I requested redrafting the provisions to read as follows: “That the CAO shall assign a senior public officer at the rank of or above senior assistant secretary in the employment of the local government, to perform the duties of clerk to district council, the justification being, to rule out the ambiguity as regards to officers who can be assigned to work as clerk to council”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that clause 15 be amended in paragraph A, by deleting the word “council” because the word appears at the end of the provision in the principal Act; hence, the deletion is done to avoid unnecessary repetition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

MR YIGA: The committee also proposes that clause 15(b) be deleted. We are saying that we should have all funds channelled through the established structures.

The idea of allowing the secretary to treasury to sit here and send money to a service delivery unit somewhere without going through the district councils and accounting officers, is not proper.

MR AHABWE: Madam Chair, I think that this is one area that I will disagree with the committee, and we agreed that we bring it here before you, and you resolve it. It is not long ago, that Members of this House decided that money for public health - drugs should not go through the districts, and that the drugs should instead move from medical stores to the units.

It is this very Parliament - I laboured in this place to insist that possibly the budget should remain, and maybe the medicine goes; but I was not given the opportunity to be supported. This provision is simply saying that the Ministry of Finance, instead of sending money to school x via bank y, in order to reach the school, we are saying the money should be sent direct to the bank account of the school.

Now, when you send the money direct to the school, you notify the CAO, the sub-county chief, and whoever is in charge of accountability. Then they can monitor the use of that money and these entities must account to the CAO, who must also account to the central government. We are using the deliberating word “may” because there are situations where I can assure you that money did not reach.

So, we are saying that in case there is a problem somewhere, instead of maintaining the problem, we can instruct that Ministry of Finance resends money directly. It does not undermine the process of decentralisation at all.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, I do not know whether you were here last week when we were dealing with the Vote-on-Account. This House was very insistent that we should know, in every district, who is going to receive this money, and their names were laid here. We said we wanted to know who was going to receive the money in every hospital.

How will we now get a headmaster in Kidera, and send him money, when I do not know him here?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I was seeking a very simple clarification from the Minister of Local Government, whether his ministry consulted with Ministry of Finance on this matter, because once you remit money to the headmaster of the school, he becomes the accounting officer, and just think how many accounting officers Ministry of Finance will end up with?

I think we can just delete this, and I would suggest that the Ministry of Local Government consults with the Ministry of Finance on how to expedite the remittance of funds for relevant projects. If he has difficulties, he can come back and inform us.

MR AHABWE: I cannot remain an island. In view of the general consensus, I concede for now. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

CAPT. OTEKAT: On clause 20; the committee recommends that it should be deleted. The justification is that there is very limited time and resources for the Electoral Commission to create the electoral colleges for purposes of elections of PWDs in the 2011 general elections, and there is need to amend the National Council for Disability Act first before making an amendment here. So the committee proposes we delete it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that clause 20 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, deleted.

Clause 21

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Speaker, on clause 21, the committee requested that we substitute for the words, “90 days” appearing in sub-clauses 1, 4, 5 and 6 with the words, “6 months”. The justification is to be consistent with the provisions of Article 186(6) of the Constitution.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, the matter of members of local councils who go into the councils under the sponsorship of political organisations and parties, and also those who may have stood as independents but choose to join parties, having looked through the law can best be provided for here. 

I recognise that Schedule III of the main part gives powers to the Minister to set conditions under which somebody vacates an office. But I think to be consistent with the provisions of the Elections Act, that of Parliament, et cetera, we would like to introduce two amendments. 

One is to amend clause 171(1) to read as follows: “Where the office of a chairperson becomes vacant, or where a chairperson crosses to and joins another political party or organisations, the Chief Administrative Officer shall within 21 days notify the Electoral Commission and the commission shall organise a by-election within 90 days from the occurrence of the vacancy” - or six months as proposed. 

The second amendment is to introduce a provision for councillors. And it says that: “Where the seat of a councillor becomes vacant under regulation 3 of the Third Schedule to this Act or where a councillor crosses to and joins another political party or organisations, the Chief Administrative Officer shall notify the Electoral Commission in writing within 21 days after the vacancy occurs and the commission shall organise a by-election within six months as proposed after the occurrence of the vacancy.” 

This will bring the provisions of the Local Government Act in conformity with the parliamentary provision and will clarify Section 127 of the Act which refers us to the Parliamentary Elections Act.

Secondly, it will then not leave this matter in the hands of the minister who can amend schedules and therefore it will make things clear; and changing this provision will mean shifting from one political system to another, and it will be consistent.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification. What will it take for the councillor to be presumed to have changed party? Is it through writing; is it at a public rally; is it his behaviour in the council that he deals more with DP Members more than Movement? What will tantamount to crossing to another party?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Actually that is what I wanted to say, that we provide a clear procedure. Because if I occasionally vote with this side and then the other day I vote for this side, it does not mean I have crossed. Today, I may be happy with Ocula and I vote with him, but it does not mean that I have crossed. 

So, can we provide the procedure, even here in the House? Because for me, unless someone writes to me and says, “I have now moved from this side to another”, I do not know that you have moved.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, since the clarification was sought from me, I would like to refer my colleagues to what has been happening in Parliament here. One of our colleagues on this side has openly identified with the NRM. But until we have a legal basis to say that he has crossed, we have nothing. 

But there are people in district councils, even in my own district. When the President last went to Kalong, two district councillors stood up and declared that they had crossed to the NRM. That is evidence and can be ground – a petition to the CAO to that effect would arise and would be accompanied with evidence. 

This is a new situation; we cannot speculate all the conditions and put them in the law. But if we say that if one has crossed the burden will be on the person saying that a person has crossed, because the other person can say, “I did not cross”. So, let’s leave it as provided; even the provisions for our Members of Parliament, there is nothing spelt; it just states, “If you have crossed”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why, up to today, I have declined to declare that people have crossed.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: But can we provide just the equivalent law for local councils and leave the situation to be?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But there are not in this House.

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, let me remind this House that when we were amending the Constitution, we were very careful not to use the word, “crossing” because I hear, in the other Parliaments, moving from this side to the other or vice-versa would tantamount to moving from your party to another; that is why they used the word, “crossing”.

In our case, when you look at the Constitution where we derive all these other laws, Article 83(1) about tenure of office of Members of Parliament, provides as follows: “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament –
(g) If that person leaves the political party for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to join another party or to remain in Parliament as an independent Member.
(h) If having been elected to Parliament as an independent candidate, that person joins a political party.”

My view is that if we insist on replicating this one into the Local Government Act, then we should use the same wordings so that we remove any ambiguities of crossing and not crossing. So that is very clear and it is consistent with the Constitution. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You will not have solved anything. The things that are happening in the local governments are that people are sitting on the fence. This provision is not solving anything. Do you cross by writing to the Speaker and saying, “Speaker, I have now moved.” From that I would know that you have moved. But if I do not write to the Speaker and I do not say anything and I just sit quietly; I do not participate with this side which brought me and I just keep quiet. Where am I? Where does the Speaker put you? Yes (Interjection) this does not solve anything. 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Madam Chair, as leaders of political parties - in fact what the Leader of the Opposition has said is true. Unlike Parliament, in councils, they do not sit on sides like we sit here to say that the Opposition is seated here or the NRM people are on the other side. But a councillor can stand up and say, “I have crossed to the ruling party or to FDC or to any other party.” 

As leaders of political parties, we have memberships and we know our councillors in the district or even sub-counties. It is upon us to say that so and so is no longer a member of the political party to which he subscribed. 

I think let us not just think in terms of Parliament here; it is very difficult, as you said. But in the councils, somebody stands up and says, “I have crossed to such and such a party.” Why should she or he continue to be a councillor on that party ticket when he or she has publicly declared? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Excuse me, do they stand in the district council during a session, which is being recorded by the clerk to council and say, “At 12.30 a.m., hon. Nsubuga said he has crossed.” That is what I want to know because if I have that on the Hansard of the district council, I will know what to do. But if I stand in a bus park and say, “I am wearing a green shirt ….”  

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Let me clarify. Madam Chairperson, every party member has a party card. A councillor on a political rally somewhere gives back his political party ticket to another or throws it out to another political party. Although he has not done it in the local council, he has done it openly in another political forum and he says, “I have crossed to the NRM and here is my original card of the party where I belonged.” Why should that councillor continue to be in the council claiming to be a member of the party from which he or she crossed?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How do we import the activities of the public rally into the district council? That is what I want to know.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Madam Chairperson, I am saying that he or she has openly given out her party card that, “Here is my card, I have crossed.” (Interjections) 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, certainly, I commend the Leader of the Opposition for this proposed amendment. But as of now, it does not actually help us much because in order to come out with an effective procedural law, we have to reflect on so many relevant laws: the Political Parties and Organisation’s Act, the Constitution itself, the Local Governments Act and all the other presidential, parliamentary and all sorts of related laws. We have got to study them and come out with an implementing legislation. 

In the meantime, my advice is that we go with the provisions we have. First of all, the Leader of the Opposition correctly cited Section 172 of the Local Governments Act and he was relating it to the Parliamentary Elections Act and the Presidential Elections Act. For instance, under Section 3 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, you can see a provision for by-elections: “Whenever a Member of Parliament: 
a) Dies
b) Where the seat of a Member of Parliament becomes vacant under Article 83 of the Constitution ….”

In order to be on the safe side - unless we take the route proposed by the Minister of State for Local Government – if you use the expression, for instance, used in this amendment of crossing, of doing this and that, you are likely to be challenged. 

“Joining” up to now has given me a lot of trouble. At what point is a person deemed to have joined or left a party to become an independent? Even in this proposed amendment, the reverse is not even provided for – of where a person decides to become an independent. 

I would rather suggest that we challenge ourselves and think of this matter, come up at a later stage with an appropriate implementing legislation rather than coming out with a provision that may not meet the expectations and the standards prescribed under Article 83 of the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And, hon. Members, I want you to understand my practical problem. Here, if a Member dies or is ejected by court, I write to the Electoral Commission and say, “I have a vacancy in the other place”. But I am asking you, if someone says something in a public rally and not the district council, as the speaker of the district council, how will I cause the Electoral Commission to conduct a by-election? I was not at the public rally. Who causes that by-election? Who notifies the Electoral Commission that so and so has crossed, come and organise a by-election of the district council. Those are the practical difficulties. 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Madam Chairperson, they are very practical as you have said but since we are building a multi-party system; we are building political parties under the multi-party system. We must accept these things. That is how political parties will grow. 

But if we just leave an amorphous situation where a member of a political party at a political rally – I am sorry to say, but very often, you hear President Museveni welcoming people from other political parties and somebody gives in his or her party card and is received. That person is in the district council and he continues to debate or represent a political party in that council. I think we are being unfair. 

If it is done openly, it is like somebody prophesying that, “I have declared. I have been a Christian; I am now becoming a Muslim.” Whether or not I pray, I have declared that I have joined such and such an organisation. Why should you continue counting me in your organisation when I have openly declared that I have left? 

So, for a speaker of a council to say that they have no evidence and, therefore, they cannot cause a vacancy to disenfranchise them or make people from that political party that the person was representing non-represented in that council. I think we must be clear on this issue because it is in the local councils that political parties have a base; it is the grassroots. If we leave it like that, we are killing political parties.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, being a Member of Parliament, it is not only the pronouncement that a Member of Parliament makes here on the Floor that matters; even what you utter from outside Parliament matters. The office literally moves with us. Imagine a situation where you are in a rally in Kamuli and then a district councillor elected under the NRM in Kamuli in the presence of all the recording systems like TV stations, radio stations and what have you rises up and throws a yellow T-shirt to your face and says, “From now on, I do not want to hear about the NRM”, while you are watching, and even throws down the party T-shirt and card and receives an FDC T-shirt and card there and then. The records have been taken. To me that is sufficient evidence and in any case such a person even continues behaving in a very hostile manner to the party under which the councillor will have been elected. 

It is not just the pronouncement on the Floor in council or Parliament that matters but whatever you do, your actions and utterances wherever. And that is why I would like to concur with the proposal, which is in consonance with the constitutional provision in Article 83(1)(g) that instead of using the words, “crossing from one political party to another,” we should borrow the wording in the Constitution and say, “If that person leaves the political party for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to council,” so that we are in tandem with the constitutional provision. Otherwise, if we leave it as it is, in fact even Article 172 would probably become redundant because I think those are some of the things, which were envisaged. Madam Chairperson, the councillors ought to be brought to order.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, there is an instance of someone I will not name in this House, who when the President was somewhere in Lango, declared while there and then after two days said, “I did not”. (Laughter) Can you see the dilemma of the Speaker in this matter? 

MR TOSKIN BARTILLE: I want to agree with what you have said that sometimes political pronouncements can be made under some circumstances; people get excited about events but at the same time afterwards people can retract whatever they had said. As already stated by Members, there must be a way of documenting what somebody has done – something must be done practically. If a member of a council has actually declared to have left the party where he or she was, this must be clarified in the council so that the speaker of the council can announce it and the proceedings can be taken as the law gives, just as it is in Parliament. 

If a Member of Parliament has actually decided, then the Speaker must get to know that and inform the Electoral Commission accordingly and elections take place and the person is replaced. Otherwise, if we leave it just the way it is, sincerely it is causing a lot of problems. 

An interesting example is in one of my sub-counties in Bukwo. A member of a council was elected on an FDC ticket but when he came to the council, he was elected speaker and he simply took up the position and nobody has ever queried it; and he continues being the speaker. Unfortunately for Bukwo, we do not have the other parties; he was the only person who was on the other side but nobody has ever talked about it and the man continues to be the speaker. Whether he is FDC or NRM, it is not a problem. But these things must really be clarified.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you so much. I believe this Parliament is the highest democratic forum in this country. I believe this Parliament can set precedents to assist local councils. I believe what we do here can benefit local councils as well. But I know and the MPs here know that there is what we call games in politics; there is what we call jokes in politics.  

I would propose that we use the system we use here in Parliament. If somebody crosses, he or she must write a letter addressed to the speaker of the council in his own handwriting and also sign it and then the speaker of the council is sure that that person actually crossed. 

MR EJUA: Thank you. This matter touches deep into the operations and dynamics of parties. It has been affecting the grassroots right up to Parliament. Even then, this issue of saying that people simply write, to me, I think this is not good enough. Not everybody knows how to write. There are some people who may not know how to write. 

Secondly, attempts by the parties to – for example parties have been saying to be a member, “You must have a card.” You very well know that even in NRM, the card system was abused and we have gone to registering in books. I am sure that somewhere there is even some sort of abuse and that is why we have these other committees who will continuously verify. Much as this matter should have been treated with urgency, I think it needs time for the parties to internalise because it affects everybody. Thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you. First of all, the person you could not name did not declare. We have got the recording of that day. He never declared. 

Secondly, I think if we restrict this thing to the district council or Parliament, we are wasting time. Crossing can take place any day, anywhere. 

Just two weeks ago, I was touring the North with my party president and so many people, including councillors crossed to UPC and surrendered their cards, we have their cards in Uganda House. We exchanged them; you cross, we give you our card and you surrender the other one. What more evidence do you need? It is the party that is being left. If somebody is a councillor or a Member of Parliament, it is incumbent upon the party that the member has left to complain. 

For me, if I am receiving you, I am satisfied; there is nothing for me to worry about. So, I think we should not restrict ourselves to Parliament or district councils. We have technologies now. Pictures are taken and voices are recorded when these people are crossing. What else do we need?

We should not really restrict – in fact it is dangerous to pretend that the member who has crossed is still your member when the person is no longer with you. You will be counting membership, which does not exist. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think you will appreciate the difficulties involved in this matter; it is not as simple as – yes, Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: I think hon. Okello-Okello is getting closer to the point. Not until there is an aggrieved party and that aggrieved party goes to the appropriate forum, and in this case, I do not see any other than court, and the person is declared to have vacated his seat under the provisions of Article 83. But this business that somebody must come and report to the Speaker or to the administrative officer and then the administrative officer – it is going to be complicated. 

However, as a fair compromise, in my opinion – the Leader of the Opposition of course made  reference to section 171 -(Interjections)- 171 of the Local Governments Act, but you will not actually have it complete unless you read the Third Schedule; the Third Schedule is more comprehensive. It does not actually restrict itself to the chairperson; it goes to any member of a local government council. And I think if we could look at that more carefully - if you have got the big book, the Third Schedule is on page 714. Look at Section 3: “Vacation of a seat on the local government council –
The seat of a member of a local government council shall fall vacant if: 
a) The holder of the office dies; resigns in writing addressed:-
 (i) In the case of a district, to the Speaker,
 ii) In the case of other local councils, to the chairperson
(b) The council is dissolved.”

I wanted us, somewhere there, maybe to introduce a new (c) to include more or less the same provision as is in the Parliamentary Elections Act, which is also under by-elections and which says that whenever a Member of Parliament dies - where the seat of a Member of Parliament becomes vacant under Article 83 of the Constitution. 

We should import this (b) into “vacation of seat on the local government council.” We can actually put it there as (c). In my opinion that will complete the cycle until we put in place better regulations and better laws for enforcement purposes.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Chair and I thank the Attorney-General for the proposal. My difficulty - and I did mention it in the beginning - was that procedurally, I did not know whether we could amend regulations and schedules which are, in our laws, the responsibility of the minister. That was my difficulty. Otherwise, I knew that that would be the best place to have it but then we would leave it in the hands of the minister to do it. Under the provisions, if the minister makes that commitment, I have absolutely no problem because that is where it should be. I was merely looking for where to put it.

MR AHABWE: Madam Chair, when I stood to make my comments, I actually said that if Parliament wished to introduce such an amendment, we had no problem. I said it and it is on record. So I have no objection absolutely -(Applause)- to putting it into the Third Schedule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay I put the -

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: I still feel there is some small lacuna or gap to the extent that the Leader of the Opposition suggested that it is the CAO to write to the Electoral Commission -(Interruption)   

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: That proposal has been dropped.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In preference for what the Minister is going to do as discussed. Okay, thank you Members. I put the question that clause 21 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, as a consequence of amendments that we have created for clause 3(b) and 7, the committee also thought that we would insert a new clause after 21, clause 22, to read as follows: “Amendment of First Schedule of the principal Act. The First Schedule to the principal Act is amended: 
a)	In rule 1 by inserting the words “deputy speakers” immediately after the words “speakers” appearing on the second line of sub-rule (1) of the provision.
b)	By inserting a new provision immediately after rule 2(a) to read as follows: 
	2(a) honoraria of chairpersons of village, parish and ward council:
	Honoraria of chairpersons of village, parish and ward councils shall be paid from the Consolidated Fund.”

And like I have said, the justification is the consequential amendment created by the proposed amendments to clause 3(b) and clause 7, respectively.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that a new clause 22 be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 3

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, clause 3 is an amendment of Section 18 of the principal Act. Section 18 of the principal Act is amended by inserting a new provision immediately after sub-section (6) to read as follows: “Not withstanding the provisions of this section, the district executive committee shall be constituted within three months from the date when the last general elections were carried out.” 

The justification is to avoid unnecessary delays in the creation of the district executive committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed - but the clause 3 I had was the other one where we had a problem with Section 11. 

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, we had sort of skipped that one when we entered into some discussion over the other one and we just glossed over it but it is also in the amendment of Section 18 of the principal Act where, in the morning, Madam Chairperson, if you remember, it has become very difficult for the chairpersons to constitute members of the executive because of disagreements -

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: No, honourable chair, let us start with Section 11 because we stood over the old Section 11 awaiting consultation and then you can bring Section 18. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, we have done consultations and we want to have a middle position. We are proposing a middle position because the problems that the Ministry of Local Government face are real. More often than not, you can have, for instance, problems in about 80 or 70 districts at a go and the process - actually like short listing; if you want to interview people you shortlist so that you get focussed on the major problem. 

So, we really thought that if the minister consults with the Attorney-General and in fact if you look at Section 14, “Terms of removal of the chairperson: Before a tribunal is formed ….” Although that one provides for a tribunal, “… the minister must evaluate the notice in consultation with the Attorney-General.” 

We thought that we could actually use the same method of evaluating this notice for sufficiency of grounds, not forgetting of course at the end of the day, this is not the end of it. Any aggrieved party can always petition court for administrative review or judicial review of any decision taken. But we must actually be seen to be addressing a situation that is real and making it also possible for the sector ministry to get involved in handling some of the basic matters like we normally call it. 

Providing the basis, there is always a question, is there a prima facie case to move on, worth following to go to step B? So, the middle position in our view is in consultation. In other words, “A notice made under sub-section 6(a) shall be submitted to the minister or his or her representative by the clerk to council and the minister or his representative in consultation with the Attorney-General shall evaluate the notice for removal of the speaker, and if satisfied that there are sufficient grounds for doing so, shall within 30 days after receipt of the notice convene or cause the convening of a meeting for the removal and election of a speaker.” I beg to move.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Chair. This provision has a lot of problems. For instance, you let the Minister to evaluate, you do not even give him a time scale as to when he finishes or she finishes the evaluation -(Interjections)- no, the problem is you people sometimes do not read what is written because the 30 days is when he is satisfied; not the evaluation. The evaluation could go on for a year -(Interjections)- absolutely!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The 30 days run after he is satisfied.

MR AHABWE: Madam Chair, I think 30 days is inclusive of the entire process, including presiding over the removal in case he is satisfied.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Read your provision and fortunately you said, “I think” because you are thinking. It is not provided here so that is why I stood up because it has a problem. You don’t have a time scale for how long the minister should evaluate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is this new element of the Minister consulting with the Attorney-General before the 30 days. I think that is -

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Yes and when you are satisfied -(Interjections)- no and secondly, you know –(Interruption)

MR AHABWE: Madam Chairperson, the provision is saying, if I can even start from the middle - “… and if satisfied that there are sufficient grounds for doing so, shall, within 30 days after receipt of the notice, convene or cause to convening a meeting for the removal and election of a speaker”. That is English.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that include the consultation with the Attorney-General?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair –(Mr Ruhindi rose_)- yes, you will help me but let me also help myself first. (Laughter) “If satisfied, shall …”, what if the Minister is not satisfied, what happens? Because the 30 days is “if satisfied”; if the Minister is not satisfied, what happens?

That is one but secondly, my earlier argument was on the issue of principle. You are giving the Minister a supervisory role that takes away the rights of councils to make their decisions. I know for instance that the IGG wrote for the removal of the Speaker of Pader District Local Council but up to now, no action has been taken. 

The problem that my honourable member said then arises because as I speak now, a councillor of Pader District Local Council who is a member of FDC has been brought before the Anti Corruption Court because he had a contract. The Speaker of Pader District Local Council had a contract, which was in total breach of the law. 

The IGG wrote directing that the Minister should cause that meeting to take place and the speaker be removed, nothing has happened. So, when you put provisions like these and you do not provide protection for those who do not belong to Government, you pre-dispose them to the whims of the Minister and it is too dangerous for democracy. Let the council fight it out and let the law take its course but do not give the Minister such power.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: First of all, I think, Madam Chairperson, the Leader of Opposition seems to be satisfied that the 30 days are inclusive of making the evaluation. Why? Because, we are talking about “within 30 days after receipt of the notice”, not after satisfaction. It is clear.

Two, let us bear with each other. We all know the circumstances under which the gymnastics, the dynamics of politics - sometimes we will get frivolous accusations and vexatious and then here is the minister all the time being required to appoint a person. This one sits aside, another one must sit there and you will end up not solving any matter. 

In any case, I have actually categorically stated that this process does not oust the jurisdiction of our ordinary courts. You can only seek judicial review. You know, Madam Chairperson, here is a situation where you are saying the sector minister in consultation with the Attorney-General should establish a prima facie case whether really it is worth following to appoint a person to hear this matter together with the council. That is all we are saying.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Chair, I think we should not impose the minister on any council. These councillors are human beings like us. When they pass a resolution to remove a speaker and sign, they have a reason for it. But to bring it here and you say the minister has said no, you will cause an impact in very many districts. I would like to suggest —

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Member, you know they are dealing with I think the removal of the speaker who presides over the council and the minister is required to create a free environment where that process can take place because a real person is the one who is at issue. So, you cannot oust the minister’s jurisdiction.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Chair, what I am saying is that it should not be the decision of the minister alone to frustrate the council and say the matter ends there. If we want to substitute the minister, put an investigation in place but to say that the minister will just write, “I have consulted the Attorney-General and I am not satisfied”, the matter ends there, you are going to cause a lot of problems in the country.

I would like to suggest this. I would like to remove from the words, “If satisfied that there is sufficient grounds to do so”. I would like that phrase to be removed. The minister can evaluate and call the meeting but to say that he must be satisfied first is a very tall order. He is going to frustrate the councillors; there will be no meetings because the speaker is not liked and the district will not move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe, we sleep over this matter?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I beg the honourable minister -(Interjections)- I agree that the Attorney-General can be independent, but it’s like getting a sheep, which has been killed by a lion and you say, “Also, it can be looked after by a leopard.” In our circumstances, the Attorney-General is appointed by the ruling party, by Government. Of course I mean that the ruling party is Government, I am just inter-changing the words. 

The Minister of Local Government whom this notice is sent to has to consult. There is a likelihood of connivance. I would not be interested in frustrating the legislature at the district council in playing their politics. It is very important that we give them their independence and leave the law the way it is. In my opinion, this amendment the honourable minister is bringing on the Floor of the House is not called for.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I propose that we sleep over this because we have done most of the work so that we get time to reflect on it. 

The Title 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title – is Section 18 also part of clause 3? 

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, the committee was of the view that we insert a new provision immediately after clause 3. If you see up, there is amendment of Section 11 of the principal Act, but again, down here there is, “Insert a new provision immediately after clause 3 to read as follows - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, why don’t we leave the entire clause 3 and deal with it tomorrow? 

CAPT. OTEKAT: Okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we leave the entire clause 3 so that we can deal with it tomorrow?

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Title, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Madam Chair, I beg to move a motion that the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Move for resumption of the House.

MR AHABWE: Resumption? Okay. Madam Chair, I beg to move a motion that the House do resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.14 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill 2009; passed some amendments and stood over others. I beg to move. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you for the work. The House is adjourned to 9.30 a.m. tomorrow morning.

(The House rose at 7.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 June 2010, at 9.30 a.m.) 
