Tuesday, 27 June 2006

(Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you from last week’s retreat. I hope you are now fully armed to take on the challenges of the Eighth Parliament.

We are going to be handling budgetary issues and the State of the National Address. I appeal to Members to follow our practice in the Commonwealth: when the new Members are making their maiden speeches, there should be as little intervention as possible, unless something is drastically wrong.  That is my appeal for now and I want to thank you very much for your support, attendance and contributions during the last retreat.
  
2.56
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): With your indulgence, Madam Speaker, it is with very deep sorrow that I inform you and honourable members about the death of Justice Arthur Haggai Oder of the Supreme Court of Uganda. 

Justice Oder was born on 25 September 1938 in Aboke, Apac District.  He was appointed a judge of the High Court of Uganda in 1979. In 1988, he was promoted to the Supreme Court of Uganda where he has been sitting as a justice of the Supreme Court until his death yesterday morning.  

There will be a requiem service at All Saints Cathedral, Nakasero on Wednesday 28 June 2006 at 11.00 a.m. The body will then lie in state at his House at plot 1 Lutuli close in Bugolobi. The body will leave Bugolobi for his ancestral home in Aboke in Apac District on Thursday, 29 June 2006 where the burial will take place on Friday, 30 June 2006 at 12.00 p.m.

Justice Oder was a distinguished son of Uganda, who served his country to the best of his ability and in a distinguished legal career. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I request Parliament to stand up and observe a minute of silence in honour of the fallen judge.
  
(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shall we have a response from the Shadow Attorney General? I have been advised by the Leader of Opposition that they want to say something.

2.59
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Erias Lukwago): Madam Speaker and Members of this august House, on behalf of the opposition government, I extend our heartfelt condolences to the Government of Uganda, relatives and friends of the late Justice Oder.  

He was a distinguished member of the bar before 1979. As the Attorney General stated, he was also a member of the bench for quite a long time. We shall miss his services. He was a man whose reputation was beyond reproach. He served as a distinguished member of the Supreme Court for quite a long time and we consider him as a man who will not be easily replaceable. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the Attorney General stood up, I thought he was giving information to this House in preparation for a formal motion that would be moved in recognition of the services of the late judge. I would like to seek clarification as to whether we are going to have a formal motion to pay tribute to the services of the late judge.  

DR. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I think we will have time for a formal motion. But it would be irregular for Parliament to just continue without being formally informed that the judge of the Supreme Court has passed away. There is still time for us to move a formal motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, for giving us that information.

3.03
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Madam Speaker, as Members of Parliament, our place of work is parliamentary buildings notwithstanding our constituencies. On many occasions, we have been denied access through the main gate to our place of work. For instance, yesterday we were denied access through the main gate and yet there were no cars in the parking yard. Therefore, Madam Speaker, if Members of Parliament are denied access to their place of work, does it mean that they should not work? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, thank you for notifying me. I was not aware that there were constraints to your ingress and egress of this building. I will find out what is happening and advise you accordingly. 

3.04
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue of national importance. Of recent, there has been an outbreak of animal diseases particularly, Foot and Mouth Disease in Western and South Western Uganda and many other places. 

I have learnt from the milk handlers that the Ministry of Agriculture has come out with a cramp on the use of milk cans. The minister is telling the very traders who were not very long ago forced to buy milk cans to start using milk tanks. Madam Speaker, we have what we call the Diary Development Authority, which is a policy regulating body for the Ministry of Agriculture. It issued permission for people handling milk to use cans and some of them went into extra efforts to acquire loans. The ministry has come out to cramp a ban on the use of milk cans and particularly for those traders in and around Kampala.

To me, Madam Speaker, this is a mark of monopoly. They are telling them to sell the milk to the milk tank owners and at the same time they sell it to the Diary Corporation. There are so many things happening here. First and fore most, the people who are handling milk now are not yet qualified to handle milk. Yet, most of the traders were sensitised by DDA. Therefore, the milkmen are now selling directly to the tanks, which in turn sell to the Diary Corporation.

Secondly, it has created another side way for people to start smuggling milk at night and sell it to the coolers and the consumers. In my view, this will exacerbate the situation, which the minister is trying to curb. Right now, these people are almost coming up in arms because they are being rendered jobless. They had taken loans to buy milk cans. 

Madam Speaker, I wish the minister would come out with a policy statement or tell Parliament what is happening because most of the people operating along Nakasongola towards our constituencies here are now being rendered jobless. Through me, they request to know what all this means. If anything, if they want to curb the spread of the disease, it should not be on a particular area around Kampala; it should spread countrywide and they should put a ban on the milk products in the entire country, until firm action is taken to rectify this situation. 

Madam Speaker, this is the issue I brought before the minister, who is incidentally here. I would like something to take back to the people who petitioned me, in my constituency and beyond.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the minister would like to say something now or to undertake to come back to us later.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY & FISHERIES (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, this problem of movement of animals and animal products has become an issue because of cattle, which has moved into the country from Tanzania. These animals have not been immunised and yet there is a spread of Foot and Mouth Diseases. We are trying to cramp down on that. 

The threat is spreading and we have vaccinated animals in the affected area but we are still trying to get more vaccines to complete the exercise before we allow normal flow of animals and their products from the western part of Uganda. The Northern and eastern parts of Uganda so far are not yet affected, including Nakasongola. Madam Speaker, this is purely to protect our animals and the lives of our people. 

Madam Speaker, We are going to have a proper statement prepared for Parliament, which we shall submit either tomorrow or the day after. We shall consult you about the Order Paper. However, all in all, this is purely for safety and there is no other motive. This is not a political issue; it is purely an animal health issue. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you let him come? He said he will come this week to make a statement and then we –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, it is just about what he has said. He said the eastern part of the country is not yet affected. I am wondering whether the honourable minister would like to issue a ban to the continued taking of animals to the Teso wetland in order to stop the spread of this disease in these wetlands. (Laughter) This will help to stop the spread of the Foot and Mouth Disease.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, much as he has tried to submit something on the curbing of the disease, I am talking about the products. I am talking about the milk now. If you ban the movement in only a few areas and allow others to continue the supply of milk to the milk tankers, which milk is taken to the Diary Corporation, to me that sparks off some kind of creation of a monopoly.

Madam Speaker, when the minister is making a statement, he should come out clearly as to whether he is going to ban milk products in the whole country for sometime. Otherwise, when he bans certain areas from bringing milk to Kampala particularly as they have already put it, he should make clear the criteria he has used. These are traders in milk. 

UNDATA, for instance, is an umbrella body for the whole of Uganda and it is part of the creation of liberalised industry of milk, which is competing with Diary Corporation. Therefore, when he is banning UNDATA from handling milk products, he should come out clearly and tell us exactly how he effected this: Why are milk cans being put out of circulation, when DDA policy regulating body allowed the people to go for the cans and even incur loans?  And why particularly Kampala? Do you mean these diseases do not affect other towns? These are some of the questions we are asking, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, now that you are on notice, could we put this matter on the Order Paper for Thursday? (Mr Odit rose) Oh, former chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture.

MR JOHN ODIT: Madam Speaker, in April, we raised a very comprehensive question on the status of animal diseases in this country. This was a list of zoonotic and notifiable diseases. The Prime Minister directed the then Minister of General Duties, Prof. Kagonyera, to handle what he could handle that day. They requested the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to consult and come up with a reasonable response to these questions. We have the copies of the contribution in our Hansard, which has just come out.  

I would like the minister to consult and ensure that not only FMD is handled; there are many other diseases. We also reminded the minister that people in West Nile were burning their pigs because of African Swine Fever.  Therefore, if the minister is responding tomorrow, we expect that he addresses these issues, which were raised in addition to this new development.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was just to give notice to the minister about an urgent matter. As you are aware, we have created time for private Members’ business on Thursday. Therefore, it is now on notice. He has understood the issues and we will put this matter on the Order Paper for Thursday.  

Honourable members, please join me in welcoming our children from Bright Junior School, Kampala Central. (Applause) You are very welcome to the Parliament of Uganda! They came with their teachers. These are future parliamentarians, you know. We also have Kampala Parents School here with us. You are very welcome. I think they have also come with their teachers. (Applause)  We have Gombe Senior Secondary School, Mpigi District.   The majority are girls as you can see. (Applause) We are delighted to have you here. I understand Green Hill Academy is – [Hon. Members: “They are not in the gallery”] oh they are missing in action. Anyway, they will some other time. 

Honourable members, using my powers under Rule 18(3), I would like to alter the Order Paper a bit to allow the Leader of Opposition to make a statement.

3.16
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, it has been sometime since I participated in the swearing in of the Cabinet of the Government of Uganda. Under the laws of multiparty politics, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament is required to constitute a shadow cabinet. The exercise has been going on and we have considered all the other factors. 

Madam Speaker, I am pleased to announce that we now have a fully constituted shadow cabinet. We shall not be shadowing all the portfolios because there are ministers without portfolios whom we cannot shadow. (Laughter)  We have 21 honourable ladies and gentlemen to shadow the different portfolios.  It is my pleasure to announce for the information of the House and the record of Parliament, the following shadow Members of the opposition cabinet.

1.	Hon. Christopher Kibanzanga - (FDC, Busongora South, Kasese) Presidency and Anti-Corruption 
2.	Hon. Erias Lukwago  (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala) -Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Attorney General
3.	Hon. Nabilah Naggayi Sempala (FDC, Kampala District) - Information and National Guidance. She is in the United States at the moment.   
4.	Hon. Beti Kamya (FDC, Rubaga North, Kampala)- Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
5.	Hon. John Arumadri (FDC, Madi Okolo County, Arua)  - Local Government
6.	Hon. Nathan Nandala Mafabi (FDC, Budadiri West, Sironko) - Finance, Planning and Economic Development
7.	Hon. Alex Onzima (FDC, Maracha Country, Arua) - Defence and Security
8.	Hon. Hussein Kyanjo (JEEMA, Makindye West, Kampala) - Internal Affairs and Human Rights
9.	Hon. Reagan Okumu (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu) - Foreign Affairs and Regional and East African Cooperation. 
10.	Hon. Francis Epetait (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi) - Health  
11.	Hon. Christine Baro (FDC, Arua District)  - Education and Sports 
12.	Hon. Rebecca Amuge (Independent, Lira District) - Public Service 
13.	Hon. Susan Nampijja  (CP, Lubaga South) - Gender, Labour and Youth 
14.	Hon. Patrick Amuriat (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi District) - Works and Infrastructure Development
15.	Hon. Florence Ekwau (FDC, Kaberamaido District) - Lands and Physical Planning 
16.	Hon. Michael Mabikke (Independent, Makindye East, Kampala) - Housing and Urban Development 
17.	Hon. John Baptist Kawanga (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka) - Tourism, Trade and Industry 
18.	Hon. Beatrice Anywar (FDC, Kitgum District) - Water and Environment. This is actually the Member of Parliament for the Minister of Agriculture. 
19.	Hon. Harry Kasigwa (FDC, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja) - Energy and Mineral Development. 
20.	Hon. Wilfred Kajeke (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale) - Communication, ICT, Science and Technology 
21.	Hon. Betty Aol (FDC, Gulu District) - Rehabilitation, Relief and Disaster Management. She is not here right now because she went a long with the parliamentary delegation to the North.  

Madam Speaker, as you can see from our list, in spite of our geographical limitations, we tried to abide by the provisions of the Constitution. The appointment to offices of the state should reflect a national character.  

Madam Speaker, We have a very important constituent, the women. This country has often prided itself in the extent to which the party in government has promoted the gender interests. The country was very disappointed that that was not reflected in the appointment to Cabinet in the Government of Uganda.

If there is a difference on our side, we were not only trying to outplay the party in government.  We have in our party provision that 40 per cent of the positions of leadership should go to the ladies.  We endeavour to meet this constitutional obligation but we also realised that there are so many factors to balance. I am proud to announce that the ladies occupy 38.4 percent of positions in our shadow cabinet.  

Madam Speaker, I thank you, for giving me this opportunity to announce our shadow cabinet to the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of Opposition. Let me take this opportunity to welcome the shadow cabinet to their position on the front bench. I am happy that we are now coming closer to how we shall be operating as a multi-party Parliament. 
 
3.29
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Madam Speaker, on behalf of government, I warmly welcome the just announced Members of the shadow cabinet. We have been waiting for your advent and we are glad that you have arrived. We very much appreciate the spirit with which we have been operating so far without this formal arrangement. I am sure that now you have been properly constituted. I have no doubt that our cooperation, exchange of views, and working together shall improve. I would like to assure you on behalf of government that we shall cooperate with you. You will always be welcome to seek information in all ways. 

Right in front of me, I see the Shadow Minister of Public Service. I would like to assure you beyond reasonable doubt that you will be welcome at any time to our ministry in Wandegeya. If need be, we shall spare you some place somewhere, where you will sit and exchange ideas with us so that the spirit of cooperation – (Laughter) - Madam Speaker, it is all a time of joy that we are witnessing this. I am sure that this will continue to be the spirit in which we shall cooperate. Therefore, you are welcome and be sure that this side of the House shall at all times work with you and look forward to effectively and courteously work with you. I thank you.  

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE VOTE ON ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/2007

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 15 June 2006, on behalf of the President of the Republic of Uganda, we presented a budget for the financial year 2006/07. In the presentation, the projected total expenditure is at Shs 4,255,000,000,000. Today, I move a motion that we allow government to temporarily spend up to one third of this while we wait for this august House to pass the Appropriation Bill and the Finance Bill to ensure that this financial year is passed.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, with these remarks permit me to read a resolution of Parliament to resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of Vote on Account for the financial year 2006/07:

WHEREAS Clause (4) of Article 154 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund account for purposes of meeting the expenditure necessary to carry on the services of government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is earlier;

AND WHEREAS the government financial year will end on 30 June 2006 and it is the belief of the President that by that date this House will not have approved the estimates of revenue and expenditure of government for the financial year 2006/07;

AND WHEREAS it is necessary that the President authorises the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund account for the purposes of meeting expenditures necessary to carry on the services of government; 

AND WHEREAS clause (5) (a) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorisation of the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund account for purposes of clause (4) has to be approved by a resolution of Parliament;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament approves Vote on Account allocated to the various votes attached to this resolution. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.  

3.37
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker, this is a constitutional matter and as for now, we in opposition have nothing to do but concur to allow the Minister of Finance to spend on Vote on Account the tune of one-third of the budget. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The mover of the motion wants to spend one-third of the final budget. The opposition has said that they have no alternative but to concur because we need the money. Are there any queries about the Vote on Account?

3.38
MR NATHAN BYAYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with the Minister of Finance about the Vote on Account and I can see that it reflects the priority of government especially on energy. However, I am wondering if this is not the time for the Minister of Finance to tell us about the chambers of this Parliament. I do not see any figure for that purpose. Members of Parliament cannot continue sitting like this. The plan is in place and it requires Shs 10 billion. The moment we get it, we shall have chambers complete in 12 months. We cannot continue having colleagues sitting in this manner and yet it is one of the priorities of government. Thank you.

3.39
MR BEN WACHA (INDEPENDENT, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following what hon. Byanyima has just stated, when we were commissioners in the Seventh Parliament, we conceived the idea of renting offices for Members of Parliament. All the time I see Members walking up and down. In this Vote on Account, you do not indicate that money will be provided for renting of office space. I do not know what the minister could say about this.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I mentioned that at an appropriate time, the budget that was presented to this House will be debated. You will debate the Appropriation Bill and be in position to handle the issue of the Finance Bill. Therefore, this document is with you and you have all the time to debate and move whatever you feel should be adjusted. We shall respond appropriately, in good time.  

We, in the Ministry, have received the issues regarding the chambers and renting of office premises for Members of Parliament. We shall handle this appropriately. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti):  Madam Speaker, the issue of Members’ office accommodation is a matter of urgency. Honourable members cannot continue like this for the next four months, without office space. We feel this should have been provided now because the final budget will be approved after four months, which is clearly after October. Therefore, is the minister telling us that we must continue walking around Parliament until the end of four months?  This is a matter of urgency that needs to be addressed.

3.41
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You are well aware how diligently this Parliament has served the operations of government. Every time government presents a supplementary expenditure to this House, Parliament has genuinely passed it and we had anticipated that the subsequent supplementary or the initial budget would address the issues of Parliament, to enhance its services. Parliament should sit in a conducive atmosphere in order to deliberate. We hoped it would be a priority of government.  

Madam Speaker, it would be a disservice to Members to deny themselves a reasonable atmosphere for effectively serving the people of Uganda. I would, therefore, like to seek clarification from the honourable minister.  He said that at an appropriate time we shall get the Appropriation Bill and the Finance Bill and pass it. It is during that process that we shall make the necessary recommendations. Should I take it that if in those Bills the interests of Parliament have not been reflected, it will be wise for Parliament not to go ahead to approve them until such a time that they have been included? 

As for now, Madam Speaker, we do not wish as Parliament to curtail the functioning of government. The budget has been read and operations must be done. Government must access drugs, our patients must be treated and government work must continue. I urge Members to go ahead to approve the Vote on Account but when the substantive budget comes, if Parliament interests have not been effectively catered for, Madam Speaker, it is within the law that Parliament can sit and make a decision on the matters that will best serve this nation. I thank you.

3.44
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get some clarification in areas where the allocation for wages is zero. What will happen to those four months? Will there be internal transfers or is that how things are supposed to be done? Thank you.

3.45
MR GEORGE WILLIAM WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Madam Speaker, I have looked at the schedule on districts. We have been assured that Bududa District will start to operate but I do not see a provision for this district. 

3.45
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to begin by thanking my friend hon. Fred Omach. However, I hasten to say that he has started learning the bad behaviour so soon –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The presentation to this House of a motion for Vote on Account is a constitutional matter. The Minister of Finance has done that with your permission. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable member of the opposition to refer to what the minister has just done to this House as “bad manners”? Could the honourable minister in the shadow –(Members: “Chief Whip.”)- Yes, Chief Whip. Is the honourable member in order to refer to the conduct and the presentation of a motion that is of a Constitutional nature as “bad manners”?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was waiting to hear whether it is the dressing or the hair, which is improper. Therefore, I cannot rule until I have heard what it is he was going to say about the minister’s bad manners. (Applause)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your wise ruling. I expected my honourable friend to have waited for me to explain what I meant by saying the minister has started learning bad habits. Concern has been raised on the issue of Parliament missing out in this Vote-on-Account motion. While the minister says that there are two other Bills we should expect and that at the appropriate time his ministry will consider the items and concerns that Members are raising, and that he is in receipt of recommendations in terms of input from Parliament for consideration. 

I would like him to clarify as to whether at that appropriate time when his ministry takes decision, he will provide for a whole sum. What is going to happen? Is he going to consider us for only two-thirds or a whole sum when that appropriate time comes? Thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  On page 6 there is a row, which has no item and yet it has figures to the tune of 1,740,536. Could that be the money meant for Bududa District?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you talking about the one with several municipalities? If there are no more clarifications, could I ask the Leader of Government Business to respond?

3.49
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With regard to the issue of accommodation, I wish to inform honourable members that I have been interfacing with the Speaker and Deputy Speaker because we need other chambers, which accommodates at least 500 people. We need at least Shs 10 billion and I am happy to inform you that the Minister of Finance said that he has so far identified Shs 5.0 billion. We are now trying to get the remaining Shs 5.0 billion so that we could have another chambers constructed as soon as possible.

I know the situation is very bad, especially on this side of the House, where people come, stand for ten minutes and get frustrated. Therefore, I would like to assure you that we are handling that matter –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, it is not a question of the Chamber alone. Members walk around the whole day because they have nowhere to sit. We are talking about office accommodation for the Members as well as the Chambers.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, my understanding of construction is that, you do not have to have a bag of money before you start. Since the minister already has Shs 5.0 billion, could we be assured that work on the extension will start immediately, since the money is now available?

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, to supplement that, the Prime Minister knows that that money is spread out in phases and for colleagues in this House, this is not something new. The new Chamber is supposed to be just on top of the Conference Hall. We shall use the same entrance, go upstairs and have very comfortable Chambers. Tomorrow I will provide the design, which we already have. The issue of keeping money in Finance is very disturbing. Work should have started by now. Let us use the available Shs 5.0 billion for a start. Within 12 months you will have mobilised more money to top up and finish the Chambers. I thank you.

3.52
MR ROBERT KASHAIJA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Madam Speaker, in relation to what the Prime Minister has just said, I propose that as we are waiting for the money to construct another Chamber - because it is a general concern this side of the House where most of the Members get tired of standing and eventually go away yet people on the other side of the opposition are very scattered - with effect from tomorrow, you put a ribbon on the side of the opposition, such that we create some space for NRM. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.55
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am worried because the Minister of Finance has just told this House that in the near future, at an appropriate time, we shall debate the issue regarding the extension of the Chamber. Then, the Prime Minister comes and says, “There is already Shs 5.0 billion” yet, when I look at the Vote on Account, I do not see it reflected. 

Madam Speaker, that is where my worry comes from.  Where is the truth? That is why some of us are asking, if that Shs 5.0 billion is there, much as it is not reflected even on the Vote on Account, why don’t they start? Could this House be assured that the Shs 5.0 billion is there, in black and white otherwise, Madam Speaker, I am worried about that this money is available. (Interruptions)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think there is anything to debate. The issue is obvious; the Members have no offices. I think government should tell us, “We are giving you so much money for accommodation or for construction to start”. There is really nothing to debate. Just tell us that you are giving us the money. That is all we want to hear.

MR FRED OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I will start with the issue of Bududa District. This district has not yet been approved by Parliament and, therefore, we could not vote for it. What appears on page 6 is a continuation of page 5 for Arua District. 

About the expansion of the Chambers and the offices to be rented for Members of Parliament, I mentioned that we have received from the Speaker of Parliament this request and we are handling it. Therefore, as the Rt honourable Prime Minister has indicated, we have already got part of this money but the amount we want is Shs 10 billion. Once we finish working on this, at an appropriate time, we shall respond accordingly. I believe that soon you will also have the commission instituted and together with your Office, Madam Speaker, we should be able to handle this. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: The question was very clear. Is there money or not? The Prime Minister has told us and the minister has re-echoed that the Shs 5.0 billion is available. We are only asking, why isn’t it in this Vote on Account?  

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I am the one who asked for clarification from the Prime Minister. I am now humbly asking you to hand over the Floor back to him so that he continues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the honourable member wants a response from you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I have delegated to the Minister of Finance.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable members, there are a number of things we handle. The Rt honourable Prime Minister has already indicated to you that part of this money is already available.  You have the Parliamentary Commission indicated in Vote 104. That column caters for many other issues.  When we receive this request –(Interruptions) This is only a third of what is required and we are saying that we are looking for this money within the budget. When it is found, it will be allocated to handle the issues of the Parliament. However, as of now, we have been able to get only Shs 5.0 billion and we are working towards getting more, to ensure that this Chamber is expanded to sit up to 500 people.  

At an appropriate time, we shall bring you all the details. As of now, I can only assure the House that we are working on this and it will be appropriately handled. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister made reference to Vote 104 on the Parliamentary Commission and said there is Shs 5.0 billion but where is it I only see Shs 1.3 billion? Can the minister make an amendment on the Floor to substitute the Shs 1.3 billion with Shs 5.0 or Shs 6.3 billion so that we know that this money is actually there?

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have already mentioned that Shs 1.3 billion is only one-third of what is available, and we are looking for money to add on it. That is why we have what we call a supplementary budget. So, at an appropriate time, this will be handled but as of now, what is available to the Parliament for what you have requested as an emergency is what is stated. And I have said that we are in receipt of your communication on the expansion of the Chamber and on the sitting of the Members of Parliament in their offices. We are going to handle it and the Leader of Government Business is here listening. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, if we are to take the words of the Prime Minister and those of the honourable minister seriously that the Shs 5.0 or Shs 10 billion is there, it should have appeared as the total expenditure. So, it would be Shs 5.0 plus Shs 3 or Shs 10 plus Shs 3 billion, which comes to Shs 13 billion then we get a third of that. That is what would be here, four or more billion. But when you show us the total figure of Shs 3.9 billion as the total budget for the Parliamentary Commission, which means the other 10 is not included here. If it was included here, it would be Shs 13.9 billion, and then we get a third of that as what we would be asking for on the Vote on Account but not here. It is very simple arithmetic; it is not even mathematics.  

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this House cannot tolerate deliberate ambiguity and contradictions when we know that there is no money that has been put aside. Either the minister says there is no money for now and we move on or we approve the Vote on Account without that provision, or he simply shows us the money. But we cannot afford to have these contradictions and just waste a lot of time here. If the money is there, let the money be reflected as proposed by hon. Betty Amongi that we amend the paper here in the House. If it is not there, it is the practice in this Parliament that you retract information, which you did not mean to give on the Floor in case you are misleading the House. So, the contradictions could be retracted and then we proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, honourable minister, I have been part of the Parliamentary Commission and from the way you are saying you have received from the Speaker this matter, you are sort of insinuating that we recently informed you. We did not inform you recently, we have been talking about this matter for over one year; the Ministry of Finance has been aware about our needs for more than one year. So, if the money is available, when we come to Committee Stage, you include that money. What is the problem?

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.04

Vote 001: Office of the President

Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 4,451,667,000, Vote 001, Office of the President, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/07.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 632,000,000 under Vote 001, Office of the President, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/07.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 002: State House

Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 12,177,667,000 under Vote 002, State House, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/07.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 5,056,667,000 under Vote 002, State House, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/07.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 003: Office of the Prime Minister

Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 4,461,795,000 under Vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/07.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 8,631,225,000 under Vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/07.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 003- OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the sum of Ugshs 8,623,225,000 under Vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 004 – MINISTRY OF DEFENCE.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the sum of Ugshs 114,023,397,000 under Vote 004, Ministry of Defence, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 004 – MINISTRY OF DEFENCE.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the sum of Ugshs 4,420,583,000 under Vote 004, Ministry of Defence, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 005 – MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the sum of Ugshs 1,147,333,000 under Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

AN HON MEMBER:  Madam Chairperson, all figures for the recurrent expenditure are lacking some three zeros.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can the Minister of Finance, please, come back and explain.

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I just want to draw the attention of the honourable member that all these figures are actually in thousands of shillings.  So you do not need –(Interjections)- but that is it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that clear your query?

AN HON. MEMBER: Yes.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The fact is that these figures are in thousands, however, what you are reading, Madam Speaker, is the record of Parliament.  May, I propose, therefore, that the record of the Hansard reflects the billions you are talking about which is the correct position and members do amend their copies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, just add three zeros to your figures.  I now put the question that the sum of Ugshs 1,147,333,000 under Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service, be provided as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 523,333,000

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 006 – MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 23,026,930,000 under Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be provided as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 006 – MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that the sum of Ugshs 258,667,000 under Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 007 – MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the sum of Ugshs 2,900,000,000 under Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 007 – Ministry Of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 

Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the sum of Ugshs 6,630,000,0000 under Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 008 – MINISTRY OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the sum of Ugshs 15,196,078,000 under Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 – Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I rise on a point of clarification.  Looking at the figure - the total figure on Vote-on-Account for Development Expenditure for the Ministry of Finance, we have almost 50 billion shillings allocated. 

This is only comparable to almost 50 billion-it is almost 49.5, only comparable to the Vote-on-Account for Development Expenditure for the Ministry of Energy which is understandable. I do not understand what we are going to spend this Ugshs 50 billion on within a period of four months in the Ministry of Finance. I would like some bit of clarification on this and especially when you look at the votes, almost all the ministries are covered. 

But for the East African Community matters, I know there is a minister in charge of that and government has emphasised the fact that this is a priority area for us as a country, and yet there is nothing actually allocated. I wish to seek clarification from you, honourable minister. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clarify now before we vote. 

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First of all, the figures there are three zeros which are silent; so, they are in thousands. 

On the issue of the allocation to the Ministry of Finance, we have the figure of Ugshs 99 billion, which is being allocated to Energy because of the issue of power, which is a problem in this country. A third of that is being ring fenced by the ministry and will be put in Bank of Uganda specifically to handle the issue of power in this country. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable minister, the Ministry of Finance is asking us to give them Ugshs 49 billion for development expenditure. That is why members are asking, what is it you are going to use that money for?

MR OMACH: Yes, that is what I have just said, Madam Chairperson. We are saying that this money is going to be ring fenced under the Ministry of Finance for purposes of putting up the dam and this will be under Bank of Uganda so as not to be tempered with and utilised by any other bodies. So, it is not for the consumption of the Ministry of Finance.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, my question has been partly answered. But I do not see any reason why the Minister would choose to keep this money in the Ministry of Finance that is not going to use this appropriation. Why is it keeping it in the Ministry of Finance and not putting it under the Ministry of Energy? 

I know he has pointed out the fact that he needs to ring-fence that money, probably you are now raising the issue of lack of trust in the Ministry of Energy. Otherwise if it is not for that reason, then I do not see any reason why this money is not clearly put under the Ministry of Energy, which is going to put it to use. Would you like to make an amendment on the Floor of the House, honourable minister?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. This one brings another question. I thought all the monies, which are withdrawn from the consolidated account are by a warrant from the Auditor-General against a budget. Why should Finance control money for another ministry when this money is meant to do a specific job in that ministry? 

We are getting worried - I do not know what construction the Ministry of Finance does! If you look, the Ministry of Finance is taking Ugshs49 billion and the Ministry of Works, which does construction, is taking Ugshs26.7 billion. I think we need to get proper clarification from the Minister. Thank you.

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. From the minister’s explanation about the money in the Ministry of Finance as a means of protecting it, does it mean that he is not so sure of the money that is put in other ministries? We have always had a problem where the Ministry of Finance wants to take all the money and leave other ministries crying. I would suggest, honourable members, let us help these other ministries be in charge of their finances. Thank you so much.

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, this is a very interesting development. The Minister of Finance is claiming that this fund belongs to the energy sector. In the past, we have had emergencies and the Minister of Finance claimed that they retain funds for emergency situations and very soon we shall be complaining about the diseases in agriculture. 

We should be looking at these funds. Is the Ministry of Finance through its own ministers indicating to us that this particular fund is meant for the energy sector or the fund is held in trust for other sectors as well? We want that one very clearly spelt out now before we think of reallocating this money elsewhere. Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If I recall correctly, when the Minister of Finance was reading the budget, he categorically stated that the Ministry of Finance would keep some funds such that when the developers start developing the two dams, in case of any shortfall, the money is there to make sure that we do not have any gap.

 It is because we are now just on Votes on Account, but if we go back and read the budget speech correctly, it was agreed like that. But it is at the –(Interjection)- I am urging Parliament that since we are going to debate the budget speech very soon, we could hold on and when time comes, we can – still these ministers are at our disposal, we can still grill them on the same issue. But I am of the view that we continue and pass this money.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Minister of Energy. 

MR MIGEREKO:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Part of the moneys appearing under Vote 008 under the Ministry of Finance are intended to benefit the energy sector - will benefit the energy sector from an investment fund, which has been created and the moneys are banked in Bank of Uganda and as investment progresses, we shall be allowed to draw upon this account.  

But for purposes of ensuring that the moneys are procured and put under the sound arrangement where there are investment programmes, which is really the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance, and that is why this money appears under Vote 008.  That is the arrangement and we have had comprehensive discussions about it with the Ministry of Finance and in Cabinet.

MR MUSUMBA:  Madam Chairperson, I just want to give further information to the honourable members.  There is a distinction between moneys allocated to ministries to run their ordinary business as a ministry and money, which is for investment. 

Under the Public Finance and Accountability Law, government investment in shares or in various projects is actually held by the Ministry of Finance.  To that extent, therefore, this money has to be in the Ministry of Finance vote until such a time when shares or investment will be made and shares will continue to be held by Ministry of Finance.  That is the law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think we are getting a problem and that is why ministries are complaining that they are not doing well.  If you look even in the donor column, Ministry of Finance has 48.4 million dollars at its disposal.  I do not know why they should keep money, which is not meant for them?  

In the 2005/06 budget, we made an energy bond of Ugshs 20 billion and that energy bond has not been utilized as yet.  Now, we have not utilised that, but we are making a provision for more money. The Ministry of Finance should really come up and explain to us exactly what this money is, other than saying it is the energy bond. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, the clarification I wanted to seek from hon. Isaac Musumba is about the accounting systems.  We have accounting systems in government, is this new accounting system? Because it is just a new thing to us now, people who are working in government definitely know how government money is being accounted.

MR OGWEL LOOTE:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson for giving me this opportunity.  I would like to seek the clarification from the Minister of Finance. This money is allocated specifically for the Ministry of Energy and it is supposed to be within the Ministry of Finance.  

Now, my dilemma is, they are also talking about investment, because in my understanding of investment, when you put some money there, any sector can call upon that money when the investment occurs.  Now, how can this money be protected?  Is this money protected for the purpose of the energy?  

The outcry throughout the country is energy and the Ministry of Finance clearly stated it. In the President’s Speech, he said our priority is energy and that is why we are concerned that this money should be absolutely protected for the energy crisis.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The Minister has explained that much of the money is for the energy sector, and I think it is important that he reads verbatim part of the speech.  

This money is actually supposed to stay in the Ministry of Finance accounts until such a time that we get an investor or work starts.  This money was read clearly in the Budget Speech and actually for avoidance of – maybe to avoid unnecessary queries, the minister should read that part of the speech to explain to the people who still doubt that this is money put aside for Finance to consume.

MR OKELLO ODUMAN: Madam Chairperson, my understanding is that we are here to provide for funds to be spent.  We are here to provide for moneys to be spent and not to be kept - (Applause)- All these moneys are kept in the Ministry of Finance, against all these votes until they are specifically released to the voting accounts.  So, to say that this money is to be kept on a certain account in the Ministry of Finance, I do not understand it!  

Therefore, it should be clear that we are talking about money that should be spent in three months because we cannot wait until the budget is passed.  If it can wait, then it should not be on the vote on account provision.  Therefore, if these moneys are indeed to be spent, then they should be apportioned to the specific spending vote. 

I do not see any provision in the financial regulations that require that a pool of money is voted on a different account in the Ministry of Finance, just to be kept and later to be spent on another vote?  I beg that clarification.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR NSUBUGA:  Madam Chairperson, I also seek clarification from the honourable minister. At the end of the financial year, who is going to give accountability in the ministerial annual report, is it the Ministry of Finance or is it the Ministry of Energy?  

And if he is saying that they are keeping this money for the Ministry of Energy, I have not seen where he has put, for example, money for Kampala District, which is expecting to host CHOGM?  

It would be understandable if he said, “We are putting some money here for Kampala district because of the important conference we are going to host.”  But who is going to make the accountability if you are saying at the end of the year you kept money for the Ministry of Energy?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair and honourable members, in the Budget speech it was very clear and I would like to read it verbatim, item 65: “Government is also allocating Ugshs 99 billion to the Energy Fund, which will be ring-fenced for dam construction only.  The newly created Energy Fund will be set up in the Bank of Uganda and will only be used   for investment and not for routine recurrent expenditures.  

Government, using the Energy Fund, will develop the larger hydropower generation facilities in Bujagali and Karuma with the private sector in order to address the power crises in the long term. 

Government is also encouraging the development of smaller hydropower options. A total of 235 rural electrification schemes have been accomplished all over the country since 2001.” I beg to read.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay members?

MR ACHIA:  I just wanted to seek two clarifications and also give information to members. One is, if you take only these two pages and look at the figures there, I do not think without reading the Budget Speech and then the State of the Nation Address, these figures are meant for a member to understand.  

I have just taken an opportunity over the last two days to read the Budget Speech, the Presidents address to us and had a look at other documents, and I found those figures very intelligible. Honourable members, if you only take these two pages, I do not think we are going to have an intelligent debate based only on looking at $ 48 million and $ 30million. 

One of the things I was very curious to look at was disarmament in Karamoja: If you look there, you will see that Defence is given about Ugshs 4.4 billion and the Ministry of Internal Affairs about Ugshs 190 million. Where is the disarmament because it is already on going? 

But when I went into the details, I found where the money is. If anybody is interested in contributing, it would be very good if you read the Budget Speech and some of the documents that were put in our pigeonholes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to clarify to some members who think that this Vote-on-Account is money supposed to allow government spend as we look at the details. 

This is not the end of it all, very soon we are going to submit policy statements and all relevant committees are going to have an input in what we shall finally pass.  So, I want to bring to the attention of members that that is not the purpose of the Vote-on-Account.

MR OKELLO ODUMAN: Madam Chair, I have not received a response to my question on why we must have money on the Vote-on-Account that is not required to be spent as soon as possible - within three or four months. If it is a fund, we are talking about, is it a fund we are establishing in the Bank of Uganda to take care of the energy investments? So, we are talking about investment in the long term, why must it be voted here? Thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Chair, development of a hydropower project does not commence when you start pouring concrete at the dam.  Development of a hydropower project is a process. 

There is the packaging of a hydropower project where there are various studies that are supposed to be undertaken, for instance, environment impact assessment studies: you have to set up a project implementation unit and be in position to have the designs undertaken.

There are a series of activities and due diligence undertakings that must take place: When you are executing a project of Ugshs 350billion, you realise that the amount of money that has been provided here is not really outrageous for a vote on account.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is not true that we are trying to pass monies that will not be utilized. Because as I have clearly stated, development of a hydropower project does not commence on the day when you start pouring concrete and steel at the power site, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the explanation that came from the Executive was that this money was going into a fund in the Bank of Uganda, waiting for other funds to join it. I think that is the issue they are raising that if it is for keeping there, why is it here? 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam, I really wanted to point out that we are supposed to work on these projects on a fast truck basis; and if we are going to be in position to do that, we need money. 

Like this morning, I was writing to the Minister of Finance that we shall require money for a project implementation unit so that we can be in position to bring on board experts in the engineering field to start assisting us in the packaging of Karuma.  

Much as this fund is supposed to be in Bank of Uganda and attract other funds, it is also true that if there are other activities at the moment that justify drawing on that fund, we shall have to do so.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  You know this is really simple. What the Minister started with that he wanted the money saved in a fund not to be tampered with is what gave the members the impression that it is going to sit somewhere. But now you have explained that it is going to be a running activity.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the explanation given by the Minister of Energy. He has talked about the preliminaries that are necessary for a hydropower project to succeed. But he seems to ignore the fact that already under the energy sector there is an allocation of Ugshs 67 billion. If this together with what is provided under the Ministry of Finance budget is added, it comes to over 100 billion. 

By the way, honourable members, this is money meant to be spent within four months, what sort of fast trucking would consume all this amount of money in four months?  I would be interested to get an explanation from the Minister and if possible he should be able to come to the Floor of the House –(Interruption)

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Since the Minister of Energy has given us that explanation and the way I have observed, we on the government side are satisfied with his explanation. 

The Opposition are the overseers of how – they are the checks and balance of how government is going to spend each single shilling. I am just giving him the clarification that since he will be the overseer, can we – I am now putting this - can you, please, honourable Chairperson, put the question and we vote on that account?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the oversight function by the Opposition has already started. That is part of what he is doing, you complete what you are saying and then we move on.

MR AMURIAT: I wish to thank my colleague for the information but the information given is the very essence why Parliament sits. It is not to take whatever comes from the Executive. We need to be satisfied and it is on the basis of informed positions that we can be able to take a correct decision in this House.
 
What I was saying before I was interrupted is that the two amounts when added come to a really colossal sum of money, over Ugshs 100 billion and the Minister of Energy is suggesting to this House that these monies could actually be spent in four months, which I highly doubt.  

In order for my doubts and the doubts of the others to be cleared - I do not know whether it is possible for us to be given a clear programme of what the minister intends to do so that we are satisfied that this money is going to be put to good use?  These together with the other concerns that have been raised especially from my colleague from Bukedea County need to be cleared in order for us to be satisfied that we are taking a correct decision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can the Minister of Energy tell us about that Ugshs 160 billion? How are you going to use it? 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I want to clarify that it is a budgetary provision that a third of whatever is budgeted be passed. We are not making an error whether this money gets spent in four months or whether it is not spent, but this is a budgetary provision; it is money, which is at call. 

I will use a scenario of a doctor when you know you have a situation that requires a doctor and you put him on call. It is not that he will come, he may or may not come and precisely that is why we put a third of the budgetary provision to take care of any or to absorb any shocks that may arise in the situation.  So, it is not debatable that we can spend these monies in four months, no. Equally what we have passed in the other figures is a third of what is budgeted for.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, what is putting us to this state are the contradicting statements which were made by the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Energy.  No one is disagreeing with these monies being spent for energy; we are all agreeing and that should be the minimum point. 

When the Minister of Finance came, he said this money is going to be kept in the fund for investment. The Minister of Energy has come and said this money is going to be spent.  If the money is going to be spent it should be in your ministry. 

Honourable minister, you have said that this money is going to be spent for preliminary work.  If we are to buy the minister’s idea that it is going to be kept then we are left at a loss. Can you tell us whether one of you has made a mistake, just tell us and we rectify and we move on.  

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Chairperson, the Minister of Finance was very clear when he read out what was provided for in the Budget Speech that an energy fund was to be put in place and the money would be banked in Bank of Uganda for purposes of developing hydropower projects. 

Now, when you create a fund for a particular purpose, you have created it for that purpose and when the need arises to make a call on that fund you do so.  Where this fund is located in as far as I am concerned is really immaterial. The most important thing is to have access to that fund?  

The arrangement has been agreed upon for the various components related to the development of hydropower projects. Once we need that money we indicate to the Ministry of Finance and the money will be made available.  

I have not yet found any reason to believe that the Minister of Energy will not be in a position to utilise those funds simply because the funds are under a fund; and two, simply because the monies are under Vote 008.  I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, first of all, the ministers of energy and finance and the members are right, but the problem which is arising –(Interjection)– yes because everybody has a point – we have the Budget Speech of 2005 /2006- This is why we always have a problem. We must always carry out an audit.

I want to read to you the budget of 2005/2006, it says: “In financial year 2005/2006, I have allocated Ugshs20 billion to start the Energy Equity Fund for the contribution of large scale power station along River Nile.”  Here he is saying we are going to start a fund. I think some members are getting worried. Are you starting a fund this year or you started it the previous year?  

The Minister of Energy’s mistake is that he is saying they will utilise this money when we start work, but there is already Ugshs20 billion you have not utilised! But for purpose of us to move –(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Chairperson, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is right. There was a provision for Ugshs 20 billion last year and this money was meant to partly cater for our equity in the Bujagali hydropower project. It was also meant to facilitate settlement for compensation for the transition line from Jinja to Kawanda and that provision was made in the budget of last financial year.  

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Chairperson, it seems we are going into the details. As alluded to earlier by one of our colleagues, unless we stick to debating the Budget Speech – because at the beginning of the debate there was worry as to why the fund was kept within the Ministry of Finance, but the Minister of Energy has ably acknowledged that he is comfortable. 

 So, why don’t we allow the Minister of Finance to continue with the Vote-on-Account, and then when time comes to debate the Budget Speech – because it is the same Minister of Energy who will come to us saying the funds are not enough.  If he is comfortable let us pass the Vote-on-Account such that when time comes to debate the budget, the examples and records, hon. Nandala, has pointed out will also feature. 

Hon. Nandala is bringing us the evidence that the fund is there, but we cannot prove it now.  If the fund was there then let us wait when we go into the details, and then ask the Minister of Energy what the Ugshs 20 billion, which was allocated to him during the last financial year, was used for.  

I am actually appealing to Members that the law is very clear; we cannot tie government when it comes to a Vote-on-Account. 

Let us pass the Vote-on-Account and then study the Budget Speech and the State of the Nation Address such that we can question the ministers rather than wasting a lot of time. 

We cannot do much when we are just looking at the figures and saying they are too big.  Madam Speaker, I beg that we continue with approving the Vote-on-Account.  I move a motion that we approve the Vote-on-Account.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that a sum of Ugshs 49,478,493,000 under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be provided for development expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 009 - MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that a sum of Ugshs 7,086,667,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I propose the question that a sum of Ugshs 190,000,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 010 - MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I propose the question that a sum of Ugshs 3,132,726,000 under Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I propose the question that a sum of Ugshs 2, 754, 533,000 under Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 011 - MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I propose the question that a sum of Ugshs 1,696,333,000 under Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government, be provided as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I propose the question that a sum of Ugshs 1, 483,333,000 under Vote 011- Ministry of Local Government, be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 012 - MINISTRY OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I propose the question that a sum of Ugshs 2,200,455,000 under Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a sum of Ugshs 13,791,487,000 under Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 013- MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I propose the question that a sum of Ugshs 27,004,400,000 under Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a sum of Ugshs 9,346,667 - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Madam Chairperson, I agree there are no taxes on scholastic materials, but I don’t see any provision under the Ministry of Education for taxes and yet we know that they do a lot of construction, which attracts VAT.

MR MENHYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  Looking at the budget estimates for development expenditure –(Interruptions)- there is something, which I want to relate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let him speak, please; he is comparing notes.

MR MENHYA: I am comparing notes and two figures so that I justify my standing on the Floor.  I find it rather unbecoming in a manner that the expenditure on Land, Housing and Urban Development is rather higher, almost twice that of the education and sports sector. I wish the Minister of Planning could justify this kind of expenditure.  Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister of Finance, he would like to know whether they provided for taxes for activities that are at the Ministry of Education.  He says he does not see the vote for taxes, may be you can tell him again.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what I was saying, we know scholastic materials are tax-free, but there are a lot of activities which are taxable like construction in the Ministry of Education.  Why have you not made a provision for taxes on such items?

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I can only check and give him the answer later.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member wanted to know why you have given more money to housing sector and less to the education sector.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, as I mentioned earlier, this is just a statutory provision for us to pass the vote on account.  The appropriation of this budget is going to be debated by this Parliament in details where all the members will participate. We are also bringing various ministerial statements, which are also going to be debated here, where you go into all those details.  

The purpose of this vote on account is to ensure that at least government starts to spend.  Because come 1st of July, if the vote on account is not passed, then government will not be able to operate.  But we take to answer the entire questions that will be raised by the members at the appropriate time when we debate the Appropriation Bill. 

For the taxes on scholastic materials, I said I will –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thought I was clear, I said, we know taxes on scholastic materials are not there.  But there are some items, like, construction, which carries taxes.  Why have you not budgeted for it?  Are you telling me that in the three months there is no –(Interruptions)

MS MUGERWA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I find that the Minister for Finance is asking a question, which really is not professional.  Because –(Interruptions)- yes, I am talking about the so-called, Shadow Minister -(Interruptions)

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, is my honourable colleague, the Woman MP for Masaka District, in order to refer, one, to the Shadow Cabinet Member as a “so-called” as though we do not have this provision in the Rules that govern this institution?  

 Two, to even insinuate that the shadow Minister for Finance and Economic Planning is making questions that are unprofessional when he is actually a professional accountant and we have it on the records of this Parliament that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a very professional man in the accounts field?  Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable members, this is probably the first time that we are debating as a multi-party House.  But I would like members to appreciate that we now have official opposition.  

Today we have been informed about the Official Shadow Cabinet whose responsibility is actually to shadow the government side and bring alternatives to what the government has brought.  

So that is the first thing I want you to acknowledge that they are there; they are real and they are part of the system.  The question of “so-called” now does not arise; they are here in their official capacity. So, please, withdraw the “so-called” part of it.  But for the rest, they provide alternatives to the government side.

MRS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I would like to withdraw it.  My concern was the clarification he was seeking from the minister. We don’t have to indicate the tax for scholastic materials in as far as the Ministry of Education is concerned, because this is a very short-term budget for three months.  Probably the ministry does not have anything taxable during these three months. So this question you are raising is sort of like we are wasting our time.  Let us go ahead and approve the figures given.  Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, honourable Namaggwa, for giving me that information.  I presume you also read these documents.  But if you read in this column- let me read for you column 1, 2 and 3 where there are taxes.  Other ministries taxes are provided for other than the Ministry of Education. 

MRS MUGERWA: They do not have similar activities, which is my concern.

MR OPIO: Thank you very much.   The Minister of Finance has answered that he is going to check and will inform us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay.  Honourable members, I put the question that the sum of Ugshs 9,346,667,000 under Vote 013 – Ministry of Education and Sports, be provided as development expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, the matter of taxes was raised with regard to this particular budget line and the minister had promised that he would furnish this House with information.  

It would look like if we pronounced ourselves on this, we are actually approving this figure without taxes.  Should it arise that he comes tomorrow or the day after tomorrow and tells us “Look, there was an error in our computation and we needed to have included a figure for taxes,” what is this House going to do?  

I would like to propose that we stand over this budget line up to such a time that the Minister updates us on the tax position of this budget line, after which we can be able to pass this vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Let me hear from the Government side.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much.  I just want to give this clarification, that actually when you see the column for taxes, it refers to taxes of an import nature.  Now for Education, VAT, it is included in the allocation therein as you know very well.  

What is happening here now is that for Education, the scholastic materials and stuff like that are tax-free, import duty-free in other words. However, VAT is included in the total amount that has been provided for because as you know VAT is claimed as one goes along. So, when the column shows taxes, we are referring to import taxes. For Education, the taxes of VAT are included in the amount that is voted for those months.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I do not want us to make mistakes because we know that when they are bringing all donor projects to us, they say net of tax, and the Government of Uganda is responsible for taxes. If there were no donor funds, I would have agreed. 

But under the column of donor funds, we have $12 million, which agreement says clearly that the Government of Uganda will be responsible for taxes. Therefore, it does not say VAT; no donor pays VAT, it is we who pay it. I would suggest the Minister of Finance looks at it further.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, to simplify these matters, this matter can be resolved even from here before we leave because I see finance officers seated there. The minister can send them out to consult and then brief us before we conclude; it can be done –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are not satisfied with the Minister’s explanation?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, first of all, the honourable member has made it appear like we are not in charge. I want to inform the House that we are fully in charge and in full consultation with our officials. What I stated has been fully crosschecked with our officials and that is the government position. I thank you.

VOTE 014- MINISTRY OF HEALTH

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 10,665,333,000, Vote 014 – Ministry of Health, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 9,171,468,000 under Vote 014 – Ministry of Health, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.
(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 015- MINISTRY OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 1,578,667,000, vote 015 – Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 2,050,000,000 under vote 015 – Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 016- MINISTRY OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATION

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 26,708,764,000, Vote 016 – Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Chairperson, we have just passed a Vote-on-Account on Vote 012 – Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and I am also hearing the same Vote 016 - Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication. 

My clarification is that, in how many ministries is housing? Is it in both? Because it is like Vote 016 is in Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication and even Vote 012 is Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. We need a clarification on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I was under the impression that Lands was physical planning, but can the Minister explain because Housing is appearing in both the votes.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, this is just an error. It is meant for Ministry of Works; you can delete the rest.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Delete it where? In the Ministry of Lands or Housing?

MR OMACH: It is in Ministry of Works and Transport- Vote 016.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you okay now, hon. Nsubuga?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I am okay.

Vote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 26,708,764,000, Vote 016 – Ministry of Works and Transport, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 26,679,667,000 under Vote 016 – Ministry of Works and Transport, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 017- MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 2,055,333,000, Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.
(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 017 – MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERALS

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 67,536,092,000, Vote 017- Ministry of Energy and Minerals, be provided for as development expenditure.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Chairperson, now that we are passing this capital development for the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, I want to seek information from the Minister about the programme that has been set in order to put up his project so that the public is assisted because there is an outcry of lack of electricity. 

I want to find out –(Interjections)- I think this is an emergency that we are faced with and I would like the Minister to assure the public that even tomorrow when the money is passed, there is an urgent activity that commences. I would like to get clarification so that I can reassure my constituents.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the whole country and all the leadership in Uganda consider this energy matter very important. That is why we had a very lengthy debate on the distribution of money between the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Energy this afternoon. I do not know really whether we should now go into the details of when they are to switch on the transformers. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I thought she was the one for whom we should pass money quickly on vote on account. Why should she question when she knows what we are doing? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members –(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to be assisted. Really, I appreciate what you have said as the Chair and I appreciate what my colleague is saying. But I am saying that there is an outcry and I want the public to be reassured that since this money is passed, definitely we know where to check as far as the activities are concerned in terms of upgrading the status of electricity. I would like to be assisted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, really as a country, we have agreed that energy is a priority. We are saying let us give them some money to start. Can you give the Minister time to tell you during the – we are going to discuss this thing unless there is something you want to say, Minister of Energy.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for that guidance. I will follow your instructions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 67,536,092,000, Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Minerals, be provided as development expenditure, financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 018 – GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose a question that the total sum of Ugshs 2,653,757,000, Vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, be provided as recurrent expenditure, financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 1,550,587,000 under Vote 018- Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, be provided as development expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 019 – MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 
1,360,405,000, Vote 019- Ministry of Water and Environment, be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 8,731,668,000, Vote 019- Ministry of Water and Environment, be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 020 – MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 364,019,000- Vote 020, Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, be provided for as recurrent expenditure –(Interjections)- it is a new ministry. Honourable Minister, why don’t you come down? [Referring to hon. Mulira]

MR MULIRA: By the time we arrived, the accommodation space was still a problem. Should I come down?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, you can speak and then come down.

MR MULIRA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to make a correction in the name of the ministry. It is not Ministry of Communication and Information and Communication Technology. It is the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology. The first “communication” is not there. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Give us the full title. 

MR MULIRA: It should be Ministry of Information and Communication Technology.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, minister.  Please, correct your records. I now propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs of 364,019,000, Vote 020-Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, be provided for as recurrent expenditure of financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 40,000,000 under vote 020- Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, be provided for as development expenditure of financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 101 – JUDICIARY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 869,162,000 under vote 101- Judiciary (Office of the Judicature), be provided for as development expenditure of financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I am getting worried; we might have a technical problem and considering that this is a Multi-party Parliament which has whips, we should have done better. So, I do not know whether in your consideration we should be able to proceed looking around the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the technical problem?

MR AMURIAT: I was avoiding the words “lack of quorum”, but we do not seem to have quorum in the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it is only your side that has no quorum. Are you suggesting that we take a block vote? –(Interjections)- if there are no other major queries –(Interruptions)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, it has happened in this House before that in circumstances such as these the House can adopt an alternative procedure where block vote of the amount of money that is to be voted on account can be voted upon and then the details will be followed up in the subsequent discussions. May I propose, therefore, that if there is no objection to our colleagues in the opposition, we adopt that procedure? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, provided the issue of the Parliamentary Commission is handled, if we can deal with that now, I do not mind a block vote. (Applause) Parliamentary Commission, inform us; deal with the Parliamentary Commission, the rest we shall do by block vote. (Laughter)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I have been mandated by the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to inform this House to make an undertaking that the issue of the Parliamentary Commission and expansion of the facilities of the Parliament is an issue that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business is continuing to engage both the Parliamentary Commission Members, the Rt. hon. Speaker and the Rt. hon. Deputy Speaker and the Minister of Finance and substantial progress has been made so far. He has mandated me to assure this House that the amount of money that will be finally agreed upon is going to be provided subsequent to this, but that given that it may be difficult to do adjustments on the Floor here and now, he pleads with you that we proceed but the undertaking remains. He is as concerned, the Government is as concerned about – by the way, it is the members of the party in government that are most desirous of having this matter settled. They are the ones that are most inconvenienced and it is a matter that is very dear to this government. 

I propose that the House allows us to proceed with the Vote-on-Account as this matter is taken in stride with your full knowledge outside these Chambers. You will be fully updated and so will all the other stakeholders. I beg to pray, Madam Chairperson.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, it will look like the Prime Minister through the hon. Minister is telling this Parliament to wait for another four months. I sympathise with a situation of Members especially our colleagues the majority on the Government side because of limitation of space, some of them cannot attend Parliament. And yet what I am hearing from the Minister is that we have got to wait for another four months. When is there going to be the opportunity for us as Parliament -  because I know the usual practice is that we pass Vote-on-Account and then we proceed to substantially debate the budget and pass the budget, which takes some time. It may be until October before we do that. 

When is there going to be another opportunity between the time of passing the Vote-on-Account and October when we shall convene just to discuss and pass Vote-on-Account on the Parliamentary Commission amended? Because I know the figure that is there for development is very little and it is not sufficient to carry out major construction work. And yet the Minister is saying, “Yes, we shall discuss outside here” and maybe in the back of the Prime Minister’s mind, it will be brought back to Parliament. When will this happen? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In addition to that, I do not see the difficulty of the Government. The Prime Minister stood here and said he has secured Shs 5 billion. He says he is only going to look for the balance. So, what is the problem? Provide the one third of the Shs 5 billion. I do not see the difficulty. He said it here. I was here when he said that he has got Shs 5 billion. Ministry of Finance, you provide the one third now so that we move. (Applause) 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, apparently we are looking for money to start expansion work, I believe.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And accommodation for the Members?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, we now have a technical problem of amending these figures here and now. May I, therefore, propose as I indeed have made the prayer before, that we pass this and we will come back to this House and make those provisions in due course? This is the mandate I have. This is the prayer I am making to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know – you Members of the Executive arrive here in time for the Session but you do note that really from morning, Members are wandering around with nowhere to sit. How can this go on for the next four months? And we informed the Government long ago. We have been talking about this matter. If the Shs 5 billion is there, let us provide it and do something about accommodation while we wait for the major thing. (Applause)

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, at the beginning I did not mention that we have looked at the request from Parliament. Yes, it is true that you sent this requisition much earlier but what we have provided for now, we pray that it be taken as it is but we are taking a commitment to ensure that the Chambers are expanded to cater for the numbers now available in this House. We have made a commitment on the Floor and you have rightly also quoted the Rt hon. Prime Minister having made a statement that Shs 5 billion will be made available and we are going to take it from here and move forward to ensure that this is handled appropriately. We pray that we pass this Vote-on-Account as it is and we make the undertaking that the request of Parliament will be handled immediately and appropriately.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have got evidence from what was a provision presented by our Commission of the Seventh Parliament and what has come out from the Ministry of Finance, signed by the Minister of Finance, Dr Suruma that even the budget presented as a provision did not even cater for new Members. 

And even in addition to that it was reduced by Shs 10 billion whereby even the operations of some staff will be deducted and I do not expect the Ministry of Finance to say that within four months they are going to run into a crisis. But this is an institution of Parliament, which needs facilitation and it needs objectivity into a multi-party dispensation. It is a beginning. If we start on the wrong note, we are not going to make it. NRM is in government, we have to look for money and we cater for it because the people have taken a decision that we should go for multi-party dispensation whereby government is in the know that this Parliament was to be expanded in the Eighth Parliament. But according to what was presented to the Ministry of Finance, it was provisional and even that provision was reduced by Shs 10 billion. Right now I would rather say that the Ministry of Finance should start considering right now the problem we are going to face because we might not operate even in the next four months –(Applause)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I really appreciate the concern of Members and sometimes we need to know the past to predict the future. We hold public offices in trust and I want to ponder on what hon. Kakooza has just said – our new commissioner. We have several commissions in our party and it is what I am referring to. 

The Rt hon. Prime Minister has made an undertaking and it is in Hansard and those who were in the Seventh Parliament, there was an undertaking almost similar to this one. There were several items that actually hon. Kakooza was instrumental in. So it is against this background that since Vote-on-Account is to allow government to start on, we do not cripple government activities. Madam Chairperson, I need protection from my brother Elijah.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are protected.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: So, all I am asking Members is that let us pass Vote-on-Account, when we are discussing this budget and policy statements in details, the pledge made by government will be fulfilled.
 
MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Since we have adopted the new voting mechanism – block voting for the entire Vote-on-Account - mine is a different concern because I remember in the last Parliament we approved Hoima Municipal Council and when I look through these, I do not see Hoima Municipal Council budgeted for. That is my concern.

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, mine is a concern. The honourable ministers have taken the undertaking but there is no timeframe put in place. So, if at all we are to accept as an alternative, can they give us an undertaking because it is really a contradiction from the Government side – on their side as Front Benchers, where the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business, stands up and says, “We have Shs 5 billion”. He has gone on record as saying there is Shs 5 billion. 

Are the Ministers in order now to go back and forth saying, “The money might be there, it might not be there; we will give you a commitment; we are giving you an undertaking?” I do not think it is right. If at all they need further clarification or to seek clarification from the relevant authorities, we should give them a very limited period and we hold the vote on that particular number, we stand over the issue until maybe tomorrow morning. But I think we need really for them to take this, like hon. Kakooza has just said, if at all the amount has even been reduced, the predicament like you have just said, we have not been given offices, most of us linger in the corridor, some of us are mistaken like you know – the situation is pathetic.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, at least I know from the last Parliament that the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications was responsible for all government buildings. I know we have a new ministry in charge of housing, that is Lands and Housing. I do not know whether – certainly, I have not read through all the pages of the budget speech. I do not know whether within the Shs 13.7 billion that we passed under Vote 012, there is a provision for Parliament. Whether instead of putting it on the line item for the Parliamentary Commission, it is housed in the Ministry of Lands and Housing, in which case, then we shall have solved the problem. Probably the Shs 5 billion that the Prime Minister alluded to earlier on is under that budget line. I believe this could get us out of the jigsaw.

MS AMUGE: Madam Chairperson, I just want to go by what you have said. The Rt hon. Prime Minister has assured us that there is money and you have seen how the Members from the Government side have been fighting to get where to sit. At one time somebody was saying that they would be coming in shifts. That is not how we must treat our fellow Members. 

What I would like to say is, before we pass what we are about to pass right now, we want that provision clearly indicated so that we know that our Members will have where to sit. We cannot continue like this. Sometimes even Ministers are crossing to sit on the opposition side and people think maybe they have gone to the opposition side, which is not right. My proposal is that before we move to the next area, let that clearly be indicated. Thank you.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like government to commit itself seriously to our welfare. The fact that this item for Parliament is not on the Vote-on-Account’s schedule, means that it is not taken seriously. Let us not beat around the bush and it does not help us when the hon. Minister Musumba says that those who are suffering most are from the Government side; the ruling party side. It does not matter where you are from, in fact that is the more reason we should be taken care of and taken seriously. We cannot just say, because you know, these are our Members from the government side, so their welfare is not important. That is not acceptable.

The legislative arm of government is as important as the Executive and the Judiciary. The fact that we are sitting on plastic chairs in the House like this should be a shame to the country. Honestly, this is a national Chamber and, therefore, I would like to move that before we pass this Vote-on-Account, we ensure that we have an item on the welfare of Parliament. I beg to move.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson for giving me this opportunity - (Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: There is a motion on the Floor, which has been seconded. Is it, therefore, procedurally right to continue to discuss when there is already a motion on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is an important matter, let us discuss it.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for giving me this opportunity. When our charismatic commissioner, hon. Kakooza talked, he reminded me of a very important point. During our orientation at Hotel Africana, one of the presenters, hon. Emmanuel Pinto said that actually our budget was going to be slashed by Shs 10 billion and I did not see any Member of the Executive coming up to refute the allegation - if at all I can call it an allegation. 

Today here is the Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business telling us that there is Shs 5 billion to cater for our welfare and when we insist that the money is reflected here on the Vote-on-Account, he is reluctant to agree. I wonder whether that is not a contradiction. Therefore, like my colleagues have mentioned, I think we should not pass this Vote-on-Account unless the a third of that Shs 5 billion is reflected on this Vote-on-Account. I thank you. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chair, I have been again mandated by the Rt hon. Prime Minister to reiterate what had already been put before this House. However, we beg that we be allowed to carry on further consultations on this matter. Further consultations mean consultations beyond the Rt hon. Prime Minister but at the same time we have legal and constitutional problems that require us to have a Vote-on-Account in place. In fact, if you say Parliament will not pass the Vote-on-Account for the Parliamentary Commission, you are even tying your hands even further. I, therefore, want to propose that you give us room to consult; some of the people we want to consult are currently out of the country. I propose that this House grants us two weeks in which we shall conclude consultations and come back to this House with a position in two weeks’ time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal. Do we give them two weeks or not? What do you say?

MR BYANDALA: The two major concerns of Members are office accommodation and this Chamber. In the development, there is some money but in the recurrent expenditure for offices there is nothing. It means that the Executive is not even thinking about offices for us. It is not here. So, we need a revised expenditure for the then recurrent so that our offices are catered for.

MR PAJOBO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to say that we continue with the motion, which was already on the Floor that we do not move until the Government goes and consults today so that tomorrow we can resume and pass this Vote-on-Account at 10.00 a.m. We are ready even if you say at 8.00 a.m. we shall be here but what happens is that the way we are sitting - you come with your good clothes, you end up going when it is dirty because there is no where to sit. We need to be considered very seriously. Therefore, I would like us to continue with the motion, which was moved here. Thank you.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Chair, in the same spirit, I want to appeal to my colleagues since the honourable Prime Minister has categorically said that we have Shs 5 billion on development, I am just appealing to honourable members that this is the beginning. We all know that we are obliged to pass the Vote-on-Account but at the same time we must balance the budget in the sense that if at all the Prime Minister made an undertaking and at the end of the day the junior ministers give the opposite - the appeal I am just making to Members is that if we could actually recall where we began from, we can make as a resolution here. The undertaking is to have a timeframe such that we continue with the Vote-on-Account but maybe within one week we get another undertaking from the Leader of Government Business.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, the honourable member holding the Floor knows that the Parliamentary Commission is self-accounting. It submits to the Executive the budget of the year and they approve those estimates. Within those estimates there is nothing reflected that we have offices and expansion of the Parliament and they know that this is a multi-party dispensation. It was expanded after the decision was taken by the people of Uganda that we should have the Leader of the Opposition and even government side. So, is the honourable member in order to say that government is thinking that we can pass a Vote-on-Account when the real issue we are debating is not even reflected in the budget year?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister of Finance, I think you should save us by creating a vote. Can you at least open a vote so that we know that we can call upon you to provide money on it? Provide Shs 1,000 for accommodation and the building.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson and the hon. Minister of Finance, I think you have a problem. Maybe this total budget is according to what you are expecting to collect but we have what we call the bond we are creating in the Bank of Uganda. We are taking money to the energy bond where Shs 20 billion already exists. If it is true that Shs 20 billion exists, I think we should be able to utilise part of the money you are planning to take to the energy bond. 

We already have Shs 20 billion in the energy bond in the previous year and it has not been utilised. In this new budget, we have provided for Shs 99 billion. That means as far as we are concerned, if we remove Shs 20 billion you are supposed to take to the bond Shs 79 billion. Now you have Shs 20 billion hanging in the air, which you should be able to utilise on the issue of expansion of Parliament.  

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Chairperson, we demanded from the Prime Minister and he has given an undertaking to permit consultations because those of us who are here right now cannot resolve this matter on behalf of the entire Executive. In the meantime I would like to draw the attention of the House to rule 119(7) which reads as follows: “The House shall consider any Vote-on-Account in Committee of Supply for a period not exceeding one day.” 

I would like to seek your guidance on the matter, Madam Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Our House sits from 2.00 p.m. to 7.00 p.m. We shall complete the matter.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, there is something I did not think necessary to inform this House about at this point in time but maybe it will help to save time. When I say that this matter is going to be consulted upon, it is with none other than His Excellency the President who is currently not in this country. This is the basis upon which we are asking for two weeks. As you know, he is the one mandated by the Constitution, so it is on the basis of this that I am asking for two weeks to resolve this matter. I thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have ring-fenced a big figure under energy, not actually energy but finance. We do not know the timeframe in which this money is going to be spent. As a matter of adjustment, can we borrow one-third? We have an emergency at hand. This job has to be started but we are putting something aside for a rainy day and we do not know when it will rain. Can the Minister of Finance consider unbundling some of these funds, which have been ring-fenced so that we start off? When the figure that the Rt hon. Prime Minister promised comes then it can be reimbursed. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and honourable members. We have an undertaking that within these two weeks of consultation we shall ensure that the issues of the expansion of the Chambers and the offices for Members of Parliament are appropriately handled. We are now requesting and praying that we pass the Vote-on-Account as it is today, to conform with our Rules of Procedure. 

The undertaking given by the Rt hon. Prime Minister is that we are going to have further consultations with the President to ensure that this issue is resolved. As has been mentioned earlier, the people who are suffering most are the Members on the government side, including the Members of the Executive. We have stood here several times to clarify on this and we are saying this with all the sincerity that it deserves; we shall do it. Therefore, I beg and pray that we pass this Vote-on-Account as it is. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I just want to go on record that there are two issues: we want office accommodation for the Members and we want a new Chamber. Everybody is focusing on the Chamber, which is going to take a long time, but these are two issues, which must be handled now. We cannot go on having Members hanging around with their books for the next four months. So, keep them in focus on accommodation, and the Chamber.

MR OMACH: Yes, Madam Chairperson, I did mention that the letters we have received are on both issues: the Chamber and accommodation for Members. We undertake to handle this within the two weeks that we are praying for. With this, may I move that you put the question so that we pass the Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2006/2007? I thank you.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just want to ask the Executive not to take us for granted because this is a very serious issue. We are saying the work of this Parliament must continue. I just want to revisit the motion and I do not want him to say the President is away because he can be reached by fax, e-mail, telephone and I can provide airtime. I just want to suggest that we do not pass that Vote and give the Executive today and tomorrow. Tomorrow they can inform us. You can reach him by telephone. In any case, there is a Vice-President who remains in office. The Presidency remains in the country even if an individual has gone out. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have sufficiently made our point. If the Government does not take us seriously, there is another stage where we can catch them –(Interjection)– but now what do I do with the rules? We are supposed to pass this in one day without conditions, but we have agreed to attach conditions and the Government has accepted.  

MR OTADA: I am very concerned, Madam Chairperson, because I thought this tendency had ended in the last Parliament where the Executive come here under the guise of rules, time and timelines and tell us to pass things “because we are out of time”. Really we should not continue like this because Members of Parliament need to legislate freely without the duress of time and bringing things here just to force them on us.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you retained that rule; you did not remove it from the Rules of Procedure.

MR OTADA: But why do they bring these things today?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, our rules say we consider it in a day and do it and finish it.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam, the argument that the head of the Executive is out of the country is not really very sound because the Presidency is an office and the Presidency is always here. So when President Museveni is out of the country, the Vice-President is in charge. So it does not give us a logical argument to say that we have to consult the President; the President is always here. We will miss an opportunity to get the Executive to answer to a call that is very pressing to us because we are the mirror of this country. 

I do not think that the population that voted this government into office is happy to see us crowded without accommodation for office as we are. I have nowhere my people can find me for consultation and so on. So, I am not so sure about this law the hon. Musumba has just read here, we need to get it clearly defined for us that the Vote-on-Account has to be passed within a day. We need a clarification on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is in our Rules of Procedure but secondly, if we say “no, UPE money will not go; medicine will not be bought”, then my Jinja-Bugiri road will not be done and your allowances will not come. Let us look at all those as we reject the Vote-on-Account.

MR PIRO SANTOS: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I am sorry because I see us soon committing a legislative lie, which is highly criminal because matters of undertaking are normally put in writing. How can we accept matters of such a nature to be undertaken verbally and we shall not approve that in future when it is denied? So I think we better get serious into business of taking this Executive - from the Minister of Finance especially - to get serious with this matter because we legislators are suffering. Right now we have been sitting here I cannot even pass to ease myself because there is no place where I can pass. I have been suffering here because of getting squeezed. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the records are being kept by the official Hansard. Whatever is said here is recorded for us in the Hansard and can be referred to at any time.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am very concerned about this regard of the Executive, the concerns of the Parliament, and when that happens I am even more afraid of what happens to those who are voiceless, the ones we represent, because even if we did not have the money I think the Executive would have been smarter. I wish they had approached the Office of Parliament to inform them of the situation of the meager resource envelope, but not to ambush this august House with the timeline and that we just have to conform because of that! 

Can I, therefore, request if it is possible, if the 24 hour limit allows the Executive to come back tomorrow when they are more organised? They should come back tomorrow, if we have a morning session, with a more organised position. We do not intend to paralyse government work but we are only requesting the Members of the Executive to be smarter and also to learn how to dialogue before coming to the Floor because we would save our image if this was not brought to the Floor this afternoon. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have a proposal. Next week we are going to start the debate on the Budget, can I propose that the Minister, before we begin that budget, comes to us on this matter? We not now dealing with two weeks; we are talking about next week. I do not think you need two weeks to determine that Members should not walk around with nowhere to sit and to leave the Chamber. Can you come back to us before we start the general debate on the Budget and give us a statement specifically on this matter?

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are guided by the rules of the House. Much as they are old rules but this one was saved, we do not have the new rules as yet but this one still stands. Much as we are debating and we want to consider the Vote-on-Account today, the Rules of Procedure of the House give the Chair leeway to consider that even in the next day as long as the Chair has ruled. Let me read the rule verbatim – the old rule 119(7); “The House shall consider any vote on account in Committee of Supply for a period not exceeding one day.”  

But sub-rule (8) says; “If it appears to the Chairperson that a vote on account is unlikely to be fully considered by the end of one day, he or she shall at any time that he or she considers necessary to conclude the business relating to the vote on account, put the question necessary to dispose of the vote on account.”                 

Which means, Madam Chairperson, that this rule gives you an opportunity and the powers to say that we can dispose of the Vote-on-Account tomorrow. It gives us an opportunity, and also gives the Minister an opportunity to go back and organise himself and come and tell us how he is going to handle the matter that is displeasing the Members. So I seek your guidance, Madam Chair, as to how we put this business on halt until tomorrow because you will be doing it within the law?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you read 119(9)(c)?  

MR BANYENZAKI: 9 has no (c), Madam Chair; 119 has sub-rules 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Actually it is 10(c).

MR BANYENZAKI: Sub-rule (10)(c) says; “The Committee shall not attach a condition or an expression of opinion on any resolution approving a vote.”  We are not a making a resolution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when we read these rules we should read them in totality. They are saying we should do it in one day, first of all, and while we are doing it let us not attach conditions. Internally, amongst ourselves we have attached some conditions, which we think that we should now take and proceed with our work. We have done it internally. Let us find a way of getting over this. I think that we have made enough contributions. All these are votes.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Chairperson, I have read the rule. We are not making a resolution. It says, “The Committee shall not attach a condition or an expression of opinion to any resolution ….”  We are not making a resolution. We are just making a request.

MR KAKOOZA: I want to appeal to Members: we know we have got another time to get them when we are passing a-third on the Vote-on-Account. The proposal you put forward should be done by the time we debate the State of the Nation Address and the Budget. The Minister of Finance should go and start homework. Members of Parliament in this august House, I want to confirm to you that the main worry is that in the estimates, which were sent two months ago before, Parliament was not reflected. It should be deep in their minds that we shall not even pass the budget.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I recall when the President was making the State of the Nation Address for 2005/2006 in May last year he said he would want this side to be expanded. All of you who were here heard. I was near him when he was saying that this side should be expanded. He was seated there. Now why don’t we expand it even when he is away?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support the proposal you have put forward. Deep in their minds the Ministers of Finance, by the time we debate this they should find a way to operate. I am sure they have even committed the letter to the Speaker of Parliament. Even the budget, which was sent as a provision, I am sure some activities will be crippled. We are not ready to continue in the same way. They think that we are going to be taken for granted. I beg to move that we pass it and give them a timeframe of one week before we debate the State of the Nation Address.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, thank you Minister.  Committee on Government Assurances, this is the first assurance by the Government. Before we debate the budget, if the Minister surfaces here with his other business without briefing us on this matter, you know what to do. So, Committee on Government Assurances, take note.  

Honourable members, while we appreciate our difficulties I do not want it to be said that “they sat there and because they had no chairs they stopped medicine, they stopped this and that.” We do not want that. We are working for the whole country. The point has been made so I would like to pose the question that the House’s disposal of votes is not yet considered and funds be provided for as requested for services specified for both recurrent and development expenditure, that is to say, the remaining ministries, districts and municipal councils. Honourable minister, can you say something about Hoima Municipal Council.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, we have not yet got any resolution from the Minister of Local Government in that respect. The moment we receive it we shall act appropriately.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I now put the question.

MR ARAPKISSA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. There are many institutions in this document where the recurrent budget has not been provided for. It is not only the Parliamentary Commission. There is the Electoral Commission, the Human Rights Commission; there are about ten where they have not indicated the recurrent budget. So we would like the Minister to make a comment on those commissions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Those are statutory bodies, but the Minister will explain.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, those are statutory bodies. Their accounts are charged directly to the Consolidated Fund Account. So they are taken care of.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, we have other commissions, which we feel also fall under that category and they are named here.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Were they placed in that category by the Constitution?

MR OKUPA: That is why we are asking for clarification from the Minister as to whether that is the reason they are leaving them out. Because we see others left out and others are here.   

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, you have already guided on the matter appropriately.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are bodies under the Constitution, which have got a separate status. Their recurrent budget is charged directly on the Consolidated Fund. They were named in the Constitution. That is why I am asking whether these others you are talking about have also been put in that category.

MR ARAPKISSA: I think the problem is the Public Service Commission, the Health Service Commission, the Judicial Service Commission; their recurrent budgets are reflected and yet they are also statutory.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have said that there are those which are charged by Constitution on the Consolidated Fund and then there are those which are not. Of course we have created many commissions but not all of them have been given that status.

MR ARAPKISSA: Okay, let him tell us which those are.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You want the Minister to say it?

MR ARAPKISSA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think I have guided you on this matter.  I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 666,290,985,000 be provided for under Vote 764 - Central Government ministries, institutions, missions, districts and municipal councils; as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 297,696,157,000 to cover the Central Government ministries, institutions, missions abroad, districts and municipal councils be provided for as development expenditure for Financial Year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Jachan Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.) 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 

6.36 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Jachan Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2006/2007 and has passed it without any amendment.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think that you should also say something about our other commitment; say it for the Hansard. The other one is okay but now say part II also. Put it on the record.  

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we have also committed to report to this House next week on the issue of the expansion of the Chambers and the office accommodation of the Members of this august House. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Jachan Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

CONSTITUTION OF STANDING AND SESSIONAL COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT

6.38
THE CHIEF WHIP, NRM (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Government side is ready to forward the names of the Members on the various committees from NRM. I do not know whether –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to know whether in order to constitute the full committee, we need information from both sides. Can I know from the Leader of the Opposition whether your side is ready with the composition of the committee? Do you have the names here? Apparently they are ready, so you can make your proposals.  

MRS MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I need your guidance on whether to read the names committee by committee or to present a package to you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For now just give me the package and then I get the one from the Opposition. We shall decide tomorrow on how to proceed.  

MRS MASIKO: I will forward it to you, Madam Speaker. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am not the Opposition leader but as he is away, we are going to pass ours over to you very soon. Since this is not supposed to be declared on the microphone; even tonight you will have it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Provided we are enabled to announce them during the course of this week.  

MRS MASIKO: Madam Speaker, we are always ready when called upon. We also have the names for the three slots for NRM on the Parliamentary Commission. We have hon. Guma Gumisiriza, hon. James Kakooza and hon. Kasule Justine Lumumba. (Applause) I beg to present those names for approval.  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shadow Minister, can we know about the Opposition.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I am now acting as the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I think by Thursday you will have the name of the person who is going to represent the Opposition on the Parliamentary Commission. You will have it by 5.00 O’clock.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we would have liked to constitute the Commission. You can see we have been battling the whole afternoon with the Executive on issues of the Parliamentary Commission. We would like to sit as quickly as possible and kick off with the serious business for this House. I think 5.00 O’clock on Thursday is too late.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, as I am saying that will be the latest but we are trying to beat 5.00 O’clock today. So, we are sure we could get it before 5.00 on Thursday. Yes, we have internal systems we follow and they will be accomplished by Thursday 1.00 O’clock.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, for now I congratulate those three Members who have been elected and welcome them to the Commission and to advise them that they need to sharpen their nails for the work ahead but I wish you well and let us hear from the opposition by the end of the week on their nominations. Do you still have information for us, Chief Whip?

MRS MASIKO: Madam Speaker, we also have our Members, as you are aware that Uganda as we stand now has no representatives in the Pan African Parliament. Four Members unfortunately lost their seats the only one who survived is now a Minister yet it requires that the Pan African representatives be back benchers. So, we did go ahead and threw our internal democracy into action and nominated Members to PAP that represent the NRM and Uganda in general so that we do not miss out. For your information honorable members, the Pan African Parliament has already sat without Uganda and we do not want to continue with not being represented. 

So, we are nominating hon. Lokii Abraham Peter, we are also nominating hon. Mary Mugyenyi, we are nominating hon. Bartille John Toskin and we are nominating hon. Ndawula Kaweesi Edward –(Applause)- to represent Uganda on the NRM ticket. Of course as you can see, national character and gender have been taken into consideration. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Again let me congratulate those who have been nominated from the NRM Party. I look forward to receiving nominees from the opposition and to say that you are succeeding a great team. We had a very good team in the Pan African Parliament I think almost everybody was heading a committee. So, we expect that the tradition will continue whereby Uganda is really well reflected on the national map so we are depending on you to keep the flag flying high out there. Congratulations and I wish you well. Again we shall hear –(Interruption)

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Madam Speaker, first of all I would like to apologize for having taken leave of the House from the Chamber but it was because we were to meet the Secretary General of the Commonwealth. That is the reason I had to take leave.

The composition of committees in as far as the opposition parties are concerned is still incomplete in the sense that this afternoon I had to meet the Rt hon. Speaker for some guidance in terms of how to deploy the shadow cabinet ministers. When he advised me that they should be posted to their respective portfolios in terms of the committees, I had to make some changes. Nevertheless, I wish to beg that if it is not so much a hindrance to this House, I tender an already developed and well laid out list tomorrow because what I have has a lot of changes, which need to be corrected on a computer. Alternatively I could read it as it is –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, we should give you time to organise yourself because this is a serious responsibility. We had actually more or less agreed to give you until Thursday but since you will be ready tomorrow, we welcome your nominees tomorrow. Thank you.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Madam Speaker, in a similar vein we are still consulting within the opposition parties in terms of representation in the Pan African Parliament and the East African Legislative Assembly. We will also be able to report back to you; equally so, we are taking a decision on the representation on the Commission on Thursday and will be able to formally get back to the House.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just only one concern about the Seventh Parliament and our colleagues who were in it. I would like to know from your Office: we passed a pensions scheme here and I would like to know because rumour has it that it was not assented to so that by the time we institute our Commission we know how to deal with the work as we proceed on. I would like to know what happened, from your Office. Is there any communication because months have gone and our colleagues out there who were in the Seventh Parliament are worried. Maybe we can get that communication by the time we institute the Parliamentary Commission then we can organise ourselves and we know how to deal with the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, what I can say is that the Bill was not assented to. It was returned with the request that we review one or two parts of the Bill. I think that information will be given to you both as the Commission and as a House, but it was not assented to. That one I know because I saw the letter. But thank you for the keen interest. I can you see you have started with vigour and I am sure that that vigour will continue throughout your tenure. 

Honorable members I want to thank you for today’s work. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.47 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 June 2006 at 2.00 p.m.)













