Tuesday, 29th June, 1999.

Parliament met at 10.30 a.m in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker,  Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

BILLS
SECOND READING 

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 1999.

(Debate continued)

MR. NYAI DICK (Ayivu County, Arua):  Mr. Speaker,  yesterday when you adjourned the House,  I was getting towards the end of my submission.  And in summary,  to refresh our minds,  what I had said was that the Movement - for about 13 years - has been accusing the political parties of all manner of evil,  and that they should be hanged.  I argued that in all legal systems, whether it is the French where you are guilty once arrested until you prove yourself innocent,  or the British one which we are following where you are innocent until you are proven guilty,  in all cases the accused has a right of defence.

I want to remind ourselves that even in the times when Rome was a big empire where Jesus grew up and lived under Pontius Pilate,  when the Jews wanted Jesus crucified they accused him of all manner of things and they took him to Pilate.  Pontius Pilate said, 'you man,  these people are saying bad things about you,  they want you to be crucified, what do you have to say for yourself?'  Yesterday I said that Jesus made a very lousy defence and I thank God for his lousy defence, because he was crucified so that I can be saved.  But the important point is he did make a defence.  So, Mr. Speaker, I was trying to persuade my Colleagues that it is only reasonable that UPC, DP, the Conservative Party - which the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs heads - should defend themselves. The parties which are yet to be formed have been accused,  they are already being represented as evil;  they should also be allowed to defend themselves.  

Secondly,  I had said that this is not about individuals.  We are not accusing hon. Kisamba Mugerwa who was a Member of Parliament here as a Democratic Party member,  we are not accusing our Ambassador to Kenya,  Ambassador Butagira nor are we accusing Yona Kanyomozi,  we are not accusing Cecilia Ogwal,  we are not accusing Dick Nyai,  but we are accusing political organisations. They are bodies corporate and they must be allowed to organise and make their own defence.  For the simple reason I argued that you cannot, as Dick Nyai,  have agents in Rukungiri,  but a political organisation as a body corporate can have representatives.  Let the accusations for the last 14 years be answered and let the people make a reasonable choice. 

I also argued that the question of timing of this Bill is a little unfortunate.  The Executive knew from October, 1995 - even if it was elected and composed thereafter in 1996 - they knew since then that this Bill had to come!  Why wait for the last minute?  Why do you want to punish this Parliament into passing a Bill which is not fully and duly considered?

I believe and I quite agree with my good friend hon. Obiga Kania who said that if you allow parties to organise,  what happens to the other parts of the Constitution which says that while the Movement is in power the other parties should be in abeyance?  I want to answer that very simply like this.  When we wrote that Constitution,  the wisdom of the majority was to protect the Movement at every turn.  If now hon. Obiga Kania finds it difficult to reconcile Article 74 with Articles 27l and 273,  then as a Director for Research at the Secretariat,  he should advise the Movement to quickly amend this Constitution so that it is consistent.  Articles 29 and 69 should now all read the same.  This is because the argument has been that why do people say, 'let us not have a referendum,'  and yet the voters are the final court of justice?  Mr. Speaker,  if we are saying that in 1999,  why did we not say the same thing in October 1995 and give the Constitution up for a referendum?  

If the Constituent Assembly could promulgate the Constitution and in it this Parliament has powers for amending the same,  why are we shying away?  Why do we not give this Parliament enough time?  I find it very strange,  Mr. Speaker,  that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs who leads a political organisation would like to deny his political organisation its right of defence!  I find it very strange.  I do not know whether he has no conflict of interest in this matter.  

Yesterday I was arriving at a very material point.  You say we should have a referendum,  but there was a very valid point which hon. Elly Karuhanga raised.  It was the point of what will be the majority,  how do you determine that a vote is a vote and a majority vote of the people?  Is it simple majority?  I would say, 'no.'  Besides,  Mr. Speaker,  what percentage of minority are we prepared to ignore in this country?  Because let me speak on a matter on which I am very familiar.  I have lost a lot of people,  starting with my father,  my brothers,  my sister-in-law,  my own wife.  When you go to the funeral service,  the preacher will tell you that it is good you turn to Job, chapter 1,  and you start reading from about verse 10.  There while Job's sons were eating,  thieves came and killed the animals,  they stole the horses,  they destroyed everything and eventually they killed all the children.  Job 1, verse 20 says,  "Job then tore his garments and smeared himself with ash and he said, "God I came to earth naked,  you gave and you have taken away,  praise be your name."  In Church everybody agrees that that is very good preaching.  But for you who have lost a dear one,  the pain is within you.  Even if the entire Uganda voted that they want Movement,  what would happen to my love for UPC?  Will that vote alone cure my heart?  It will not,  Mr. Speaker!  I think this is why I am saying that on matters of this nature,  a referendum is deceptive.

Finally,  hon. Obiga Kania Mario - again forgive me for referring to him - said that if we do these other things,  what then happens to the other provisions in the Constitution?  Mr. Speaker,  that question reminded me of what hon. Cecilia Ogwal Atim,  Member of Parliament for Lira Municipality,  said last week.  She said - if I am wrong let her correct me - that among other things that in her readings which are very varied and versed, she has found that fascist organisations protect themselves within the law.  If the purpose of our exercise here is to confine the parties by law and say, 'the Constitution does not allow us to do this,  you can associate but you cannot organise,'  then it is unfortunate.

Yesterday I said that the entire purpose of forming political organisations is to organise so as to capture state power.  You cannot tell me, 'Dick Nyai,  associate but do not campaign.'  It makes no sense.  Because if that is now the matter,  I want to give very free and honest advice to the Movement:  over the years you have worked overtime,  you have locked the parties out,  you want to kill them!  You go ahead and kill them with a very clear conscience.  I would advise,  Mr. Speaker,  that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs does not extend the time of this Parliament on discussing something which is really irrelevant.  For the simple reason that since the Movement Act exists, and it identifies a party to the referendum,  since he does not want to bring any Act to identify the other parties to that referendum,  then I would hopefully pray that the Minister stands up now and withdraws his Referendum Bill and comes back to this House with Amendments of the Movement Act so as to enforce the Movement Act.  

Why am I saying that,  Mr. Speaker?  In the Movement Act,  Article 25(1) reads:  "There shall be a village Movement Committee for every village;  (2) A village Movement Committee shall consist of all the adult members of the village..."  I want to submit that all Ugandans are members of a village somewhere, by law.  If every Ugandan is a member of the Movement by law,  then these other political organisations which have not been identified are counted as adult membership of the Movement.  Are we going to have the Movement competing against small children below the age of 18?  
Let him withdraw this Bill.  Let him bring an Amendment to enforce Article 25 of the Movement Act.  I can even recommend to him that he can introduce 25(5) to read:  "Any member of the village Movement Committee who acts contrary to the interests of the Movement,  shall be guilty of an offence and on conviction on first time shall be liable to a fine of five million shillings and two years in jail.  On a subsequent conviction shall be imprisoned for life."  Then,  Mr. Speaker,  we shall know that this is the law.  The Dick Nyais who are reckless with themselves will end up in Luzira,  the others will be cowards,  they will be down completely and down trodden.  Nobody will talk,  then you will have total amity.  There will be peace because you would have killed everybody's spirit.

I do not believe that that is what the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs wants for this country.  I do not believe he wants that, and it is in this light,  Mr. Speaker,  that I am pleading very passionately that the Minister will find it in his heart to come back to this House this afternoon with an  Amendment to the Constitution to give us time,  to extend time for passing this Bill so that we start with the Political Organisations Bill,  and then go to the Referendum Bill.  If that is not the case,  I am totally opposed to the Second Reading of the Referendum Bill.  I thank you.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA MATAYO (Buhaguzi County, Hoima):  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I want also to thank the Committee for having been able to introduce their report, which to me looks to be a bit hasty in terms of time,  and the pressure that they under went must be appreciated.  I have got some few points to make before I express my opinion about this Committee's report.  I will also express my opinion known on whether I support or I do not support the report.  

I want to inform this House that a situation like this did prevail before we even came to power.  We had a stalemate about whether we should invade and capture Kampala.  When we were in Bushenyi we held meetings to decide whether during the peace talks we should move ahead and capture power.  But because of the conscious decision which was arrived at by the commanders then,  it was so decided to wait until Masaka and Mbarara barracks had fallen.  So,  the timing is one of the most fundamental issues in all issues in life.  

Here I am seeing the problem of timing. Our politics and political arrangements of this country are continuing to shift positions.  The other day His Excellency the President was a darling of the city dwellers.  When he was moving from Entebbe to Kampala on his official duties,  people were waiting to see the President.  Today they are used to the President's motorcade,  and therefore it is not something very, new and surprising to see the President pass.  Similarly I am saying that what the Committee has recommended,  in my view,  is the most fundamental issue.  

The purpose of the struggle is all about showing the correct and good side of the revolutions.  We want to show the world that there is a fundamental change,  and indeed this fundamental change must be sailed through with fairness,  open mindedness and lack of tricks.  I can see we have put the political parties,  by law,  in abeyance.  They are not operational,  and indeed the political parties have behaved,  they have co-operated and they have accepted to present themselves on individual merit.  But when my hon. Minister tells us that individuals will come and present themselves,  form themselves into groups to appear that they are representing those interests,  it fails my understanding.  Because we are now assuming the perceptions of our people in the countryside are the same as ours here in terms of interpretation of what a referendum is.  

The Committee has ably expressed its concern,  and some Committees which were also called in to represent the interest groups of this country did express the same concern.  I am talking about the interest groups like the various religions, political organs.  At one instance, I was also disappointed by our Secretariat.  The Committee report says the Secretariat was invited to come and advise what the Committee should report to the House.  They decided also to absent themselves,  in line with UPC and Democratic Party who also boycotted.  This one is a question which I should put before our Secretariat:  why did they choose not to come and cooperate and inform the Committee the need of our people to be given a chance to hold the referendum?  

I was however pleased to see that all the interests groups in this country representing the cross section of people were represented.  For instance,  I saw the Foundation for Human Rights Initiative, the Catholic Secretariat, the Uganda Journalists Association, the Electoral Commission,  the Uganda Human Rights Commission,  blah, blah, blah.  They all came and did advise the Committee on what they thought, thus the Committee came up with this report.  Mr. Speaker,  I think it is also important that what has been happening in this country is that we are supposed to discourage the politics of obscurantism.  These politics of obscurantism is so bad that the ordinary person is caused to believe that what goes on behind the closed doors of the informed group is such a nice one,  and thus you should all follow.  This is good in terms of representation because as a House here we are now representing the interests of all our nationals in this country.  

But when it comes to whether the Political Organisation Bill comes first or precedes this Bill,  I have the following to say.  Ordinarily,  I would have said,  because the Bill was initially brought in,  it was withdrawn and this one was re-introduced.  This is the working method which in my view is wanting.  All along that we have been -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I am sorry to interrupt you,  but the Political Organisations Bill has never been withdrawn.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for your observation.  Be that as it may,  I want to state that the recommendation of the Committee solves our situation as politicians and beasts of war.  Tomorrow there will be a disagreement, as these disagreements have continued to take place.  What causes war?  War is caused by first of all expressing the disagreement, and when pressed harder, somebody expresses the disagreement by war.  And this war is solved by spilling of blood, and this is what I am talking about.  

The political groups are indeed a minority and in all declaration of wars,  minorities are the ones which normally go to war.  When they go to war,  they become very difficult to scoop out.  Difficult in a sense that they become costly,  they become even difficult to identify because they have got people to hide them,  like we are suffering today with the Kony and ADF rebels.  These fellows are small as far as UPDF is concerned.  We are more trained,  we are well equipped,  some of us gave away our niceties of the army,  we resigned to cause our soldiers to enjoy a well facilitated army so that they can be properly equipped.  But up to today,  UPDF is fighting.  And indeed this one is very dangerous politically.  Fighting must not continue endlessly,  and similarly,  the Political Organisations Bill must be Tabled.  

I am saying this when many Members might be mesmerized as to why I could be saying so.  I am saying so because if there are confusions I do not doubt your full participation,  but there are always certain people who may be called upon to first of all go and test the music of bitterness. I am still strong,  I have had some basic training in the army,  I think I can still be called upon to fight.  But this fighting is the one which I do not want myself.  If we have got opportunities to stop it,  then we can stop it,  and we can stop it very cheaply.  Why am I saying this?  We are giving undue concern and sympathies to these weaklings.  The political organisations,  as far as we are concerned today, are weak.  They are weak because they have not been organising, they have no leadership.  With due respect they have leadership yes,  but maybe they have never expressed their wishes whether they should change their leadership or not.  

The Constitution is very clear,  many of them are ageing,  when we see the photos of Mzee Obote, we all get surprised whether this is the same man who will come back to rule us.  When you look at my uncle Kawanga,  he is also ageing.  When you look at my uncle Rwanyarare,  he is gone.  Well,  my sister Cecilia is also towards the same and then my uncle,  I do not know,  I will not mention, but my uncle will be knocked out by the constitutional provisions because he is already towards that age which will not allow him to stand.  Then when we come to our dear President,  he has told this country at the age of 55, he is going to retire.  But that one is again subject to us the supporters, because we see he is slightly stronger and he can present himself.  We shall say, 'hendeleya'.  Because 55 is his choice,  we shall say,  'this 55 is still good enough,  you can continue.'  But that is the choice of again the Movement,  to advise him to change his opinion.  

Whereas I would also wish to comment on this,  I want to talk about the recommendation of the Committee about the media.  Anything that brings suspicion and anxiety, is in my view, a bad law,  and we should cause this country to differentiate between ourselves and the previous Governments.  What is wrong for you to show society that Movement is actually what you told us?  I was behind that person that day,  some few metres when he was saying, 'I have brought in a fundamental change,' and this fundamental change has actually been realised.  I am able to stand here to talk rubbish and then I go scot free,  because that is my freedom.  

Then somebody is able to say, 'we shall demonstrate if you do not ask people to stop eating fish.'  And the Rubaga people clap and say, 'our man.'  This person would not have gone unharmed if this semblance of democracy was not there.  So, my question is to hon. Members,  is it true and do you believe even if - God forbid - even if there was another system to come in now,  with the same systems of Lutwa and Bazileo to lay road blocks,  start checking where is Museveni and so on?  Do you think people will accept this kind of system,  and are you not aware that actually people now are so enlightened?  They will camp up the following day the moment this group starts doing the same that they used to do then.  Are you not also convinced that the same group will also want to impress public that actually what the other ones were doing, we must also improve on it?  

I say this is an improved situation,  we have set a precedence of peace,  freedom of expression,  and I believe we are still strong enough to challenge and compete with these small groupings and win them,  if the ground is levelled.  I get lost also,  Mr. Speaker,  when we are told that people will group themselves somewhere and say, 'we are this group, we are challenging our people also.'  For us, we want to cause our public and citizens to understand between the choices,  the question will be put between Matayo and that table,  who is better?  People will not understand what is this table,  because it is not described and it has got no meaning.  Similarly,  the Committee also expresses their concern - especially the Committee on the Uganda Episcopal Conference - during the interview with our Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee,  they expressed to them that this is silent and it is not properly described.

The definition of a referendum should be clear to our voters.  We should say it is between Movement and a particular political organisation,  which political organisation as far as I am concerned in Buhaguzi,  my voters ask me, 'what is a referendum?' 'A referendum is a question between the Movement and those people who are supporting political parties,'  that is what I tell them. And they say, 'oh! so you want political parties to come back?'  I say,  'it is a choice between yourselves and your votes.  You either say you want to continue with Movement or not.'  Then they ask, 'is Movement Museveni?'  Because it is also personalised.  Many people believe Movement is Museveni,  nothing more.  And they say, 'oh, Museveni was our man.'  Not knowing there is a person called Prof. Nsibambi,  now Prime Minister and tomorrow you never know he might be a President,  who knows?  He has refused. (Laughter)  He has refused -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, can you come to your concluding remarks?  

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  I have known that Prof. Nsibambi is not having any anxieties to become one.  But what I am saying is that any other person could be looked at as a capable person to lead.  So, the Movement is also at a problem to inform the people whether they are electing the individual or they are electing the Movement.  As far as the recommendation of the Committee is concerned,  I think the problem is, do we precede with it as recommended by the Committee?  Do we proceed with the Political Organisations Bill whose report has already been concluded or do we first of all pass the Referendum Bill?  

The referendum will also go into abeyance maybe before these people have organised themselves.  Those stalemates are the ones which I want our hon. Members to understand.  There is a problem of cheap popularity ambitions,  and self aggrandizement,  because we are not sincere ourselves.  With due respect to all hon. Members,  we say Movement,  political parties,  but what is it all about?  Cause these people to choose between the two, so that if there is a land slide victory,  it is known that we have defeated this?  It is no point for us to have finished the election, to start telling people that now the Movement has won.  Whom has it won?  Or is it individuals who have clustered together?  We should say, a group of either CP, UPC, DP, have clustered together, now this is a political organisation and they are saying, 'we are here,  we want to make an alternative to the Movement,  which one do you want?'  And people choose between the two.  And we shall live,  I can assure you hon. Members,  very peacefully shall we live.  

I want to remind those of you who were in the CA, hon. Wapakhabulo has always been getting various praises and congratulations,  because he allowed everybody to let off his steam.  The first week we sat in CA,  I came closer to hon. Cecilia Ogwal.  She was avoiding to get closer because she was saying,  'these military people are dangerous.'  Today we embrace each other,  we live together,  and she has never changed from UPC,  I have never changed from Movement also.  That means we have got the capacity to live together.  In other words,  there is a possibility for me to encircle Cecilia and cause her to join me because it is with a question of time. (Laughter).  Hon. Members,  I want to say that we should have this Bill passed,  but also encourage the level of political grounds so that people are able to differentiate between our political system which is a Movement and the political party system.  

Then on the media,  I want to assure Members that this is the most horrendous suggestion that we expect to have in our third world situation.  When you look at the punishment, because the Committee realised that it was too harsh, they decided to propose an Amendment.  Even this Amendment is also dangerous because when you are looking at the punishment to someone who will allow the opposing group to say something over their medium,  the electronic media will be fined 150 currency points, which is about Shs 3 million,  or two years imprisonment, or both.  When you look at it,  we do not understand the issue of being liberal,  we are supposed to liberalise these media groups,  they are free,  they are making money,  and if somebody comes and he or she wants to make his or her campaign propaganda; and as you are campaigning,  naturally you will talk about somebody.  You will talk about the evils of that person whom you want to defeat and at the end of the day this person will be subjected to that -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, this is the second time I am requesting you to come to your concluding remarks.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Mr. Speaker,  lastly,  I propose and recommend to the House that this report,  as presented by the Legal and Parliamentary Committee,  be adopted and supported.  Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER:  I will have hon. Obiga Kania, hon. Balunywa, hon. Omodi Okot and hon. Kinobe in that order.

MR. OBIGA KANIA MARIO (Terego County, Arua):  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I also want to join those who have thanked the Committee for the good report and right from the beginning I would like to say that I support the referendum Bill as it is tabled.  Mr. Speaker,  at some appropriate stage in this House, I intend to make one or two amendments.

I believe this Bill is about the right of the people to choose and I am sure all of us who believe in democracy and the power of the people have no quarrel with that position.  Many points have been raised in this House regarding this Bill.  The first one is the attempt to tie this Bill to the Political Organisations Bill. It is my considered view that virtually all Bills that we pass in this House into an Act are connected in one way or another,  because at the end of the day,  they are meant to administer the sum total of our society in Uganda.  If we then start legislating by way of saying that unless one Bill is passed,  the other cannot be passed,  it is my considered view that that will be setting up a very dangerous precedent,  upon which the House of this Parliament can easily come to a halt.  

If you say we cannot proceed with the Referendum Bill unless we have dealt with the Political Organisations Bill, the logical assumption will be that we think that the Political Organisations Bill will actually pass through this House.  But there is that slim possibility that the Political Organisations Bill may not pass through this House.  That means we will be tying the fate of one action,  for example the referendum,  to the fate of another.  

Two:  Bills have different intentions expressed in the memorandum, and have more long term objectives than the needed referendum coming.  So my view is that if it is found absolutely necessary that the Political Organisations Bill in its own right should be in place,  that should be put in its own context but not tie down the work on the Referendum Bill.  This is because the Referendum Bill has a different objective and as many speakers have already alluded to, it has a fixed timetable during which it must be in place.  
My brother hon.Dick Nyai hon. of Ayivu stated that it is possible I might find it difficult to reconcile Articles 74 and 271 of the Constitution.  What I was referring to yesterday when I asked the hon. Dick Nyai for clarification was: suppose you pass the Political Organisations Bill now, would you be able to operationalise it immediately in view of the fact that it is the Movement system which is operating and supposed to operate within the five years irrespective of the weaknesses of the Constitution?  That is the question.  Because if you pass the Political Organisations Bill to achieve the aims of those who are agitating for multi-partyism during campaigns for the referendum, and if you want to have a Delegates Conferences to elect delegates and set up structures for parties,  you are bound to run against one of the provisions of the Constitution.  

And if you want to achieve that objective through the Political Organisations Bill, the method will not be to debate the Political Organisations Bill first, but rather to seek for an Amendment of the relevant constitutional provision before you create a conflicting role,  which you will be unable to operationalise,  in this House.  That was the point I was making and, Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption).

MISS. KABASHARIRA ASIIMWE:  Mr. Speaker, much as we want this Parliament to be worked on quickly,  I am getting irritated by the noise that is coming from up.  I wonder whether we should continue.  Otherwise they either stop or we stop and they continue.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  The appropriate steps have been taken to stop that noise and if you can bear it for a few minutes,  it will be sorted out soon.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  In as far as this Constitution will remain in force,  Article 74 provides for methods for Ugandans to demand for a referendum on any issue,  including the political systems.  That is the generality of Article 74, which is actually operationalising what is contained in Article 1 (4), the one about the supremacy of the people.  

But Article 271 which is in the transitional arrangement, my brother hon. Dick Nyai,  knows why it is there.  He knows that in the CA he contested my argument that the people of Uganda wanted the Movement to rule in perpetuity.  He disagreed and said it was not correct.  When he walked out,  I said that was undemocratic.  The final solution was that we sat and said, 'in the year 2000,  we must go to the people so that the issue is resolved.'  That is why Article 271 is there.  I find it strange that having reached that consensus that time,  hon. Dick Nyai, is now unable to proceed to the people in the year 2000.

MR. NYAI:  Hon. Obiga Kania Mario was very consistent and he said, 'Dick Nyai disagreed and walked out.'  Then in the next breath he said, 'we reached a consensus.'  Mr. Speaker, I cannot reach a consensus when I am not there. Is he therefore in order to say that I reached a consensus when I was not there?

THE SPEAKER:  I did not hear him say he reached a consensus with you. The CA reached a consensus without you, so he was in order.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Actually I did not want to remind my brother, hon. Dick Nyai that he walked out after voting,  but I will remind him next time that he did that,  when I get the statistics of when he voted and how.  Nevertheless,  Mr. Speaker,  I find no problem in the provisions of Article 74 and 271.  In fact once the people have pronounced themselves in the referendum,  not only Article 271,  but even Article 269 will liberate hon. Dick Nyai and his friends.

Therefore my position will be this.  The points that have been raised for or against political parties or against the Movement having stayed for 14 years and having done a bad job,  are not points of the principle of whether we should have the referendum or not.  They are points of the campaign, of the canvassing that hon. Dick Nyai will say against me and I will raise as a Movement person against him.  It is not a question which should stop the passing of this Bill.  The principle of the Bill is that we should have it,  go to the people and raise all these things which are bad and good against the two systems - or three - and let the people decide.

The second point is the fairness which has been called the levelling of the ground.  I would have thought and considered that so far the ground is level.  But if there is anybody who thinks the ground is not level,  that should have been mentioned here.  I am thoroughly surprised that those who think the ground is not level,  are actually unable to put a proposal to level the ground. If I am not the wrong, -(Interruption). 

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, my friend hon. Obiga Kania has raised a very fundamental question on the issue of the level ground.  I wish to inform him that in his contribution he has basically answered that question,  because he said that the people are going to choose two systems or three.  And if people are going to choose more than one system,  surely those systems must be legally in place.

THE SPEAKER:  Sorry,  I did not get you.  Did you say to choose three systems, or to choose from three systems?

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  He said people are going to choose from among the systems.  If the systems are to be chosen by the people, those systems must be legally in place and I am arguing that at the moment,  the multi-party political system as one of the systems.  Although it is provided for in the Constitution,  it is not yet legally functioning in order for people to choose it because the Constitution says that Parliament shall make law so that these systems are actually operationalised,  just as the Movement system has been operationalised.  

If my Colleague is then talking about level ground,  the level ground is not like that of a football ground.  We are talking of a political, legal ground in a contest in which we make laws, where the system competitors can ride over and reach the people.  I think this is really the fundamental point.  We are asking that the multi-party system or any other system which wants to be there is supposed to be legally alive and then you give us all the resources and then we face the people and I am sure that you will have a bloody nose,  if you leave us there.  Thank you.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Speaker, I have heard the information. The multi-party political system is in place legally. It is provided for by Article 69.  If you read that Constitution, all the political parties which existed as at the time of the promulgation of this Constitution,  are safe. But what those who advocate for multi-party system are erroneously requesting is that they should go and canvass for votes for multi-partyism as political parties. That,  in my view, is a demand in the wrong.  

The reason is this. We are not talking about whether the people will choose UPC,  DP or any other political party, no. That is not what we are talking about.  We are saying the people of Uganda want to choose one system within which, if it becomes multi-party political party - and God forbid - then all the parties will mushroom, not just the two or the four that we know.  In other words, if you want to go as parties as of now,  what about the parties of the future?  Are you going to give them opportunity to canvass?  That is why you must go and canvass for support for multi-parties as a group, as a system vis-a-vis the other system, which is the Movement. In that situation, you will be comparing two likes, there will be two likes. But if you base political parties vis-a-vis the Movement system,  you are comparing two unlike things and actually trying to rig the referendum against the Movement system -(Interruption).

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, my point of order is raised in view of Article 71 of the Constitution which prescribes principles to which a political party in the political system shall conform. In other words, there is no such thing like a multi-party political system,  therefore you cannot talk about a multi-party political system without a political party.  So is it in order for hon. Obiga Kania to mislead this House that there is such a theoretical thing called a multi-party political system which is existing in isolation of political parties?

THE SPEAKER: To me this is a very simple and clear provision. I am not arrogating to myself the role of interpreting the Constitution in a contest - that is for the court - but when I read it,  Article 71 says: "A political Party in the Multi-Party Political System shall conform to the following principles..."  I do not need to read the rest.  There must be two entities,  one is the Multi-party Political system and within that, there has to be a political party.  

What hon. Obiga Kania was saying,  in my understanding,  was that instead of the parties going for the referendum to canvass for support for themselves,  they should go out there and canvass for a multi party political system under whose umbrella the individual political parties exist.  That is my understanding,  and if it is correct,  I think the hon. Obiga Kania was in order.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: I am grateful to you,  Mr. Speaker,  for having put it a lot better than I could have done.  By going to canvass in this referendum as a group,  I do not see those who aspire for multi-party system being in a disadvantaged position as compared to the Movement political system.  That is where to me the issue of levelling the ground would come in.  How do we level the ground for the two groups to make sure that they are even in approaching the people?  And I, Obiga Kania of Terego,  am extremely open to discuss that kind of levelling once we have settled out the principles.  I have no intention whatsoever of killing parties.  Why should I kill them when they are within the Constitution?  If they are ever to be killed, they should be killed by the people of Uganda.

MR. LUKYAMUZI KEN:  I thank the hon. speaker for giving way.  As far as I know,  with reference to this Constitution which is a very important Constitution,  I would like the speaker holding the Floor to show me where the multi-party political system per se is defined.  Much as the Constitution defines the Movement political system,  it does not - any where - define the Multi-party Political System.  I challenge you on that.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: I ask hon. Lukyamuzi to read Articles 69 and 71. He should be able to find out the meaning of a Multi-party Political System. Mr. Speaker, my time is short and I am not going to do the work of hon. Lukyamuzi if he does not do enough reading. I suggest he does read more.  

LT. KINOBE: I thank the Member for giving way for this information. The information I wanted to give the Member is a definition of a multi party system as by the encyclopedia Britannica volume 17 - this is an international understanding of the word which can be brought into Uganda's context.  This is how the encyclopedia defines multi-partyism: "A multi-party system is the formation of separate parties with programmes tailored to fit the views of comparatively small segments of the population.  The population is divided into a multiplicity of parties due to the adversity of political beliefs and fundamental issues."  That is the definition I got from a researched document,  from our Research Department.  Thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker,  and hon. Obiga Kania. The issue of definition has always been as pledged by philosophers. But you see,  you can define something conceptually or by pointing out that something.  Here under 71 it reads: "a political party in a multi-party system shall conform to the following principles."  But you could say the same thing by saying, a multi-party system shall be characterised by the following.  That is a linguistic matter.  

MR. MUTYABA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would request hon. Obiga Kania to explain to me something which I have failed to understand.  Because in the Constitution for example,  it is provided that we are going to have different systems.  Mentioned are the Movement System, the Multi-party System,  and any other.  Now, it is incumbent on Parliament to pass laws for all these systems.  We have passed a law to govern the Movement System,  the Constitution enjoins us as Parliament to also pass a law to define the parameters under which the political parties would operate.  Let me ask hon. Obiga Kania:  during the campaigns for the referendum,  will the Movement campaign in terms of individuals?  Because the organs are there, we have a secretariat,  we have directors one of whom is him.  So when we go for a referendum,  is the Movement going to campaign as individuals?  Because then we would say we know these people believe in a system,  we do not need these organs to campaign for this system.  

If it is not so,  if the Movement is going to campaign under the law which established the Movement organs which define the legal framework under which the Movement operates,  then why do you in this case say that it is alright for people who believe in multi-party to campaign as individuals;  that they do not need a legal framework under which they can operate,  while it is good for us in the Movement to operate under a legal framework?  I just want clarification.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  This is a Bill  -(Interruption)-  I do not know what you will prescribe for the Movement,  how he wants me to campaign.  But the principle is one,  I want fairness.  What applies to the multi-party political system,  I want it to apply to me when we are canvassing for votes during this referendum.  With you permission,  Mr. Speaker,  if the Minister has any more details to satisfy the Member,  I have no objection in him raising it at this point,  subject to your permission.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Since I am a Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs I should explain this.  Under the Referendum Bill, we follow Article 271(2) which speaks about any person canvassing.  We interpret that to mean a natural person.  And the Constitution also defines a person in 257(10)(b) to include persons.  Therefore as it is under this Bill that the Movement Act created a corporation out of Membership of the Movement.  Under this Bill, the corporation is not going to canvass.  It is not being asked, it is not being in fact authorised to canvass.  It is only members of the Movement who were not incorporated.  

Incidentally,  if we went ahead and passed the Political Organisations Bill as it is now,  clause 7(2) of that Bill makes political organisations corporations.  So if we do pass it in that form, it will take corporation parties outside of this 271(2).  It is like saying that now since you are corporations you may not canvass,  unless of course this Parliament Amends 271(2),  it is up to someone to propose that.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have two small points I would like to clear and I will give Floor to other Members.  I have no problem with the passing of the Political Organisations Bill in so far as the owner of that Bill deems to bring it at any time appropriate to his programme.  I have no problem.  I am not saying that because the Referendum Bill is being passed therefore the Political Organisations Bill should never be passed.  That is not the point that I am raising, no.  I am saying it is principally wrong to tie the passing of the Referendum Bill to the Political Organisations Bill, because they have two different objectives as spelled out in their memorandum.  

Finally, my view is that hose of us who say the Political Organisations Bill should not be passed now are not saying it because we want to take advantage of the weaknesses of political parties.  It will be wrong to pass a Bill here as some Members have intended to argue,   that because the Political Organisations particularly the parties are not properly organised, therefore we should rush to take advantage.  That is also not the reason why I oppose the tying of the Referendum to the Political Organisations Bill.  I think it is better that we do the correct thing irrespective of whether one party is strong or weak on the ground.

In summary therefore, I am appealing to this House to do the service that it has been called upon to do.  To refer to the people the decision that was not completed in the Constituent Assembly by passing the Referendum Bill into an Act very expeditiously so that the people can exercise their power.  I thank you,  Mr. Speaker.

MR. BAGUNYWA ARTHUR (Mityana South, Mityana):   Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  About the time we went into recess,  there was a lot of talk about boycotting the referendum.  Unlike my other hon. Colleagues,  we had to go and hold rallies in our areas.  I happen to have an area where those in the urban areas are pretty well educated.  As a matter of fact,  in my own village there are four people with masters degrees,  there is one with a doctorate and these can pause some very difficult questions.  And I believe I am not the only one who is facing that type of situation.  I thought however that it was necessary for me as their Member of Parliament to at least explain why it was necessary for them not to boycott the referendum.  

I was basing my argument on Article 271(2) and I read it to them. It reads: "Two years before the expiry of the term of the first Parliament elected under the Constitution,  any person shall be free to canvass for public support for a political system of his or her choice for purposes of a referendum."  Then they took me up on this one they said, 'alright, what is a political system?'  If we do not have a genuine choice there will be two or three mentioned.  So we went to Article 69.  Article 69 of course gives us the three systems:  the Movement Political System under 69(2) - this is all familiar to everybody,  the Multi-party Political System,  and any other democratic and representative political system.  

I thought I would explain it from there further and I said, 'well, we are going to choose from those three.  We already have the Political Organisations Bill with us,' because when we went into recess this had been Tabled,  I thought I was on safe ground there.  Then they said, 'alright,  we can see there is the Movement Act now that has been decided,  how do you decide on that one without deciding on what the others will be?'  We went to Article 71 which is also familiar now.  I was talking like an informed lay man, but I have also been listening to the learned members of the legal profession.  That way we can gather more information,  and I can be persuaded,  or probably not be persuaded,  to join one side or the other.  

I was pursuing the fact that there will be a choice and it will be a genuine choice.  And I said, 'Parliament has the responsibility to give you a genuine choice and since the Political Organisations Bill has been Tabled,  we will make sure you have a genuine choice.'  But the choice,  in my opinion,  goes beyond the legalities of the Constitution.  It says under 69(1): "The people of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice." These words 'to choose' and 'their choice through regular, free and fair elections or referenda',  were pursuing that goal of the people's right to choose.

I heard it said here,  for those of us who were not in the Constituent Assembly,  that you actually examined the principles of all good Constitutions, although I suppose even bad ones started with a preamble and gave us these principles.  The principle of unity and the principle of peace,  these are very powerful words,  but sometimes you have to go beyond the obvious.  For unity,  but national unity is what we are talking about.  Even the 1967 Constitution did talk about that,  unfortunately in sympathy with our aspirations for national unity,  we ended up this way.  For peace we ended up with war, for prosperity we ended up with poverty;  freedom, we did not achieve any political freedom or anything of that kind.  And these have been repeated in the 1995 Constitution.  But we have gone even beyond that,  we have added a few others.  

For peace,  I happen to have worked for UNESCO and I was not only just an employee of UNESCO,  but I was the first Ugandan on the Executive Board of UNESCO.  And we said peace is not the absence of war.  Some people argue that Uganda is peaceful just because there is no war right here.  But there is even war elsewhere within Uganda!  So these principles are important,  I want us to go to the principles rather than the legalities.  There is equality.  Different interpretations of equality have been given and we are arguing about the unequal opportunities given to groups,  sometimes to individuals,  but we are seeking equality for both individuals and groups.  

There is democracy.  That of course is very difficult because it all depends how you understand it.  The best we can take always is Abraham Lincoln's definition.  For freedom,  we discussed a lot about this freedom of the individual and freedom of groups,  in UNESCO.  It was always that the individual's freedom to associate was seen as a fundamental freedom.  Social justice;  this depends on how you understand it.  We have in Plato's Republic one character - and I am sure Plato meant to ridicule him - who was asked to define justice and he said, 'that which is advantageous to the stronger.'  And of course we have many incidences where might is right but I do not subscribe to that.  

That is however not my understanding of justice.  I have been heard on this Floor before to have said that there is a difference between development and progress.  We may not have achieved social progress, social economic progress because our people have no jobs, because our people are still poor in the rural areas and so forth,   but we see a lot of skyscrapers in Kampala.  So progress is not the same as development and there is over-emphasis on development.  I say,  why can we not go beyond the legalities of this Constitution?   I mean,  it is true one can explain under Article 271 that a person has now been given their status of a corporate group,  but a corporate group has to be seen in terms of a political system.  And the political system,  under Article 71,  does not really exist.  

The existing political parties may probably conform to the provision that every political party shall have a national character.  What about those that might come under category (3) then?  It is provided for that membership of a political party shall not be based on sex,  ethnicity, religion or other sectional divisions;  that the eternal organization of a political party shall conform to the democratic principles enshrined in the Constitution;  but how do we know if we have not yet enacted the law?  How do we elect members of the national organs of a political party?  They are not there.  They cannot be even elected.  All this remains undone,  and when we take away the Political Organisations Bill,  we are going to do precisely that.  I was keeping my people quiet because they knew they would have an opportunity to make a genuine choice based on all this.  Now I do not know how to go back to them and say, 'look,  you have to join in the referendum even though what I said earlier has not been done.'

I have to respect my intellectual integrity on this point and that is why I go along with our Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee report.  I think if we are going to be fair,  and if we are going to be seen not to subscribe to the view of justice that was given in Plato's Republic,  we have to start with the Political Organisations Bill to make things clear,  to level the ground.  That is my conviction now.  I come to this House open minded,  I am still open to suggestion and persuasion but I am not yet persuaded by some of the arguments brought forward for rejecting the Committee's recommendation.

Before I give up the Floor,  I envisage a situation where maybe two years or more from now, someone will come and argue that Movement system has to be suppressed or perhaps rejected 'because there was so much corruption during the time of the Movement.'  I am not saying I would agree with that one but two years from now,  because there was evidence,  they would say, 'there was a lot of corruption,  every Auditor General's report that came out, almost every page read like a criminal charge sheet: this has been stolen,  there is no accountability, no signature from every Ministry...'  And they are going to use that kind of argument.  They would say, 'look, there was liquidation of so many of these banks,  therefore the Movement system does not work.  

When that happens, are we going to reject it because of what has been said?  I would not say that would be right. I sympathise with some young people who have only vicarious experiences of political parties,  what they read from books and so on,  but they have not lived through it.  What are they going to base their judgement on?  They have never seen a political party in operation,  they only act on hearsay.  And politicians are angular, you know.  Sometimes you just go there knowing that somebody is playing tricks,  but all the same you go there to be entertained.  Are they going to act on rumours,  or whatever they have been told?  They want to live through it.  They want to be able to make a genuine choice.  

If we are not going to repeat the mistakes we have made in the past,  and I think our actions have genuine intentions,  but the methods we use have been all wrong.  That is why in peace we ended up with war.  National unity was not national unity.  Prosperity turned into poverty and so forth.  I beg my hon. Members of the House not to repeat these mistakes this time.  We are at crossroads,  let us do things properly.

I will go along with the Committee's report.  We start with the Political Organisations Bill,  for that is the best and logical explanation to my electorate.  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  

MR. OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to begin by thanking the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for a very good report,  and very good guidance that they were able to present before this House. 

I am increasingly alarmed at the unusual leadership style in some quarters of this Government,  style which is so manipulative,  style so deceptive,  style so tricky!  When we are playing a football match,  as we are about to score,  the goal posts are lifted and put aside,  and we will never score.  Mr. Speaker, this does not make a decent match at all.  From Legal Notice No.1,  which brought Movement Government into the seat of power of the present country we have had to see only one single political organisation,  in the name of the Movement.  It is the same Movement which proclaimed Legal Notice 1 that created its existence,  the same Movement that visualised and put in place the Odoki Commission,  the same Movement which after some time later extended itself.  It is the same Movement which is today talking about referendum.  

If this House will recall,  when we were implementing Article 70 of the Constitution,  we all got conscripted into the Movement and now we are asking our own organisation for the referendum?  It will therefore mean perhaps differentiating between Movement three, one, one, vis-a-vis Movement two, two, two.  Mr. Speaker,  a political system which has people and goes ahead to block such people from freely associating,  from freely exercising their constitutional right,  from freely exercising their God given right,  is bound to face a revolution.  It is bound to face a crisis.  I find it very difficult to understand for some Members of this House to argue that the Referendum Bill before us now clearly gives the other camp vis-a-vis the Movement camp.  Where is the alternative camp to that of the Movement?  I find it defeating.

There was a question raised by hon. Dick Nyai as to whether the other side,  the so-called multi-party side can be found everywhere in this country just as the Movement can be found everywhere?  How are we going to sensitize other people beside us here in this House?  The other side which is opposed to the Movement,  who will listen to them?  It is just like having two aspiring  candidates presenting their interests on the nomination day and then at the end of the nomination day only one of them has his papers correct.  Do you go ahead organising a joint rally for two when actually only one qualified and was duly nominated? I find this difficult to understand.  

Since 1986 the NRM Government has put in place mesmerizing programmes that tended to delude and persuade people of Uganda to think that perhaps one day one good thing will be done about the political life of Uganda,  but where! We have to keep abreast with the world around us.  We are making a law,  Mr. Speaker,  which must be in place over and above our time in politics today.  We have to bear in mind that the law we are making to day will remain intact when we leave our political offices.  

Political parties have done a lot for this country.  Given the correct leadership,  given the proper organisations,  I am sure they can still do a lot.  I was in full agreement with the former Army Commander hon. Mugisha Muntu when he said,  'it is not the army which is bad but the leadership.' I would want also to say this can be the case with political parties as well.  It is not the political parties which are bad but it is the leadership.  If we argue out that political parties messed this country therefore we do not want them,  can we not argue that UPDF is messing this country so we do not want army,  or UNLA messed this country therefore we do not want an army;  what will UPDF be doing therefore?  I think it is a good approach to organise the society to meet the decent requirements at the time we are talking about.  

I want to quote from the 28th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference Report, 1982, Eldin Bahamas.  This was part of the speech made by one who was the Speaker of this House some ten or so years ago.  He is now His Excellency the Uganda High Commissioner to Nairobi,  H.E Butagira.  He said: "In Uganda people have chosen the multi-party democracy.  We have a strong and effective position in Parliament.  Those who are carrying out campaigns in foreign capitals against our newly established democracy,  are voices in the wilderness.  They speak for nobody in the country,  they should be denied a platform.  We need your sympathy and encouragement.  There is no alternative to democracy."  This is now a Ugandan High Commissioner to Nairobi, Kenya.  

Earlier on I made a statement that by Article 70 of the Constitution,  all of us have been conscripted to the Movement.  I did say that to carry out an organised referendum,  we are organising a referendum against ourselves,  if we have failed to put in place political parties ahead of the Referendum Bill.  Mr. Speaker,  it is obvious that even the suggestions and proposals in this Bill - I would like to take time to go back and look at it.  There is one giving authority and power to the Electoral Commission.  The Electoral Commission was by law established,  its membership were nominated by the President of the Republic of Uganda,  who is also Chairman of NEC of the Movement.  Cannot that defeat your thinking that you are the reason to suspect?  That is, it is only fools and children who bite the finger that feeds them.  If you give me a job and I begin acting against you, it is very unlikely that you will maintain me.

Political parties did quite a lot in this country and I have said this again and I will repeat it.  I think the only one thing to do,  as it was proposed by the Political Organisations Bill,  is that the Minister in charge,  without wasting time,  should bring back that Bill.  He is arguing,  Mr. Speaker,  that the provisions of the Bill were greatly altered.  Maybe,  I would say,  it is his argument which is greatly altered,  because he would have shown to this House how to make good.  There are things that have been referred from this House,  only to see them back within the earliest possible time.  It is not yet too late, Mr. Speaker.  

To conclude my contribution,  I want to say one thing.  I would like to reach a situation where any section of our political community will advocate against or will do otherwise.  Can I say that people who boycotted and walked away during CA did not fail?  If they lost,  they would not have been here and such Articles like 270 would not have been in the Constitution,  neither would you have got anything to do with multi-partyism in the Constitution.  It is because of their walking out that the parties were blessed with the sympathy.  That is why they had the shame and said, 'okay, let us entreat those who have walked out,  we give them this.'  

Incidentally we want more!  Mr. Speaker,  let us form a Uganda which is honest,  a Uganda which is united,  a Uganda which will prosper.  I would like to request that the Referendum Bill be withdrawn and Political Organisations Bill be put in place so that the sequence can follow.  I beg to present.

LT. KINOBE JAMES (Katikamu North, Luwero): I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to support the motion that the Bill be read a Second Time.  I also want to thank the Committee for having made the report the way they made it,  but point out my observation that they included an unfortunate clause which has hijacked the entire debate,  from the Referendum Bill to the Political Organisations Bill.  The clause has done a disservice to the Referendum Bill which I believe has to be passed if we were really the democratic Ugandans who believe in constitutionalism. 

The Constitution dictates that we should have this law enacted by midnight of 2nd July, 1999.  With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I wish to add my voice to those who are urging the Government to bring up the Political Organisations Bill after the Referendum Bill so that we debate the merits and demerits of whether we should have the parties or not,  in that Bill,  other than diverting attention when we are actually debating the Referendum Bill.

When you look at the statistics used by the Odoki Commission,  the controversy about the question we are actually debating is not accidental.  The elite,  from the LC 4 level upwards, individuals and groups,  on the question as to whether we should have Multi-partyism or Movement,  50 percent of those supported that we should ban parties.  The peasants at LC 1 level and below,  95 percent said otherwise.  The consistence of this debate among the elite is actually historical.  When you look at the Odoki report,  it examined the submissions and the submissions summarised the views of the people into four systems.  There was a system being talked about,  of course which had also been in place and this was the One Party system.  This is where Parties operated up to a time when one of the Parties declared all the others illegal,  took over all the powers and declared that everybody to belonged to that particular party - banning all the others.

The Report goes ahead to define the multi-party system as a system where people are allowed to organise themselves in small groups vying for State power.  It we went ahead to define the Movement system as a system which includes everybody irrespective of his political belief.  Finally it indicated that there were desires of a combined system,  a system which would combine both Multi-party and Movement.  Because of practicability, the report went ahead to say that it was not compatible to have both systems operating at the same time.  I believe that is the background  the Members in the CA analysed when they reached an impasse as to which system we should adopt.  According to their submissions,  Ugandans had values and values for both systems.  

Those who had wanted multi-partyism did not want it to start immediately,  they wanted a healing period.  Those who had suffered out of parties did not want parties for over 20 years.  I read some documents from my constituency whereby someone had written that, 'we do not want parties, indefinitely.'  Bearing in mind that society and democracy grows,  in the wisdom of the Members who were in the CA,  they provided this arrangement that over time,  we should subject this view to Ugandans to find out their views.  If they say, 'lock out parties for another period,' we lock them out.  If they say, 'open up,'  we open up the political space.  It is in this spirit that I support this motion to allow Ugandans the opportunity to say whether they still want us to be in power as the Movement or they want us to go out and restore multi-partyism.

One factor which is intriguing me is that when NRM,  then the NRC,  extended itself without the consent of the people,  one Member of that same House walked out and was applauded by the multi-partyists as a principled man.  'How could this Movement extend itself without consulting the people?'  he asked.  The Movementists,  having learnt the lesson that it was wrong,  have now agreed to consult the people whether we should extend or not. Surprisingly, the same people are saying, 'do not go to the people.'   Where is the principle and logic behind this?

Our friends have been saying that they want to go to the people as multi-partyists.  But of course because of legal arrangements,  the law does not allow them.  When we want to make a law that allows them to go,  again they turn around and say that they do not want to go talk to the people.  Where is the principle and the logic?  Mr. Speaker, I want to urge Members that this country is ours.  We have gone through a lot.  It has not only been in Luwero,  it has been in Gulu,  it has been in Soroti,  it has been in Kasese,  it has been in Kampala,  it has been everywhere.  Why do we not sober up and reconcile and see what we want for the good of this country?  

This debate would not have taken this trend if we had all what we have gone through in our memory.  For that matter,  I agree with people that instead of shelving the Political Organisations Bill indefinitely,  let us have it after this Bill.  Because definitely even those who think we should have had the Political Organisations Bill,  if you are really sincere you can realise that we are time barred,  we cannot have it otherwise.  But let us have it after and discuss the merits and demerits.  Let us discuss what should be in that Bill,  whether we retain Article 269 as it is,  whether we improve on it.  Whatever we want should come when we are discussing the Political Organisations Bill at its time, not when we are discussing the Referendum Bill.

Having said that,  I want to go to another point which has also been echoed by so many Members,  fairness.  I totally agree with every Member that we should be fair, we should appear to be fair, we should be just to all parties in this referendum,  not only the multi-partyists,  but even supporters of the Movement system, the people of Uganda.  We want Ugandans,  at the end of the day, to vote according to what they should have voted for,  not to be disturbed by other sentimental issues attached to what we are going to tell them in the process of canvassing for support.

I also demand hon. Members in this House to look at the fairness in the Movement system and to those who subscribe to the Movement ideology.  I want Members to examine the membership because many Members have said that the Movement is properly organised.  Fine, it has an Act of Parliament,  but let us look critically at the membership of these organs which we are talking about.  You will remember that these Members,  from the time of elections, are cohered into the Movement by law.  What is the opportunity for the Members who are there by conviction?  I think that is what brings out the differences which Members were talking about,  that maybe this one is dilute and the other one is a concentrated Movementist.  Those are conceptual things.  

But I want to look at this House giving an opportunity to Members who believe conceptually, by conviction,  that they want the ideology and not belonging to the organ simply because the law prescribes that.  The people we are talking about,  who have been in this system of the Movement which they say,  the Movement has monopolised power.  We have had hon. Ssemogerere,  he was a leader for nine years in this very system.  I do not know whether he could turn round and say we have monopolised power when a whole leader of the party was sharing power!   Where even individuals who fought for it never knew where he was.  Who of the two was actually benefiting out of the sweat and blood of the struggle?  The soldiers who fought,  on reaching Kampala they had to continue up to the fields there at the frontline,  where they went on dying, and where they are up to day.  So who is the beneficiary of this very system?  Is it the soldier who fought or Ssemogerere who benefitted out of it?  

Let us also look further.  We had Ssebagala,  a Mayor in this city.  Do we also say that we monopolised power?  We have Ssebaana today,  who I believe was elected on merit, though other people say otherwise.  So, where is the fairness to those who support the system by conviction,  not those who are there by law?  The organs we are talking about,  that the Movement is properly organised,  which are even giving false confidence to those who believe in the Movement,  are there by law.  Many of them are there to eat salaries while many others may be there for selfish reasons,  not to advance the ideologies they pretend to stand for.

These organs we are talking about,  the LCs,  I understand in Lira one Mr. Otoa is the Chairman of LCs.  Is he going to support me when I am advocating for the Movement ideology or I need another individual?  Hon. Members,  be fair to the Movement also,  because many have talked of fairness on the other side of the multi-partyists,  I request Members to be fair to the Movementists by conviction,  not by law.  I have observed several meetings in this Parliament and in the Parliamentary Consultative group where very strong multi-partyists have always attended Movement caucus meetings and one could not tell them to get out because by law they are also Members.  Immediately after they go and sit in the multi-party caucus where I cannot be invited.  Where is the fairness?  If they can come to where it is all inclusive, why can I not attend to where it is all exclusive?  

Hon. Members who support the Movement by conviction,  do not have false confidence that you have organs.  These organs are there for organisational structures to deliver services to the people,  not for political reasons.  Let us create organs in this law which will allow those who believe in the ideology by conviction, whether it is the multi-party system whereby people who by conviction also believe in the same ideology,  to go together in a group and vie for State power;  or the Movement system where people who believe in the ideology that individuals go and vie to get access to leadership on individual merit.  That is the fundamental distinction between the two ideologies which you can call multi-party or Movement.  Let us create,  in the framework provisions,  those who believe in either side of the ideology to form all structures from the top to the bottom - at village levels. 

People are talking of the Movement structures being organised.  Yes,  let us have a parallel structure similar to the Movement and call it a forum for multi-party democracy.  Let it have a Secretariat from the top at the district,  let it go to the village levels as a forum of all those people who share the views of multi-party democracy.  We are also going,  in that consortium of people who believe that people should compete individually,  to create our structure,  separate from hon. Obiga Kania's Secretariat,  I do not want it. 

Those people were appointed as public officers and they are eating their salaries.  We need people who can voluntarily sacrifice and offer themselves out of conviction.  Members who were appointed as public officers at the Secretariat,  and are getting public money,  should not participate in our political convictions,  after all they are supposed to serve every body.  But individually if they want to campaign then let them cross over from the Secretariat,  resign or take leave and join the task force to sell the ideologies.  At the end of the exercise, they will go back to their jobs.  But do not be convinced and confused that you have the organs.  These organs,  to tell you,  are not there for political reasons. These organs are structurally organised by the Act of Parliament to deliver services in the system which is described by the Movement Act in the Constitution of Uganda.

Those who believe in the Movement as ideology lost what we stood for. For example we lost the word resistance,  everywhere.  Those are the things we used to associate ourselves with.  Can we have an opportunity to go and fall back to what we strongly stood for,  without breaking the law?  Because according to the Movement Act, I cannot tell hon. Lukyamuzi,  who was one time a member in our National Conference there, not to come to Movement meetings because he does not believe in my ideology. But he can tell me not to go to his Party CP because I am not a member. Is that fair?  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, -(Interruptions).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker,  and I thank hon. Lt. Kinobe for giving way.  The point advanced by the speaker holding the Floor is very controversial,  and the way my name is mentioned,  my eyebrows are raised.  I have never imagined any occasion where I have personally participated in any Movement caucus.  Could he tell this House whether I have ever participated in any of them?

LT. KINOBE:  Mr. Speaker, I intended to stop at that.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, can you make your concluding remarks.

LT. KINOBE: I would not want to come to the details,  because hon. Ken. Lukyamuzi knows that. Perhaps that is why he added the word personally,  but you see if one gets allowances as a Member from any sitting,  I take it as a participation in what is being done. 

I want to conclude by saying that each side has a task,  whether it is multi-party side or Movement.  The Movement side already has a disadvantage of being incumbent.  I had the opportunity to interact with many of the multi-party advocates in discussions,  and on many occasions the discussions on the referendum never come up.  Instead we discuss the actions taken by the Government in place today.  You will always find debates dominated by corruption allegations,  all other related things in the running of the Government,  but the debate is always biased towards that.  So,  I must take it that being incumbent is sometimes a disadvantage in some areas and of course an advantage in other areas.   

When analysing both systems,  I looked at it as a balance sheet where the Movement side may have a favourable balance in some circumstances and unfavourable balance in other circumstances.  The same also applies to parties.  When people say that they want parties,  definitely you reflect on the history of this country.  Mr. Speaker, Members should remember that when we went through campaigns,  there are Members who stood in their constituencies and vowed to fight the Movement,  which they have actually done and they are heroes in their constituencies.  Likewise there are Members who stood in constituencies and vowed to support the Movement,  which they have done,  and they are also heroes in their constituencies - but all of us are here.  All of us are trying to serve the people who voted us into power.  Because the Movement is all inclusive, let us only iron out where there are inconsistencies.  

Is it because one wants to remain in the limelight that one makes it his or her duty to attack the system at every opportunity or may be there is some genuine reason why one is attacking the system?  Why do we not give you an alternative and time to set up your task force, to go out and convince people on why you think the Movement is very bad?  Why not also allow me out of the formal secretariats and all those other structures to convince the people why I think the Movement type of politics should continue?  But all in all, we should be fair to both sides, we should allow everybody access to the people so that we can manage to convert the minority to the majority because today's minority can be tomorrow's majority.  

For purposes of guiding our people,  there is an Amendment which I also intend to support as we move on.  We should have means of helping the people identify themselves with the sides they want.  We should have means in this law of creating these organs at the top,  for example a secretariat at the national level, which becomes the principle.  Because without a principle you can not have an agent.  We could provide for a secretariat at the top,  say a secretariat for multi-party democracy or secretariat for Movement politics.  That one becomes the principle so that all groups which want to sell their views become agents of those two contending sides and go down to the people at village level.  Let each group be given State money,  and where groups want to supplement the State funding, then those who support those sides by conviction,  will supplement voluntarily.

I wanted to talk about where this law limits the media.  Given my experience,  Mr. Speaker,  during discussions both in public and on radios,  I share the concern raised by the report.  It will be very dangerous to restrict the media in the dissemination of the information as debate go on.  It will be very dangerous to even prescribe penalties for people who own these radio stations.  From my observations, callers-in to the studios during discussions,  phone directly and management has very little to do with it.  And the moment he starts editing the callers, they will shift from that radio.  These are commercial radio stations.  Let us go out and use them as best as we can.  There is no reason of legislating against the media which has done a tremendous job to get us where we are today.

Lastly,  in politics convincing and lobbying your friends is a continuous process. It is dangerous to think that one should perceive what the other one wants him or her to see immediately.  Do not hate someone for not seeing what you want him or her to see immediately.  It is a lobbying process,  let us continue sensitizing each other, continue convincing each other, continue lobbying each other.  At the end of the day, persuade everybody,  so that we have a free and fair vote.  Let us do a service to the people of Uganda by enabling them to determine their destiny.  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think we all appreciate that this is a very important debate in our political programme,  and as Members of Parliament we must be very clear about what it all means before we pronounce ourselves.  You will all have an opportunity at an appropriate time to raise some of these specific issues which I allowed you to dwell on,  although you should have only discussed the general principles of this Bill.  In fact some people almost cited clauses,  but this is all part of democracy and good governance.  You will have another opportunity.  I wish at this juncture to call upon the Chairperson of the Committee to wind up.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  With due respect to you,  Mr. Speaker,  it is on record that for the last four days or so I have expressed interest in contributing to this important motion.  May I beg you with humility that you give me some opportunity to make a contribution?

THE SPEAKER:  I think all of us here,  including the Speaker,  would have wished to contribute but it is not possible for to do so.  You will have an opportunity hon. Lukyamuzi to debate each of the clauses or even to move an Amendment.  There you can make your speech or part of the speech that you would like to make now.  We have some constraints in terms of time,  but you will have an opportunity to say something.  Mr. Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take this opportunity to thank all Members who have contributed to this report. I want to categorize those contributions.  The first group are those who out rightly opposed the Bill,  for example hon. Okello-Okello,  hon. Onzima and hon. Dick Nyai.  To those I say that this matter of the referendum is a matter of the Constitution.  It is a matter of law, and really the Bill has to be enacted in order to conform with the law.  There are no two ways about it.  
The second group are those who had reservations about the report. Let me begin with hon. Elly Tumwine. When hon. Elly Tumwine begun by invoking the Lord to assist him in his contribution, I sat back very comfortably.  Half way through his speech I got very alarmed.  Three quarters through his speech I begun wondering whether the Lord had heard him.  By the time he finished I was sure the Lord had not heard him.  Mr. Speaker, he did say that when the people who are opposed to the referendum found that the referendum was failing,  they turned around and said the Political Organisations Bill should be debated first.  This is not the case.  The report, -(Maj. Gen. Tumwine rose_). 
MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  During my contribution yesterday,  hon. Wacha raised that same sentence in almost the same words that the Chairperson has raised it,  on a point of order.  You made a ruling from what I had been contributing.  Is it in order for the Chairperson to bring it back when you made a ruling on it yesterday?  

THE SPEAKER:  Well,  I do not know what he was going to draw from that, because he had just made the statement,  he had not really completed.  So I am not in a position to tell whether he is in order or out of order.  Maybe you wait until you see how he uses it?

MR. OGALO:  In arriving at that conclusion,  it was not that it was the Committee's own thinking that the Political Organisations Bill should come first. We took into account contributions by many people who appeared before us.  We took into account the pastors of the Church, the Uganda Human Rights Commission,  all these called for the debate on the Political Organisations Bill to come first.  So the impression should not be that we are actually trying to smuggle in the piece for debate.

On the question of sides,  this came up because of exactly the question of whether there would be anybody to be able to talk for the other side.  I do not know whether we can be able to improve on Lt. Kinobe's suggestion,  whether we can be able to improve on it and work it out as a way forward.  Mr. Speaker, we are not tying the two Bills together as hon. Obiga Kania says.  Article 271(2) must be together with Article 69(1) of the Constitution.  Hon. Wangubo did mention that we are trying to bring the Political Organisations' Bill first in order to turn the Movement into a political party, yet the Political Organisations Bill does not have anything of the sort.  
On the question of Article 94,  we believe this is a Bill for the Executive,  but we have only recommended to you hon. Members, and it is up to you to make the decision on this matter.

The question of us having included an unfortunate clause,  I would like to point out that Justice Odoki came to the Committee and said that in his view the Political Organisations Bill should have come immediately after the Movement Act.  So, Mr. Speaker, in winding up,  since I am told time is short, I only wish to thank all Members for their contribution and pray that what we deliberate here after shall be for the good of this country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Speaker, the speeches you have heard actually, as hon. Chairperson has just said, fall into three categories.  Those who say an outright no to the referendum,  those who subscribed to the view that there should be a referendum whether we like it or not,  and many more Members of Parliament who are saying, 'let us have the referendum but let us also be fair to the other side.'

I am saying that the Cabinet has at no time said it does not want to be fair to anyone at all.  I have said before that the Political Organisations Bill was so amended by the Committee when I saw it,  that we have to go back to the Committee,  and to Cabinet,  to look at it.  I have not said I have withdrawn the Bill,  I could have done it under a certain rule of procedure,  but I have not done so.  So the cry really is for fairness.  The cry is for fairness.  Are we going into a referendum with only one side because under the law everybody is a member of the Movement?  Are there going to be two sides?  

I am saying - someone used the word obscurantism - let me tell you this,  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members,  if someone wanted to challenge me to speak for christianity and said, 'but do not say, you Mayanja Nkangi that you are born again by the grace of God.' I would go and speak for the principles of christianity and make my point.  Similarly I am saying, anyone who has got anything to say about the Movement system, call it movementism as a philosophy,  as a governance system,  he or she should be able to do so.  Anyone who wants to say no the Movement is intrinsically wrong,  corruption or no corruption,  whatever is being alleged.  That person should be able to say, 'I do not like this system,'  and that person should not be blamed because for the good of this country,  that must be said.  I am therefore saying that anybody can come here with an amendment.

In consonance in fact with the Constitution,  Article 271(2) says that any person will be free to canvass for any side.  The CA did not say, 'so and so should go and canvass.'  It is not imperative,  it says anyone who has got anything to say should go and canvass.  The Constitution says any persons means persons.  So the question of identification of who is going to stand for this side is to me really theoretical.  The moment you say you do not want the Movement system,  you are going to see someone stand here to say they want the Movement system.  The moment you say, 'I do not want multi-partyism,'  I am pretty sure I am going to see some people who are against me.  And we are saying, let these people organise themselves that way so that in fact they are formally facilitated by the Electoral Commission. 

If however the question is, 'should the political parties do come before the Referendum Bill is passed,'  I am begging Parliament to say, 'because of the constraint of time,  let us have this Bill out of the way so that whoever wants can start canvassing for the side he or she wants by latest July the 3rd.'  The other matter will come up.  I have no problem with it.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you,  Mr.Minister, for allowing me to ask for this clarification.  It would appear to me that your explanation is not giving me the answer to the requests that have been made by various people;  that although we may pass this Referendum Bill,  we also like to have the Political Organisations Bill  brought in as soon as possible,  before we actually start canvassing.  Are you now telling me categorically -(Interjections)- I am asking the Minister,  if the Members could just be patient.  Are you telling us categorically that you are not going to bring this,  because in any case according to you, you can campaign anyway without the need for the Political Organisations Bill being brought here and passed?  I would like to have that categorical statement.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: As I understand it,  the issue is whether or not the Political Organisations Bill is going to be debated first before the Referendum Bill.  That is actually the issue.  I am not saying anything at all about the other Bill,  that it will not be debated by Parliament.  Indeed that Bill came to Parliament because Cabinet wanted it to.  I could have withdrawn it.  So if you want the answer whether or not this bill will ever come here, I am saying the Cabinet has not closed its doors on this issue. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, the motion of the Minister was that this Bill be read a Second Time.  There is also a report of the Committee not only opposing certain amendments but also making an important point,  namely that the Political Organisations Bill should precede or rather the enactment of the Political Organisations Bill should precede the enactment of this one.  This is contained in the report. If you look at page seven the last but three paragraph,  the Committee is of the view that the Political Organisations Bill whose report it had already concluded, should precede this Bill.  This is an important observation and I think it is a recommendation on which you have to pronounce yourselves as a House.  

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Considering the importance this House attaches to the report of the relevant Committees and considering the time within which the Referendum Bill must be passed into an Act and other reasons which I propose to give later if my motion is seconded, I beg to move that the sentence in the Committee's report which reads: "The committee is of the view that the Political Organisations Bill whose report it had already concluded should precede this bill,"  be deleted.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Speaker, I have the highest regard for Committee reports and I have always considered them the most important tool by which this Parliament can make its views known and felt by the Executive.  Therefore the report and recommendations made therein should be implementable.  However,  in view of the present recommendation which is a subject of my motion,  you will notice that this Parliament has gone very far in considering and particularly concluding the general debate on that particular Bill,  the Referendum Bill, 1999.  

This Parliament was sworn in on the 2nd of July and according to the relevant constitutional provisions,  this Referendum Bill should be in place by the 2nd of July in order to fulfil the constitutional provisions of the 1995 Constitution.  It is therefore my considered view that if we adopted this report with that provision,  we would be passing a nullity whose effect in terms of implementation would not help this Parliament and therefore that particular recommendation should be removed in spite of its importance.  It is a very important view but my emphasis is on the time frame,  in order to give ourselves time to finish the Referendum and Other Provisions Bill,  in time.  I beg to move.

MR. MUTYABA:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  Without addressing myself to the substantive reasons or grounds for the motion,  the speaker has not told us under what rules he is moving the motion,  and there is normally a procedure which has to be followed in moving motions.  Normally we need notice.  He did not say anything about that.  So procedurally I think I will oppose the motion because it is not engrained in any rule of our rules of procedure.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  I am moving under rule 44(a) which says: "Any of the following motions may be moved without notice - (a) motion on a question which the Speaker has proposed,"  and I take that the Speaker had proposed that particular item on the Floor.

MR. MUTYABA: Unless maybe my ears were blocked,  I have not heard you, Mr. Speaker, proposing a question on the report of the Committee.  In which case,  the Member could proceed under rule 44(a).

THE SPEAKER:  I think this is a very simple matter.  There is a  motion on the Floor. There is a report which deals with the subject matter of the motion on the Floor,  namely that the referendum bill be read a Second Time.  That report of the Committee is actually saying more or less the same thing,  but proposing certain amendments.  The same report gives a qualification that the Referendum Bill should be preceded by the Political Organisations Bill.  To me it is one and the same thing.  We are discussing the same thing except that this aspect of the Committee you must say whether you accept it because if you do, then at Committee stage anybody can say, 'but we adopted that report with that provision.'  

I want to proceed this way.  The question being proposed is that this Bill be read a Second Time.  If you are going to say, 'no, the Political Organisations Bill precedes this,'  you are actually saying that this Bill should not be read a Second time.  That is my understanding.  Proceed.

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. The motion moved by hon. Obiga Kania seeks to get this House to delete that particular recommendation.  But I wanted to move a motion to amend,  rather than delete it.  Would it not be better for me to move a motion to amend that proposal rather than delete it and then my motion will be overtaken, if it is deleted?

THE SPEAKER: No.  You speak against his motion so that it is defeated.  

MR. MUTYABA:  I would like to move an amendment to the motion proposed by hon. Obiga Kania,  under rule 45(1) of our rules of procedure,  to read as follows: "That the House proceeds to consider the report of the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Political Organisations Bill immediately after the passing of the Referendum Bill, 1998 and pass it before 31st July, 1999,"  for the reasons I am going to give. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are now two motions.  Is it seconded by the way?  There is a motion on the Floor by hon. Obiga Kania,  now there is another motion amending hon. Obiga Kania's motion.  We will proceed this way.  We will discuss and dispose of hon. Mutyaba's motion first.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking your clarification on procedure.  You have proposed that we proceed with hon. Mutyaba's amendment to my motion first.  But I thought the better thing would be - I am sorry to use the word better - but I thought the proper things would be to consider my amendment which is departing furthest so that if this House pronounces itself that actually it be deleted,  then there is nothing to amend. But if it is defeated,  then the amendment will come in plus any other amendments,  because the effect of the deletion is that the House will have said, 'we do not need to proceed with this.'  I need your guidance on this matter.

THE SPEAKER:  What hon. Mutyaba has sought to do is to amend your amendment,  and his motion has been seconded.  Those who think hon. Mutyaba is not doing the proper thing will be able to speak against his proposal,  and we dispose of that,  then we go to yours.  That is according to our rules of procedure.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I am having difficulty with the two motions,  the original one and the amending one.  My understanding was that we would proceed to incorporate the recommendations of the "Ogalo Committee" in the text of the Bill at Committee stage so that we pronounce ourselves on each of the recommendations that seek to amend the Bill,  during the Second Reading.  However there is,  in the body of the Bill,  a suggestion that we should bring a certain Bill before another.  That suggestion,  in my view,  seeks to determine the order of Business in this House.  My reading of the Constitution is that determination of the order of Business in the House is the job of the Speaker,  under Article 94(4) of the Constitution.  

I would have thought therefore that the proposal or the view of the Committee was a mere observation or  plea to the Speaker to exercise his discretion under guidance of the Committee of Business.  The Committee of Business only acts to advise the Speaker,  because Parliament is incompetent to take away the powers of the Speaker, as under Article 94.  Can I get your guidance?  Thank you.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Speaker, perhaps the hon. Member misunderstood the reason and the purpose why I was moving this motion.  The purpose was not to take away your powers as under Article 94, and it was not to take away the powers of the Executive to initiate Bills, under the Constitution. My motion stems from rule 99 of the rules of procedure, which does not contradict the Constitution, and rule 99(5) says: "Whenever a bill is read the First Time in the House, it shall be referred to the appropriate Sessional Committee appointed under the provisions of Article 90 of the Constitution which shall examine the Bill in detail and make all such enquiries in relation to it as the Committee considers expedient or necessary."  Then (6) "When a Bill has been deliberated upon by the appropriate Committee under this rule,  that Committee shall submit a report on it to the House."  

You determined the order of Business, under Article 94, Mr. Speaker. In February 1999, you allowed the Political Organisations Bill to be put on the order of Business and read the First Time.  It was then referred to the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.  That Committee - and they have said it themselves - are ready with their report,  and under rule 99(6) it is incumbent upon the Committee to present a report to this House.  The motion which I am proposing is that this report be presented as required by rule 99(6), to this House,  so that we can pass the Bill.  Because the Bill has never formally been withdrawn by the Minister under rule ll0 of our rules of procedure, it has never been!

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Speaker, whereas I appreciate the point being made by hon. Mutyaba,  the rule he is quoting refers to reading a Bill for the First Time.  That Bill was given a First Reading,  that is true, and the Committee made a report.  How then does the Committee report come here?  You have to proceed under rule 101 and 102.  That means the Minister moving the Bill must first give it a Second Reading, and it is after the Second Reading that the Committee presents its report.  Until the Minister presents the Bill for a Second Reading, the Committee cannot be in a position to present its report.  

Further, this has been expressed and explained;  this was a Government Bill, it is Cabinet that brought this Bill,  and we have a rule of practice in this House.  When a Bill is presented and a Committee makes certain fundamental recommendations and amendments, the Minister has that obligation to take it back to Cabinet,  so that Cabinet decides whether to own up to the original position as presented,  to accept the amendments and recommendations of the Committee, or indeed reprint and come out with a different Bill altogether.  This is what happened, if hon. Members will remember, with the Movement Act.  It was given a First Reading, it received so much criticism and amendments, and it was brought back in another form. So, until the Minister moves for a Second Reading under rule l01, there is no way we can go back to rule 99.

MR. MUTYABA:  I have moved a motion, which I am entitled to do under the rules of procedure,  and Members of this House have the right to debate it.  Mr. Speaker,  we have a right to debate and pass a resolution on the motion which I have moved.  Whether the Executive adopts it or disregards it is another matter, but the House would have expressed its preference, and I think that is the point which we want to make.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  But my fear is creating precedent that we should proceed with incompetent motions.  Must we proceed with a motion which is incompetent so that in future however incompetent a motion is, we pronounce ourselves on it?  That will be setting a dangerous precedent!  The motion is incompetent,  in my view,  Sir. 

MR. MUTYABA:  Mr. Speaker, it is you and you only you to rule whether my motion is incompetent, and that incompetence must stem from the rules;  and you have not done so. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think let us not spend too much time on this,  okay?  Let us debate the motion and show that it is incompetent and then it gets defeated.  Otherwise we will continue debating to no end.  Have you already spoken to your motion,  hon. Mutyaba?

MR. MUTYABA:  No, I  have not, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  I would like to get your guidance on this one on record.  With regard to a motion which is for deletion and another one which is attempting to amend deletion,  which motion departs furthest and therefore should be debated first?  I would like to get your guidance on record. 

THE SPEAKER:  The motion which was moved last.  You see, what hon. Mutyaba is saying is, 'no, do not delete it, but let us change it this way.'  That is what he is saying.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I am a bit confused,  Sir. I thought your original position is that we adopt the report of the Committee,  is it not so?  We adopt the report with amendments,  or in its entirety.  Now there is an amendment to the effect that let us not adopt everything, let us remove one sentence.  Someone else is saying, 'no,  keep that sentence but modify it.' Hon. Kania is saying, 'let us remove something completely.'  Then there is a motion which is saying, 'do not remove that completely,  leave it there and let us amend it.'  My understanding of the rule is that when you have two amendments you start with one which departs furthest from the text,  so that it sorts out the whole thing,  and there is nothing left to amend.  That way the original motion collapses because there is nothing to amend;  it has gone.  That is how I would look at it.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member for Mbale Municipality,  if you want to apply that rule,  I think  you should go further to say that this particular amendment,  citing that of either hon. Obiga Kania or hon. Mutyaba,  is the one that departs furthest.  You have to go that far so that we are in a position to rule.  The rule you are citing talks of an amendment which departs furthest,  and you are arguing that it is that one which should be disposed of first.  Did I understand you correctly?  Although the rule is there,  I am now asking you,  which one departs furthest?  

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I do not have my text of the rules in my hand, but I know that it is something like that, in the rules of procedure.  

THE SPEAKER:  Let me assure you,  there is that rule.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank  you,  Mr. Speaker.  Why I said hon. Mutyaba's motion departs furthest is essentially because the motion is more or less retaining the substance of the proposal from the Committee,  except that he is putting a time limit.  The Committee was saying the Bill should come first,  this one is saying, 'okay let it come,  but let us put a time limit.'  That is why earlier on I had said that if you are going to seek to put a time limit or to allocate time,  you are in fact determining the order of Business in the House and you are going into a danger zone where the authority is that of the Speaker.  

But that one has not been allowed.  So I would say that the one which deletes completely is the one which goes furthest.  But in order not to waste time,  I do not feel strongly for it.  We can proceed in the order in which the Speaker chooses,  so that we dispose of this matter fast,  given the time frame.  

MR. MUTYABA:  It is actually rule 45(4) which says, "No amendment shall be permitted if,  in the opinion of the Speaker,  it substantially alters the principle of the question proposed."  And I think mine is nearer the question proposed.  

THE SPEAKER:  No.  There is a rule regarding how we dispose of amendments,  you have not reached that rule. 

MR. MUTYABA:  Okay, it is 48(5),  and it says: "When two or more amendments are proposed to be moved to the same motion,  the Speaker shall call upon the Movers in the order in which their amendments relate to the text of the motion,  or in cases of doubt,  in such order as he or she shall decide."  Mr. Speaker, I believe that mine relates more closely. 

THE SPEAKER:  Yes,  but there is another one still which you have not reached,  which deals with starting with the furthest amendment.  Anyway,  in light of what hon. Wapakabulo has said,  can you speak to your motion and we dispose of it?  

MR. MUTYABA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Members, last week I talked about the need to have a level ground as we go for the referendum.  I am not going to go back and entertain you on the same points again.  However, I would like to remind you that the Political Organisations Bill was read the First Time in February,  1999, this year, and was referred to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee.  As the Committee has indicated,  it is ready with its report. I have listened to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and I do not believe that he has given any justifiable reasons for withdrawing the Bill.  

The Constitution in Article 269 provides for the continuation of political parties,  in accordance with Article 73 of the same.  Article 73(1) of the Constitution provides as follows:  "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,  but not withstanding the provisions of paragraph (e) of clause (l) or Article 29 and Article 43 of this Constitution,  during the period when any of the political systems provided for in this Constitution has been adopted, organisations subscribing to other political systems may exist subject to such regulations as Parliament shall by law prescribe."  I believe, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members,  that this Article enjoins Parliament to pass laws to regulate the activities of political organisations during the period when any of the political systems provided has been adopted,  in this case the Movement system.  

Hon. Members, it is imperative and I think important,  and many of you have said so, that as we approach the referendum,  as we go to the people to seek their mandate on a kind of system which we should adopt,  the ground is levelled or is seen to be levelled.  I think political organisations need to know the parameters under which they will operate when they go to the people!  It is unfair to say that the Constitution provides for two sides,  multi-partyism and Movement.  The other day I told you that in fact, for me I subscribe to the third,  and one hon. Member said in my absence that I am ajar, I am not!  I said I prescribed to any other and the Bill which you are going to pass will of course provide the basis for us to bring this other political system which,  I think will keep this country more together than either the present system or the multi-party system.  

Taking into account, we should not conclude simply that there are two sides to this argument;  that when we go to the referendum we are either going for the multi-party or for the Movement,  and therefore we do not need the legal framework for allowing political,  civic groups to operate during the campaigns and after.  Hon. Members,  Article 270 of the Constitution I believe presupposes that Article 269 would be transitional.  Article 270, again I will quote -(Interruption).

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  If he is saying that he is for neither of the two systems but for any other and he is pushing for the Political Organisations Bill, will that help his other system?

MR. MUTYABA:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, it will.  In fact by having any other,  a third system,  we do away with those people who say that you know, there are two sides so you do not need a legal framework under which you are going to organise yourself when you go for the referendum.  Because I may be ready to form a political organisation,  but I am not willing to subscribe to the pure multi-party system.  Let me tell you,  Members,  that for me I believe that a system which would allow for example someone who gets 40 percent or 25 percent in the elections to be brought into Government.  I call that inclusive coalition.  That would, I think, guarantee the unity of this country more than 'a winner takes it all' situation.  So, there are so many sides to this argument.  

As I said, hon. Members, Article 270 which I was going to read before Maj. Gen. Tumwine rose on a point of clarification says: "Not withstanding the provisions of clause (2) of Article 72 of this Constitution,  but subject to Article 269 of this Constitution, the political parties or organisations in existence immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall continue to exist and operate in conformity with the provisions of this Constitution until Parliament makes laws relating to registration of political parties and organisations."  We are in the fourth year of our Parliament,  we have previously passed a law to regulate one system,  the Movement system.  We passed the Movement Organisation Act.  But we are being told that we should not hurry to pass the other law which would regulate the other systems which the Constitution recognises?  We are not creating this system, the Constitution recognises these systems.  

Someone said, 'but you see if we pass this law, these parties may think that actually we have opened up.'  I say that the Constitution for example built in some restrictions which have stopped parties to come out full blast,  you can do the same in this Bill.  You can stop some political parties' activities like calling a delegates conference.  In doing this they will be restricted during this time,  but give them guidance on how they are going to organise themselves.  Give them guidance because at the end of the day it will be a very sad day for this country.  Be it five or ten years from now,  if we decide that we are going full blast to pluralism,  and you find that we are giving political parties one year to organise,  we shall go back to the confusion and chaos which we were in.  

Why do you not,  or why do we not allow these parties,  these institutions to grow so that I can look at them and decide whether it is proper for me to join them or not?  Give them the ground, then we shall know whether the parties definitely are serious,  whether they have matured,  and then people will be able to make their considered options and choices.  Many of us may choose to remain in the Movement system,  others may decide to go in for multi-parties,  but we cannot decide for them.  In fact we cannot even presume that this will happen unless we give these people the chance to show us what they can do and how they can reform their system which,  as you know,  has not gone down well with Ugandans.  A Member of Parliament said, 'maybe it is the leadership,  maybe if we get mature leaders and come up with a spirit of nationalism we could have better institutions.'  Why do we not allow these parties the legal framework for them to operate restrictively at least within the currency of this system?  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member can I have your motion in writing please?  Yes, hon. Karuhanga.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I rise on a point of procedure,  and I would like you, Mr. Speaker,  to confirm whether the motion you have been handed is the same that is circulating in the House.  That motion is moved under rule 8 and rule 44(d) of the rules of procedure.  The motion reads:  "that the House proceeds to consider the Report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Political Organisations Bill immediately after the passing of the Referendum Bill, 1998 and pass it before 31st July, 1999."  It is moved by hon. Benedict Mutyaba,  seconded by hon. Mwandha.  If that is the text of the motion you have,  then I have a problem of procedure which I would like to raise.  

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, proceed.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker,  for your confirmation.  If this be the motion then first of all the rules upon which it is moved,  44(d) and 8,  call for suspension of rules.  There is no rule to suspend.  If you look at the text of the motion,  it is saying that the House proceeds to consider the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on Political Organisations Bill immediately, these are the problem words, "immediately after the passing of the Referendum Bill, 1998 and pass it before 31st July, 1999."  

Then we have a procedural problem because it is in direct contradiction of Article 94(a), which gives power to the Speaker who shall determine the order of Business in Parliament and shall give priority to government business.  The shall makes it mandatory.  If we start this precedent of contravening the Constitution and telling the Speaker what to do,  we will be contravening a Constitution.  May be if I am wrong the Attorney General can help us to further this interpretation I have presented to you.  And if I am right then this motion is totally incompetent to be presented and debated upon.  It should then be immediately withdrawn,  suspended or ruled out of order by the Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have finished my presentation.

THE SPEAKER:  What has been presented here is certainly not the motion which the hon. Mutyaba moved.  Hon. Karuhanga,  you are talking about a different motion,  and what we have before this House is not the one the hon. Mutyaba has moved.  His original motion was to amend an existing motion,  which he did.  So hon. Mutyaba, you have not given me the motion you are reading,  that is what I am really telling you.  You should give me the motion.  

MR. MUTYABA:  Mr. Speaker,  I had intended to move this motion as a substantive one.  However,  because of the motion which was moved by hon. Obiga Kania,  I had to come up with an amendment motion.  Definitely that was an old motion which I have just presented to the House.  So this motion was supposed to be brought as a substantive one but it was pre-empted by hon. Obiga Kania.  So you are right,  the motion which was sent is not the motion which I have moved.  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member,  I had already made a ruling on that one and what I was calling upon you to do is to conclude your presentation.  

MR. MUTYABA:  I have already concluded,  Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Have you have already concluded?

MR. MUTYABA:  Yes.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I thank you.  I think we are either being confused deliberately or there is another reason.  The hon. Member has presented you the text of his motion and you have confirmed that that text is the one I read.  You asked a specific question and it is no record, 'can you please hand over your motion to me?'  The hon. Member moved from his seat and personally handed to you a motion upon which I asked for a confirmation.  You confirmed that that was the motion.  I would like that motion to be clarified whether it is not unconstitutional for us to debate, and if it is not incompetent before the House,  I would like -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga, I think you are taking us backwards.  I said the motion which the hon. Mutyaba handed to me is not the motion he actually moved,  but it is the document which you have - about which you are talking.  We are talking about a motion moved by the hon. Member;  this one he did not move.  That is my ruling.

DR. KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure.  We are confused because we are saying that the motion hon. Mutyaba is moving  -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Let me tell you this,  hon. Members.  I am saying you disregard this document.  Are you with me?  Disregard this document because it is not the motion the hon. Mutyaba moved,  alright?  What you should ask me is,  'where is the motion which the hon. Mutyaba moved?'  That is what we should ask him to give me.  I asked for that motion to be given to the Speaker in writing as required by the rules,  and it is that motion I am waiting for,  for that is the motion he moved. 

MR. MUTYABA:  Mr. Speaker, I am forwarding the motion now.   

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker,  you cannot amend a deletion.  How do you amend a deletion?

DR. LYOMOKI:  I am moving a motion, Mr. Speaker, for adjournment of the House to the afternoon,  as a point of order. 

THE SPEAKER:  Point of order.

DR. LYOMOKI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am standing on a point of order.  We are going to consider a very serious question and my assessment of the House apparently is that we are hungry.  Is it in order for us to continue this debate when Members are tired,  Members are no longer concentrating and are hungry? (Laughter).  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I appreciate the condition in which we are,  but this is a national duty.  This is the motion which I have been told was the one moved through the microphone, not the one handed over to the hon. Karuhanga.  It is that hon. Obiga Kania's motion be amended and substituted with a new motion that the House proceeds to consider the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Political Organisations Bill,  immediately after the passing of the Referendum Bill, 1998, and pass it before 31st July, 1999.  

That is the motion which is supposed to be in amendment to the hon. Obiga Kania's motion.  His was to delete a particular paragraph from the Committee's report,  and he has spoken to it.  I had said that if you think there is something wrong with this motion, whether it is incompetent,  talk about it so that you can defeat it.  

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Considering that we have been debating and we have spent a lot of time here, even Members are raising the question of hunger,  is it in order for the hon. Mutyaba to raise a motion which he calls an amendment on a deletion, which is unconstitutional,  and engage the House in gymnastics that is are keeping us here longer,  without a written amendment?  The amendment which he presented to you was unconstitutional,  it is the same amendment he has brought back.  Is he in order to continue playing with the time of this House and the money of this country?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, the hon. Member has got a right to bring any motion in this House,  and if he engages in bringing motions which contravene the Constitution, say so, right? Say so in your contribution. 

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  That is the point I was making, that is he in order to read an unconstitutional motion and continue playing with the chance you have given him,  Mr. Speaker?  That was my conscience of my point of order. 

THE SPEAKER:  I have already ruled.  Hon. Obiga Kania, do you want to move another amendment?  Why do we not -(Interruption).

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  I still have a problem.  With your indulgence, let me clarify this, Mr. Speaker,  because my understanding is that when a motion is moved for deletion, there remains nothing in its place.  You cannot move an amendment to amend nothing.  What hon. Mutyaba should do is move his own amendment under a different rule but not purport to amend a deletion,  so that my motion takes precedence in the order which it was moved.

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to draw your attention and the attention of this House to our rules.  Rule 48 (9) says: "Upon any amendment to delete any words of a motion, the question to be proposed by the Speaker shall be "That the following words...be deleted from the question."  (11) upon an amendment to delete words and insert or add other words instead,  a question shall first be proposed "That the following words...be deleted from the question", and if the question is agreed to, the question shall then be proposed "That the following words...be inserted (or added)."  (12) If the first question is negatived, no further amendment may be proposed to the words which were to be deleted." 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mutyaba.

MR. MUTYABA:  I respect greatly the Attorney General and he knows that, but what about sub rule (13)?  If an amendment is moved to an amendment upon which the Speaker has proposed the question,  the last mentioned amendment shall be dealt with as if it were the original motion until other amendments have been disposed of.   

THE SPEAKER:  What the Attorney General is saying is that the original position which you are now referring to - and that is what I had drawn your attention to - that is (13),  cannot obtain if you proceed on the basis of first treating the deletion.  That is what he is saying and I want you to either disagree or not.  It is as simple as that.

MR. MUTYABA:  Mr. Speaker, I will leave you to make the ruling on that. You know these rules are very contradictory in a way.  Because if you read the rules which the Attorney General has just cited,  you would be tempted to agree with him.  But if you read (13), then you get a different thing altogether.

THE SPEAKER:  I agree with him,  I agree with the Attorney General.  That means that we go back to hon. Obiga Kania's motion.  I am really building up a consensus,  I want you to be on board,  but I think that is the position.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Speaker,  I had earlier on spoken to my motion and I had moved that the amendment be adopted,  so I rest my case.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I stand to support hon. Obiga Kania on the grounds that if today is 29th and tomorrow is the 30th,  then Thursday is the 1st.  We have Friday to pass this and we have not even gone to the Committee stage yet.  When we have gone to the Committee stage,  I expect a lot of amendments and even when we are through with that stage, we go to the Third Reading before Friday. It will mean that there has to be a printing of the Referendum Bill.  It will also mean that after the printing there will have to be presidential assent before midnight of Friday.  

If we do not accept deletion of this,  then it will mean that we must invent a new wage,  new days and new timing;  or hold them stationery until we finish and then we have to introduce a new calendar of our own in Uganda,  which is not possible.  So we should just lament and say, 'why did they not bring this Bill before?'  We should quarrel about what they should have done,  but we were here, we were Members, we could have moved a Private Members Bill to bring this forward.  We also share the blame.  We have Committees which can handle these matters, they did not.  Everybody just decided to sleep and wait until the last day,  and yet we have a Constitution to observe.  I am not ready to entertain many amendments to the Constitution in order to extend the time of this Parliament,  because if we postpone it one year for debate,  it means we will have extended the time of this Government and of this Parliament,  and that needs a referendum.  At the moment,  Mr. Speaker,  we have no alternative but to support hon. Obiga Kania's motion to delete this amendment,  and move on.  

THE SPEAKER:  Is there anybody against?

MRS. MUSUMBA SALAAMU:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking guidance.  I am aware that most of the work of Parliament is done through Committees and this Committee that I referred to yesterday as very patriotic,  has made this concern known.  I am just wondering what kind of precedent is this that we are setting to totally disregard it,  because by deleting it I am finding a problem that it seems the House is about to disregard its own Committee's competence.  That is why I am asking for your guidance,  not the guidance of the Back Bench.  I am seeking your guidance so that I am educated on what kind of precedent this is going to be.

Is there no other way that we would accept the concern and do something about it?  Because,  Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time that the Executive works in an emergency way.  The Land Act was passed in almost the same way,  and it worries me.  If we have anybody charged with insuring that the time schedules are met or that we are going to operate in an emergency way all the time,  what I am pleading is,  may I know - for future purposes - what this kind of deletion is going to have?  What impact will it have on future Committee activities?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, if you are seeking guidance from me, my understanding of the situation is that this is a report.  I belaboured this point right from the beginning,  there is a motion on the Floor and as is usually the case,  it is accompanied by a report of the relevant Committee.  The motion moved by hon. Obiga Kania is actually to the effect that we adopt this report minus a certain paragraph.  Parliament plenary is entitled to pronounce itself this way on the recommendation of the Committee.  That, in my opinion,  does not derogate from the respect the plenary ordinarily has for Parliamentary Committees.

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think we can say that the Executive has achieved its objective.  The objective of the Executive was actually to bring this Bill at the very end of the period so that there is room for nothing else other than to pass that Bill.  Of course nobody in this House would like to go against the Constitution however much we may wish.  And by the way we work in this House,  it is not feasible that we can pass both Bills,  starting with the Political Organisations Bill and then go to the Referendum Bill, within the constitutional period.  And I think this was the intention of the Executive that, 'we should bring the Referendum Bill towards the end so that it would not be possible to debate the Political Organisations Bill.'  But somebody here said this is our Uganda.  

Uganda is ours,  we are so divided over this matter that the whole country is listening to what you are saying.  The way the whole thing started is creating a lot of doubt and to me,  it can actually undermine the credibility of the referendum,  the very method we have used to come to this level.  Mr. Speaker,  I speak as a disabled person.  Many of these men and women,  if guns are fired in the streets they will be able to run and hide.  I will not have that opportunity to hide and people are causing us this problem because of agendas of their own.  Some of them have money to run away,  the disabled are the poorest of the poor, they never even have the money to run away.  The create chaos here and leave us to suffer.  
People are asking, 'why did the Executive bring the Political Organisations Bill in the first instance?  Why did they put pressure on the Committee on Legal Affairs to consider the Bill as fast as possible?  Why did the Executive lose interest in the Bill all of a sudden,  and how was is it that the Minister for Constitutional Affairs can tell the country that the Political Organisations Bill is so mutilated that it has got to go back to the Cabinet?'  And yet when you look at the recommendations of the Committee on the various amendments, there are more amendments on the Referendum Bill than on the Political Organisations Bill.  I cannot understand how people can lose even any sense of principle in themselves.  I do not know when this country will have responsible leaders!  

It is even written in the report of the Committee that even the Minister for Constitutional Affairs himself refused to go to that Committee.  One is asking, why?  Why did he refuse to go and testify and this is a man of integrity, a man who is very close to God, but he is playing games with this House!

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker, I am very honoured and obliged to hon. Mwandha for giving way.  He has said that I am a man of integrity and so I am.  I want to tell you what happened.  I was summoned to the Committee, and I was there the first time.  Then I appeared again the second.  On that second time,  about three Members of the Committee wrote to me on a constitutional issue.  They said to me, 'Mr. Minister, you cannot bring this Political Organisations Bill under the Article you are seeking to do so,'  which was 73(1).  They asked me, 'what is the reason?'  

The answer was, 'because Article 73(1) provides that when a political system is being adopted, then the Government may bring legislation.'  And they said, 'no one has actually adopted a political system,' they told me that.  So,  I said that under Article 271, I thought there was a system adopted, namely the Movement system,  'therefore we can now go forward with the Bill and the same law.'  They said, 'no,'  and I agreed with them.  That to me, being a man of integrity, I think I agreed with them that constitutionally they were right.  

So I said to the Committee, 'let me go back, and I think I might bring the Bill under rule 72 only to circumvent the constitutional problem you are raising.'  When they say that I never went back,  I do not understand it.  Then in the meantime,  someone told me that the Committee had published a report,  one I had not seen.  I went and looked for one and I got one.  When I saw it,  I found it was so changed in principles that I had to go back to the Cabinet.  So I think hon. Mwandha should agree with me that we do not have any ill intention,  not even bad faith.  I put the Political Organisations Bill before the other one.

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Mr. Speaker,  I want to correct the record and the impression created by the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs,  that he was not summoned.  It is true he came twice.  The first time as he says, he did come but is was not consider the Political Organisations Bill.  We called him on a specific matter on both Bills,  to ask him where the Referendum Bill was,  that was the matter we discussed.  He told us it would be coming and it will be a small Bill in any case.  Then we went ahead and fixed hearings for this Bill.  We invited the Minister,  we invited him twice,  but he did not come to discuss the Political Organisations Bill.  I am very surprised that the hon. Minister says he is a man of integrity and yet he says we did not invite him.  There has been a tendency -(Mr. Mayanja Nkangi rose_).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister, he is still responding.  Hon. Minister,  I will give you an opportunity, let him respond.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: In both the Political Organisations Bill and the Referendum Bill, we have sent out communications and people we invited have come,  others have not come.  What would be the reasons for the Committee not to seek the guidance of the Minister on this matter?  

Let me give an example of the Movement Secretariat.  We have called the Movement Secretariat in both Bills and in both Bills, they did not turn up.  I remember I met hon. Raphael Baku and I told him, 'we really need your input.'  There is no reason whatsoever for us not to want the Minister to come.  He is the owner of the Bill and I am stating it categorically here that we invited the Minister twice,  to have his views on the Political Organisations Bill,  and he refused, failed or neglected to turn up.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I have specifically referred to a meeting there at which the issue was raised specifically by hon. Ben Wacha,  and another Lady.  The Chairman said that in fact that issue was never raised with me,  that we never had that meeting?

MR. KARUHANGA:  I know that some time ago we said we could stand here and lament.  I did not know that it would degenerate into private exchanges.  Is it in order for us to depart from the motion which we are debating - which is obviously just waiting for the question to be put - and divert to just simple gymnastics and allow the debate to deteriorate to such levels?  Mr. Speaker, is it in order?

THE SPEAKER:  No, I think there were points of clarification from either sides and that is allowed by our rules of procedure.  Hon. Karuhanga, I do sympathise with hon. Members and I am saying this is a national duty, we are all involved, nobody has an advantage about the condition in which we are, but I think we are soon getting there.  If you can keep your cool, we will be able to -(Interruption).

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker,  and I must apologise that maybe I was not keeping my cool as you put it.  But you can understand the kind of suffering some of us went through during those very bad political days.  I have no time to go through this now.  All I want to beg this House to do is that we must ensure that when we conduct the referendum,  that referendum will be credible.  That people will accept the outcome of the referendum as a fair outcome,  that people will not complain that because a,b,c,d was not done,  that is why the results of the referendum are x,y,z.  This can cause problems, we know very well that the trigger point for our President going to the bush was because he believed that the elections in 1980 were not fair and I can -(Interruption)-(An. hon. Member rose_). 

THE SPEAKER:  Can you allow him to finish?  

MR. MWANDHA:  I do not need any information, Mr. Speaker.  All I want to say is since the Minister has consistently repeated that he did not have time to have the Political Organisations Bill debated before the Referendum Bill,  when we go through the Referendum Bill,  I would like to beg this House that we immediately go and debate the Political Organisations Bill.  That way we remove any suspicion from anybody on any matter relating to the referendum.  We have a major interest in the success of this Referendum,  because if it does not succeed some of us will suffer more than some of you.  I therefore would like to beg the Minister that he seriously considers bringing back the Political Organisations Bill,  after we have passed this Referendum Bill.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. PINTO:  Motion.  Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind that we are dealing with a matter which is of great sensitivity and a matter that has been brought out now to indicate that we have controversies;  a matter of discrediting the Committee and crediting the Ministry,  or otherwise.  I would like to move a motion under rule 73.  May I be protected from hon. Zziwa please,  Mr. Speaker?  I would like to move a motion in view of the circumstances surrounding the debate that we currently have in this House,  that the matters that we shall deal with be settled by secret ballot under rule 73(c).  I beg to move,  Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Is the motion seconded?

MR. WAPAKHABULO:  Can I suggest that that motion comes up later?  The decision has not been made whether to vote or not to vote,  because at the point at which we are, we are not yet voting.  So how can we decide the mode of voting before we come to the point of voting?  Unless a Member has moved that a question be now put.
But I am not the one to move that.

MR. PINTO:  I heard you very clearly say you will now proceed to put the question.  I had already gone ahead to move this motion. I said that in this particular question or in any other question that may be related to this matter being debated now, the matter be settled by secret ballot.

DR. LYOMOKI:  Mr. Speaker, I am raising a point of procedure.  In rule 48(5) of the rules of procedure of Parliament,  it is provide as follows: "when two or more amendments are proposed to be moved on the same motion,  the Speaker shall call upon the Movers in the order in which their amendments relate to the text of the motion,  or in cases of doubt,  in such order as he or she shall decide."  The motion that we are debating relates to the Committee report and to whether we should go to the Second Reading.  Hon. Obiga Kania moved an amendment to that motion,  and hon. Mutyaba also moved an amendment.  So there are two amendments to the motion.  Because the major motion was the one about the whole report,  I am wondering how we should proceed because -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you are taking us back.  Hon. Mutyaba was persuaded to drop his motion.

DR. LYOMOKI:  No, he did not withdraw.  No, Mr. Speaker,  hon. Mutyaba never withdrew the motion,  it was just disregarded.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Lyomoki,  I as the Chair am telling you.  If you want to challenge that you can go and move another motion and  give notice. 

MR. WAMBEDE:  I have watched and listened with all the interest regarding this report and particularly so on the motion that was put by hon. Obiga Kania.  The question that is about to be put has a very serious bearing on the future political trends of this country. It is quite sensitive and emotional.  You have seen it is raising a lot of sympathy,  while others do not want to disclose their mind.  Given the magnitude that the decision we are going to take is going to weigh on the future of this country,  Mr. Speaker, I would implore you and the rest of this House that we do agree and vote on this matter by way of secret ballot.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, unfortunately the hon. Pinto,  while moving his motion in respect of rule 73(c),  has not indicated how he proceeded without giving notice. Can you justify how you were able to move this motion right in the House without referring to any particular rule?

MR. PINTO:  I am very grateful to you,  Mr. Speaker,  for your guidance. I would like therefore to move this motion under rule 44(d) and 8 -(Laughter).

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable,  please do not waste our time.  Hon. Pinto and your advisors,  please you spare us time, let us proceed to take a decision.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker,  these are matters that arose in the course of my debate.

THE SPEAKER:  I am going to put the question.

MR. PINTO:  I have a motion on the Floor which has been -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Your motion is incompetent, so I have ruled.  I now put the question that the report of the Committee be adopted subject to the deletion of the following words,  "The Committee is of the view that the Political Organisations Bill whose report it had already concluded should precede this Bill."  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I will now put the question.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I seek your guidance,  Mr. Speaker, before you put the question.  I beg your indulgence!  The report of the Committee on which we are about to pronounce ourselves -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  We have already pronounced ourselves on the report.  We are now going to the next issue, the motion as to whether or not the Referendum Bill should be read a Second Time.  Hon. Members I will put the question.  I now put the question that the Referendum Bill be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)
 
THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members -(Interjections)- Order please.  Order!

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 1999

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I am sorry we have been here for quite some time but as I indicated,  it is a national duty.  I would like to thank you for your cooperation and participation this far.  The job is not finished yet,  but I think we have let out the steam.  When we go to the next stage we should be able to sober up and discuss the detailed provisions of the Bill.  I adjourn the House to 4.00 p.m,  today.

(The House rose at 2.20 p.m and adjourned)

(On resumption at 4.18 p.m,  the Speaker presiding)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 1999

Clause 1 

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that immediately after that Clause we insert another one between 2 and 1.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we are still dealing with Clause 1.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Okay.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are dealing with Clause 1.  I propose the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I beg for your guidance.  When do I move an amendment immediately between 1 and 2,  those clauses? I want one inserted in just after the present 1.

THE CHAIRMAN:  And what will you call it?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I think we are going to call it clause 1(2).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: It is a new clause actually. I think we should call it 1(2). -(Interjection)- If we passed 1 then we better call it 1(2) because it is important and in between.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us get it clear.  Do you want to make a sub clause to clause 1?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Yes, Sir. I think it is better that way and it is about the commencement of this Act,  if it is passed.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I am entirely in your hands. Do you want to put a new clause to follow clause 1 which the House has already pronounced itself on?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Okay, I want to propose that we put in a new clause.  This is going to mean all the others are going to be renumbered.  So it is going to be 3, 4, 5 and this one which is about really the commencement of this Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that a new clause be inserted as clause 2 between the present clause 1 and clause 2, to read as follows:  "The Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the second day of July 1999."  That should be the second clause immediately after this first one,  and then the others will be renumbered accordingly.

THE CHAIRMAN:  What is the date of commencement?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: The date of commencement,  Sir,  is the second day of July, 1999.

MR. NYAI DICK:  Mr. Chairman,  my understanding of that amendment sounds as if it is taking care of a possibility of the Bill being signed after 2nd July.  I do not believe that it is a good law,  for this Parliament to begin deeming -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Dick Nyai,  let us proceed this way.  The hon. Minister has proposed an amendment and I would like the Clerk,  in accordance with the rules of procedure,  to call it and after it is called,  it will be deemed to have been read the First Time,  alright?  And then we will proceed that way so that you can come in with your discussion and debate,  agreeable?  That is the procedure.

MR. GAGAWALA:   I would like the Minister to clarify to me the difference between the clause he is suggesting to become clause 2 and the current clause 17,  which is also referring to time.


MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  This amendment I have just proposed refers to the whole Act,  while 17 refers to a political system.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRMAN:  Clause 2 which the Minister is proposing will be taken as read the First Time.  I have to put the question that it will be read the Second Time before we can talk about it, hon. Members, that is the procedure.  I propose the question that clause 2 of the Bill be read the Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 2 - the definition of agent, we delete the word  -(Interruption). 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Chairman, we have clause 2 proposed by the Minister.  It has been called out and I put the question whether it be read a Second Time and the aye took it.  Which clause are you referring to now?

MR. OGALO: Now that is the old one.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The old one?

MR. OGALO: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed.

MR. OGALO:  I beg to move that in the definition of agent,  we delete the words, "under section 18 of this Act."

THE CHAIRMAN:  I am so sorry to take you back.  We have pronounced ourselves that it be read a Second Time,  but I have yet to put the question that it forms part of the Bill,  right?  So let us sort that one out first.

MR. OGALO: Okay, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I propose the question that clause 2 do form part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OGALO:  That I believe will be a new clause 3;  that we delete the words, "under section 18 of this Act."  Mr. Chairman, the definition in the clause, if it narrows it to section 18,  it only deals with the agents on the polling day,  because the definition under the Constitution Article 68 deals with the day of voting.  If you hold it that way then you will be eliminating agents under,  for example clause 20 which deals with the agents and the media.  In effect, the definition as given by the definition section limits it to only the day of voting and yet the agent ought to refer to both polling and canvasing.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I concede that, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose the question that  -(Interruption).

MR. MWANDHA:  I just want to raise one more point.  The word referendum is really a word which is new to the population and I would have thought that it would have been a good thing if the Minister defined the term under this section.  Thank you, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I do not know what you are referring to in the Bill,  if you can guide me.  We are dealing with clause 2 and the first amendment has been proposed by the Committee;  that is what we are dealing with.

MR. MWANDHA:  What I am saying, Mr. Chairman,  if you are talking about the current clause 2,  which is a definition clause -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, we have already pronounced ourselves on a new clause 2.  Now we are dealing with  what on the Bill reads as 2 but should be reading as 3.  Which one are dealing with?

MR. MWANDHA:  Well, if clause 2 is now clause 3,  I am talking about the new clause 3, Sir. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  The new clause 3?  Okay, proceed.

MR. MWANDHA: I was just going to make a proposal that the term referendum be defined.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Where is it to be defined?

MR. MWANDHA: It does not appear under the various definitions under clause 3.  I am proposing that a definition be provided.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, let us do this.  Let us deal with agent. You know, we are going alphabetically.  Referendum will come a bit later.  When we are there, you will have the Floor.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman,  the way it is defined,  agent is supposed to be for canvassing and polling.  Who will decide the agent?  When you look at the sides, there is nobody who is responsible for the sides.  So there is a problem  -(Interruption) because I have read the definition of sides.  It does not give anybody any responsibility.  It will be amorphous and impossible for somebody to claim to be an agent. Because an agent is entitled to certain rights.  In clause 18,  at the polling station he will be entitled to represent a side and to conduct himself in a certain manner. But he must show that he is appointed and he is officially known by his side.  Yet when you go to who the side is,  it is the side of any group of people.  It is not clear.  It is important that we sort this matter out.  It is not clear to me,  I do not know whether the Colleague will see this.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Mwandha,  your issue is coming a bit late but you see he has raised an issue,  I would like -(Interruption).

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman,  I think I agree with the hon. Member.  The word side cannot be defined, it is amorphous and therefore as he says,  it will be difficult to decide sides - in terms of appointing agents and in terms of financing.  And I think that is why the Committee had proposed that we come with the Political Organisations Bill first so that the sides can actually be defined.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Mwandha, I would like to address you specifically on this.  We are dealing with details of the Bill and therefore any talk, any reference about discussing the general principles,  I think is not going to take us anywhere.  What you should do at this stage is to come with the amendment.  If you want agent to be defined otherwise,  then you propose and we shall proceed.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  On the issue of sides,  I am seeking clarification both from the Minister and the Chairperson. In the interpretation, side is interpreted to mean the supporters of an affirmative answer to a question in a referendum or as the case maybe,  the supporters of a negative answer to a question in a referendum.  Supposing there are two,  three questions,  how would this definition fit?  Is not this definition restrictive?  This is the clarification I would like to get from the Chair.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Which definition? There is an amendment by the Committee to delete the expression under section 18 of this Act.  I think their argument is that there will come a time in future,  when people will have to pronounce themselves not on sides but on something else.  That is their argument. 

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Precisely that is my concern.  And in that case even the referendum for a political system needs it,  because under Article 69 clause 2 give three systems and if there are three systems, you are to choose from those.  You will not be having two sides and this is one area where I am requesting further clarification on the matter.  Thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, first of all I would like to inform hon. Members that the term side or sides is not really an invention of this Bill.  It is found in Article 68 (4) of the Constitution.  It reads as follows: "the presiding officer, the candidates or their representatives and in the case of a referendum, the sides contesting or their agents, if any,  shall sign and retain a copy of a declaration..."  So, 'side' is a constitutional term.  Unfortunately it is not defined under Article 257.

Secondly,  when we define 'side' the way we have done,  we are saying that you either say yes or no to a particular proposal or system.  If we got about four sides possibly presented to you, the only thing I can see is that you are supposed to choose one of the four,  so that is your 'yes'.  In that case there are going to be three sides to which you say, 'no'.  Otherwise you have got to choose one side and that is your 'yes'.

CAPT. BABU:  Sir, looking at the amendment which has been moved by the Committee,  all they are asking for is just to expand the definition of the agent to include canvassing.  I was going to request you that if the Minister is able to accommodate canvassing since the minimum requirement of the Constitution has been achieved, then I think we do not have any problem at all.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister conceded, but the point which was raised was definition,  how to define the side.  That is what the debate is.  As far as the Minister is concerned,  he accepts the Committee's amendment that there is bound to be a side, and that side should not only be confined to the exercise under clause 18.  I think we should really move.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 3 as amended, agreed to.

MR. KARUHANGA: I was busy drafting a new definition and I thought that it would come in clause 3 and would have answered a lot of things which are going to happen later on.  I seek your indulgence to permit me, Mr. Chairman,  since we have not moved away from clause 3,  because later on my definition will affect almost the entire clause.

THE CHAIRMAN:  We have pronounced ourselves on it,  but we can revisit it.  We shall come back to it.

Clause 4

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, for the purpose of maintaining consistence,  would it not be in order for us to follow the sequence in the original Bill in terms of numbering so that any amendment becomes consequential,  so as not to confuse the process of pronouncing ourselves?  The rest would be for the draftsmen.

THE CHAIRMAN: No we have to refer to them and pronounce ourselves.  

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 3, sub clause 2,  be deleted.  

THE CHAIRMAN: This is what is clause 3 on the text now?  

MR. OGALO:  Yes, and clause 4.  The justification is that section 3, sub section (1) of the Referendum Statute, 1994 empowers the Minister,  with the approval of the Legislature,  to direct the holding of the referendum on any issue.  Under section 5(1) of the same Statute, the Minister, by statutory order, makes regulations for that purpose.  Under section 5(4),  such order shall be laid before Parliament for approval before any referendum is held.  The present law on the referendum therefore requires that a statutory order must be with the approval of Parliament.  

Rule 118(e) of the rules of procedure of Parliament of Uganda provides that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs shall consider those Statutory Instruments which are required by law to be approved by Parliament,  and shall report to Parliament.  The proposal in the Bill is a departure from the present law.  It introduces a hitherto unknown concept of approval by Cabinet and offends the doctrine of separation of powers,  and also seeks to circumvent the rules of the House.

Further,  it negates the spirit of Article 1, clause (4) of the Constitution which reads: "The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they shall be governed through regular,  free and fair elections of their representatives,  or through referenda."  That, Mr. Chairman, is a justification for deleting this clause which would otherwise enable a Minister to override Parliament and direct a holding of a referendum.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that sub clause (2) of new clause 4 as amended be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I was going to make a remark  that the hon. Chairman should realise that he is relying on the Referendum Act 1994, but he should see that clause 31,  which has now become 32,  repeals it.  Otherwise I concede,  for other reasons.

Clause 5

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I am sorry to come in at this time but I have an amendment to sub clause of the old clause 3.  I also have an amendment to add a sub clause (4) to the original clause 3,  and from the way we are proceeding it might be better for us.  I think it is the business of the draftsmen to re-number.  Otherwise, it is very difficult for us to follow.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, we will make references to clauses as they appear in the text.

DR. OKULO EPAK: So, I have an amendment.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okulo Epak, we dealt with sub clause (2) of the clause 3.  Does that make you happier?

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman,  I beg to move that clause 3, sub clause (3) which reads "The question to be voted on at any referendum shall be framed by the Commission,  meaning the Electoral Commission."  I beg to move that where the referendum is held under clause 3 of the Bill,  it should read as follows: "Where a Referendum is to be held under clause 3 of this Bill, the Minister shall refer the matter to the Chief Justice who will appoint a panel of three Judges to frame the question in a consultation with the side to the referendum."  The justification for this is that we should avoid  politicizing the Electoral Commission.  It is envisaged by the Constitution that the Electoral Commission is an independent body which should not be dragged into this highly political issue.  There is bound to be controversy as to the very nature of the question.

Further,  such controversy may have to be determined by the Commission.  It will be placing the Commission in a situation where it is a Judge in its own court.  It is also the duty of the Electoral Commission to educate the voters.  Questions will be raised and it would be more appropriate if the Commission used guidelines set by this panel of Judges to answer those questions rather than the Commission itself giving answers about the question to be framed.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Hon. Members,  I am hereby bewildered by the suggestion that the Electoral Commission might be politicized,  because actually the Judges too might be politicized,  and in the end you might have a case going to them.  Having said that, I want to concede this on the understanding that the words 'in consultation with' do not mean 'with the consent of.'  I want to repeat this.  I am conceding on condition that the words here 'in consultation with' do not mean 'with the consent of.'  They should be consulted,  yes,  but in the last analysis the panel should decide on the questions.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, it was never the intention of the Committee that the sides must give their consent.  That is why we used the word consultation.

DR. OKULO EPAK: My amendment to the same sub clause was to the effect that the question to be voted on at any referendum shall be framed by the Commission and the specific amendment is that, "save that,  there will be no direct question regarding the referenda on change of political system".  Then I have a sub clause to explain that further.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us deal with your first amendment.  You know that the Minister has conceded the Committee's amendment,  you are aware of that.  Now, your amendment is retaining the framing of the questions with the Commission,  but you are saying the Commission in doing so will not frame the question in such a way that it has direct reference to the referenda on change of a political system.  Is that what you are saying?  There are two things: the Commission should deal with the matter,  but in so doing the questions framed shall have no direct reference or question regarding referenda on change of political system.  Is that what you are saying?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Thank you.  I think I would like to deal with the principle of the motion and the framing should be left to the drafting experts.  That will save me the problem of trying to become a legal draftsman.  Mr. Chairman,  I am in total agreement with the proposal of the Committee which in effect is to change from the Commission to a panel of Judges, but they will still be framing questions.  Mine is a kind of proviso saying,  "Where we are going for a Referendum on change of political system, there should be no direct questions".  In other words,  do not for example ask, 'which of the system do you want?'  Or something like that.  I would like us,  instead of direct questions for decisions, we should make statements.  And that I have provided for in an amendment in sub clause (4).  And may be to assist us to appreciate my concern,  I might as well just hint at the sub clause (4).

It says, "save that there will be no direct questions regarding the referendum on change of political system,  only a statement instructing voters to mark the symbol of the political system of their choice will be made as shown in Schedule 1."  And I have shown both the statement and the symbols in Schedule 1.  That is the import of putting that,  to sub clause (3),  Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okulo Epak,  I do not want to derail you.  But let me propose this to you.  The Committee has moved the responsibility to frame questions to a panel of Judges.  That is a point which I am glad that you have appreciated.  I am sure the reason behind this mercy is that we need an impartial person.  The responsibility is thus given to the panel of Judges who are expected to frame the question such that they will meet the expectations of the two sides,  or all the sides.  If you agree with that,  why do we not sort this one as it is first and then we move to your amendment which is talking about marks or symbols?  

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Mr. Chairman, we cannot talk about marks or symbols unless we accept the proviso that in case of referenda on change of political system, we should not have direct questions,  we should have statements.  Unless that proviso is made in that sub clause (3),  we cannot go on to discuss the use of the statements and symbols.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Then we shall proceed this way.  I was trying to reach a kind of compromise with the hon. Dr. Okulo Epak. I want to now know whether that amendment is seconded so that other people can get involved.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  First of all I thought that according to our rules,  amendments and motions brought at the Committee stage need not be seconded.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are right,  proceed.

DR. OKULO APAK:  Mr. Chairman, I think that even the Committee itself,  and all of us,  are concerned.  In fact the very fact that the Committee wanted to shift the responsibility for framing questions to a panel of Judges is the fear that questions that prejudice the voters might be asked.  Some of us are even concerned that even the panel of Judges were to frame those questions in consultation with the parties,  the sides contesting,  in case of change of political system,  there will still arise a lot of arguments on how the questions should be framed.  I have no doubt in my mind that the manner in which a question is asked and the manner in which a voter is directed to score against the question of his or her preference,.  will in itself be disputable.  

Yesterday when I was contributing,  I did say that the manner in which this Bill is drafted is dealing with all referenda. It is an omnibus including referenda on policies, and I thought that my amendment is trying to introduce a situation unique to referenda on change of political system alone.  I doubt there will be any disputes on questions regarding referenda on policies,  but questions on change of political system will be inevitable.  That is why I am suggesting,  as somebody who has administered a number of questionnaires, that in those cases a statement would do.  A statement would be very neutral,  just saying, 'please indicate in the boxes below the political system of your choice.'  And that statement would be very,  very useful and then we will have the symbols designed for each political system,  and you would score in the symbol.  

This is the crux of the matter, Members of Parliament,  that we should avoid anything which can cause arguments and disputes. We should avoid anything which can be leading,  but a statement just instructing somebody to mark the point to me is very, very neutral and in any case, if it was sorted out as such,  you may not even have the fear of using panel of Judges because even the Electoral Commission could just frame that statement or use this statement if we so agree,  and already attach it as a Schedule to the Bill.  I thank you,  Mr. Chairman.

MR. NDAWULA KAWEESI:  I beg to differ from hon. Okulo Epak.  I think that in the first instance,  it is not correct to start dragging the Chief Justice and the panel of Judges into an issue where it is our responsibility to make the laws.  I think the Chief Justice or the panel of Judges should enter in this situation in case of a dispute which might arise over the framing of a question.  Because if we disagree with what the panel of Judges put up then we will be going to the Court of Appeal,  and this can become very messy.  I would suggest that Parliament itself should argue about the framing and agree on it,  instead of trying to bring in other people into making this law.  Thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I think the Committee has already referred to this issue of impartiality,  and placed it in the hands of Judges,  trained not to give leading questions.  But I want to add something else.  If someone presented to me a book and a watch and said, 'which do you prefer?'  Alternatively he could ask,  'a watch and a book,  which one do you prefer?'  It is a question but it is tantamount to asking one to choose.  So it seems to me that a statement and a question can be equivalent.  

And the last one is,  I see some geometrical figures here.  It looks like an isosceles triangle,  and there is a circle and a rectangle there.  If these are meant to signify political systems,  then we will have to put down,  under them on the ballot paper,  multi-party system, this represents so and so and so on.  For someone who is not really literate in terms of figures,  it will not mean anything.  So, I think we should leave to the Judges to determine the best way to put the question.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  let us proceed this way. I think we are getting drailed.  The amendment by the Committee has been accepted by the Minister;  that is taking away the process of framing questions.  The matter of framing the questions for the referendum has now been removed away,  or is being proposed to be removed away from the Commission to a panel of Judges to be appointed by the Chief Justice.  This is an indication that we are trying to get somewhere where things will be absolutely transparent.  

The technique of framing those questions is the thing which is now being left to their Lordships the Judges.  I do not know whether hon. Okulo Epak would still like to pursue this point that even at that stage there should be something to the effect that no direct questions asked.  In fact you are saying they should be statements.  I still have not got exactly what you really mean,  because those are questions,  and they have in my opinion to be asked that way so that you can make a choice.  I do not know whether I am being fair to you.  

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman for your guidance,  but I have definitely made my point that one of the biggest problems of getting voters to respond in the referendum - which is going to be a headache - is the question and how the question is framed.  You know a statement is a statement,  it cannot be a question.  A statement is simply giving guidance as to how you should do the thing, giving you direction which way to proceed.  That is why I say the amendment to sub clause (3) is to simply save that.  In case this happens then I will introduce,  and I am going to introduce a sub clause (4) for the other provision which the hon. Minister was already discussing,  and the symbols.  I have no doubt that until I explain it,  he may not understand it in the same way I meant it to be.  

But if the august House feels that they are now satisfied with the fact that the Judges will frame questions which are not leading, then let it be.  But I must say I have administered many questionnaires,  and to get the same information you can ask 20 various questions,  and they will affect the manner in which you get your responses.  That was my concern in this particular matter.   If this august House so feels that questions framed by a panel of Judges will impact that kind of impartiality and guide the voters to use their votes appropriately,  I would leave it to the august House to decide,  Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  There is an amendment by the Committee,  and although the hon. Okulo Epak has not said so much in so many words, he is really amending the Committee's amendment.  I do not know whether you would be happy if at the end of the Committee's amendment, we have the proviso which he is talking about. He wants us to add,  "except that there will be no direct question regarding the referenda on change of political system."  That would be a continuation of an amendment to that of the Committee.  We should really move forward and if we can -(Interruption).

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I think that would be going too much in detail.  It would really amount to almost directing how the Judges should go about their work.  I would be more comfortable with leaving them with the discretion of having to consult.  In any case,  the sides will be consulted.  So I think it is okay as it is.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The reason why I have added this is because the hon. Dr. Okulo Epak has not yielded.  That it is an amendment to the Committee's amendment,  and it is discussed in that manner and voted upon.  That is the reason why I have added it to the other.

MR. KAGGWA:  I had also wanted to support my Chairman of the Committee,  and also go on to give a small background as to why consultation of the concerned parties was brought in to assist hon. Okulo Epak.  As the Chairman said in regard to the Electoral Commission which itself raised this issue,  the concern was that the NRM or Movement Government is in power,  the Electoral Commission was appointed by them, then if they frame the question, it may prejudice the parties.  This consulting of the concerned parties,  surely should go a long way in allaying the fears of those who would think the question would be prejudicial.  To start telling the Judges that save for this, if I were the judge I would just say, 'take it back and do it yourself because you do not have trust in me.'  So, I would request that we really leave it at this and move ahead.  I thank you,  Mr. Chairman.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Mr. Chairman, I am sorry, but this save which you have added is precisely the manner in which I wanted the amendment to be brought out.  We are not going to confront the Judges at the time of a referendum, it will not arise.  I think the Judges would be wise enough to know that when the time comes for framing questions or dealing with referendum on political system, they are not supposed to ask direct questions, and they are supposed to use the amendment which I am going to bring next for guidance.  

I do not see any manner in which the Judges who are very, very wise people will be confused by the addition of save.  I think they are used to that formulation in any law and they have had so many saves in provisions and they have operationalised them without any problem. I am now surprised that my hon. Friend here who is a Learned gentleman is saying that they could be confused by such simple phraseology.  I thank you, Mr.Chairman

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the matter is simple.  I would like to put the question on his amendment.  I now put the question that at the end of the Committee's amendment the following expression be added,  "except that there will be no direct question regarding the referenda on change of political system."

              (Question put and negatived)

Clause 3 sub clause 3 agreed to

Clause 4

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that now clause 4 sub clause (4) but originally clause 3 sub clause (4) be amended to read, "any question submitted to a referendum under this section shall be framed so as to enable the voters make a choice of either of the sides."  The justification for this is that in view of the fact that the Bill envisages a referendum held under Articles 74, 255, 259 as well as 271 of the Constitution,  it is not always mandatory that the question will always have to be answered either in the affirmative or in the negative.  

The citizens could,  under Article 255 for example,  demand for a referendum whose purpose should be to seek a consensus.  In such a case the framing of a question could be in such a way as to achieve a consensus.  This would also enable the use of symbols so that illiterates can be able to vote.  I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  The sub section being amended reads as follows:  "any question submitted to a referendum under this section shall be framed so as to require more answers than an affirmative or a negative answer."  This might sound cumbersome from the point of drafting.  The question should be answered yes or no.  This is what he is saying.  

When however the amendment now being proposed says that any question submitted to a referendum under this section shall be framed so as to enable the voters make a choice of either of the sides,  I do not see very much addition.  And I think this is rather not precise.  I would prefer the existing wording.  

But I want to go further and say this.  The hon. Chairman is saying there might be a referendum which seeks a consensus.  You see a consensus refers to the state of affairs, does it not?  So to say yes to one state of affairs and no to another state of affairs, is consensus.  So I do not see that this will be an improvement.  In any case I would still want the Chairman to let us know.  He is sort of framing the question leading to a consensus.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I would like to oppose the amendment by the Chairperson of the Committee and support the current clause 3 sub clause (4).  In any situation where a question is posed, one is required to answer in one way or the other.  An answer cannot be yes or no.  Either it is yes or not, either it is affirmative or negative. So the current sub clause (4) is quite clear,  and would be well understood by those who are literate.  If the question is translated into symbols,  it will also be very clear for those who are illiterate.  I would like to oppose the amendment of the Chairperson. 

MR. WANGUBO:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Chairman.  I would like to support the amendment,  but with a slight change.  The changing from the original drafting presupposes that there are two sides.  If we use the new amendment which reads,  "to enable the voter to choose either," it still presuppose two sides.  But the Constitution in Article 69(2) gives room for more than two.  Supposing the referendum was held to choose from among three sides,  then you cannot use either, or.  What will you do to the third one?  Instead I would like to put an amendment that, "to enable the voter to choose any of the sides."  Thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I still think,  Sir, that the present formulation is the best.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN:  I am also standing up to support the Committee.  I see a lot of difficulties in framing the question requiring an affirmative or negative answer.  In this case we might have more than two sides and what shall we do?  Do you not think this will lead us to coming up with leading questions?  For example, 'do you support restoration of multi-party politics;  yes or no?'  'Do you support the Movement; yes or no?'  If there are already three sides,  to avoid leading questions and to support more than two sides,  we rather go with the position of the Committee,  but amend it the way my Colleague put it and say not either,  but at least one of the sides.  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Your Colleague said any.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN:  Yes, any of the sides.  Thank you.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Sir, the rules says that Members of the Front Bench are referred to by their Executive titles, Minister or otherwise.  I would like to say that if you read the current clause 3 sub clause (4) without reading (5),  you may think that this questions is actually referring to the actual voting. What it is doing is to make it easy for the voter to vote in a manner which will not make them answer the question in phrases,  and this happens all the time.  I would like the Committee to reconsider this because if you say any question submitted to enable voters make a choice of either side, then it negates what comes in sub clause (5).  Yet in the Committee's report they themselves have proposed amendments which the Minister has conceded to to the effect that you have as many questions as possible in any referendum. 

I would like the Committee to consider this and have it as it is put because irrespective of whether we have more than one question, then whoever is voting will either say yes or no instead of even trying to explain a situation which will make many votes invalid.  I would like the Committee to concede this because we are not asking yes or no on only two questions.  It is the way of voting on any particular question.  If I am for the Movement,  I will say yes to the Movement and I will not go on ticking a number of things.  It is the mode of voting which is being clarified here for the sake of making it easy for the voter to make a choice more easily.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I think both the Committee and the Bill do not bring out what I think has become the practice while voting. We are used to where two or more people stand and we are supposed to choose one.  If I may take this case of the political systems,  if they are two or more,  why does the question not say which political system you want?  Then you tick Movement,  or you tick multi-party,  or you tick your interest groups or any other that will come up.  Why not the different choices?  The question should be on the choices rather than on either yes or no.  I would therefore like to move that the Committee and the hon. Minister accept that we put the question on the choice that is supposed to be made.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we are really moving around something on which we cannot exactly choose the best option.  Why do we not do this in order to make us move a step forward?  Why do we not allow the two sides - the hon. Minister and the Chairman - to help us out of this?  Hon. Chairman, can you interface?  We allow you to move out,  according to our rules of procedure.  That can also include the hon. Member for Bunya west,  and hon. Elly Tumwine.  That one is stood over. Hon. chairman, have you finished your amendments? The other one is on a different clause?

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that clause 5 be part of the Bill.  It is clause 4 in your text.  It is to do with the Electoral Commission being responsible for referenda.

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Mr. Chairman,  we have no amendment on clause 4.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose that clause 4 be part of the Bill

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Sir, I beg to move that clause 5 sub clause (2) be amended so as to read, "the Commission shall, in consultation with the sides,  select symbols which shall be used on the ballot paper in a referendum,  to facilitate the exercise of a choice by voters."  The justification for this is that in the contest of this nature, contribution by the stakeholders is of utmost importance to avoid accusations of unfairness.  This would also disarm those who would argue that though independent, the Electoral Commission is a politically appointed body and therefore liable to favour one side.  Mr. Chairman,  I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman,  I would say yes,  subject to assisting me.  Supposing there is a disagreement between the Commission and a side,  what happens?  Do we leave it at a stalemate?  What happens?

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  The answer is that the final decision really lies with the Commission.  The process is one of consultation and consultation does not import a mandatory directive on the Commission.  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the amendment but I would like to add an amendment to the same to read that, "the symbols agreed upon by sides shall be published in the gazette."  The aspect of publishing such a symbol in the gazette is very important so that it maintains consistence, just like in the Interim Electoral Commission Act.  The photographs of individuals which should appear on the ballot paper,  it is stated that they would appear in alphabetical order, and that is put in the gazette.  I would like to propose that the symbols also be put in the gazette in order to avoid any confusion that may arise thereafter.  I beg to move. 

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to amend the submission by the Committee to the effect that the symbols that shall be used on the ballot paper in a referendum should be provided by the contending sides.  In other words, each side should provide the symbol.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member,  consultation really covers that!  You consult the appropriate side and say, 'how would like the symbol to be?'  Now there is an amendment to the Committee's amendment which is conceded to by the Minister.  Then we have the hon. Okumu-Ringa's amendment which is to add the following:  "The symbols so agreed upon shall be published in the gazette."  I will now formally put the question that at the end of the amendment by the Committee the following sentence should be added:  "The symbols so agreed upon shall be published in the gazette."

(Question put and agreed to)

Sub clause 2 as amended,  agreed to. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Sir, since you have not moved completely to finish the Bill,  someone has given me an idea which  might help us not to go on with these old things. Someone said to me, 'instead of having the 2 clauses,  move to say about commencement,' because it keeps on bothering us in numbering.  Someone said to me, 'why do you not put that commencement to be the last clause?'  Now because it is 31, right,  we put commencement to be 32.  Then it will be very easy for everybody and you, Sir, I think to follow.

THE CHAIRMAN:  That will be arranged by the draftsman.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Yes, but I am saying numbers are found here to be difficult.  Is it 3 here or 4?  If we agree to that now then we would follow this as it is and 32 will just come at the end naturally. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, we are following the numbering as they are on the Bill,  that is what we agreed.  So, when he calls clause 5, it is actually clause 5 on your text.  The rest will be re-arranged by the draftsman, or the draftsperson - to be gender sensitive.  

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that we insert a new sub clause (c) in clause 6.  Clause 5 sub clause (6) has (a) and (b) and I beg to move that we have a new (c) to read: "The agents of the sides contesting shall sign the declaration form before the announcement of the results of the voting at that station, but where the agent refuses to do so,  he shall state and record reasons for such refusal on the declaration form."  The justification for this is that after election there are normally accusations and counter accusations.  Some agents even claim to have been forced to sign declaration forms.  Most of these come by way of after-thought,  to justify petitions.  This provision will reduce on that kind of conduct.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to Move. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:    I concede to that, Sir. 

MR. ETIANG:  Mr. Chairman, I do accept first of all the proposal by the Chairman of the Committee,  but there is another possibility.  Either of the two agents may not be present,  for whatever reason.  Is the announcement going to be delayed until the signature of that agent,  or his reason as to why he may not sign is obtained?

MR. KINTU MUSOKE:  The import of this amendment definitely is understood.  But what if he fails totally to either sign or to give reasons,   what will happen?  If he refuses to sign and also refuses to put down the reasons,  what will be the import of that action?

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  I would think that if the agent refuses to sign,  then the presiding officer should be able to record that himself.  He should record the invitation to the agent to sign,  and his refusal to sign.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  there is this amendment by the Committee -(Interruption).

MR. KINTU MUSOKE: If that is so then we should put it here to say what will follow in case he fails,  as he has put it.  

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  The view suggested by hon. Kintu Musoke is acceptable but he has not moved the amendment.  But we would have no objection really so as for it to read that -(Interruption).

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think I do share hon. Kintu Musoke's concern and I would immediately move an amendment to the effect that towards the end where the agent refuses to do so, instead put there, "the presiding officer shall state and record whatever reason - or the presiding officer will make an appropriate comment for the refusal,"  and then we move from there.  I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us get the importance of this amendment.  The importance of this proposed amendment is that the agent was given all the opportunity to either sign,  or refuse to sign,  and to give reasons.  We are talking of a situation where he does not do any of those things,  he just refuses, alright?  I am sorry,  I do not want to sound as if I am debating, but I think I can guide you on this.  The proper thing to do now is to take away that responsibility from the agent to somebody else. And that would for example be the presiding officer,  and where the agent refuses to do so or fails to do so, the presiding officer shall record that fact.  Something like that.  But it is not my Bill, let somebody -(Interruption). 

MR. KAGGWA:  We could opt to add that towards the end or to make it probably neater,  we could break it up and say,  "The agents of the sides contending shall sign the declaration form before the announcement of the results of the voting at the station," because that is a requirement.  Then a sub section,  "where the agent refuses to do so shall state the reasons ..."  Then another one,  "Where he refuses to sign and give reasons,  the presiding officer shall record that fact."

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Mr. Chairman,  what is suggested by hon. Kaggwa  breaks it up into so many parts.  If we take what you suggested,  it will be a neater way for it really connects it. 

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  The import of what hon. Kintu Musoke brought to the attention of the House is the absence of the agents.  Because it is already recorded.  So, I would like to bring in an amendment which should take care of a situation where the agent is absent.  "Where agents of side or sides contesting is not available, the presiding officer shall record."  In other words, Mr. Chairman, when you look at the existing text in the amendment,  it is given as a clear indication that the agents are there and they have refused to sign.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, this is very simple in my opinion.  From where the agent refuses to sign,  do you want to add the words "is not available"?  Then the rest continues up to where my proposal ends;  if somebody can move that one. 

MR. KAGGWA:  "The agents of the sides contesting shall sign the declaration form before the announcement of the results of the voting at that station."  We should delete 'but' and start a new sentence:  "Where the agent refuses to do so he shall state and record reasons for such refusal, and where he or she refuses or fails to sign or record reasons then the presiding officer shall record that fact."

THE CHAIRMAN:  You have confused me.  Write it down.  
MR. KAYONDE:  While he is drafting I am seeking a clarification, what are the implications of the presiding officer recording?  I think we should be very careful.  Does that mean if he records that this one was absent or he refused,  does it invalidate the results?  If it does not, let us state so and say,  "The refusal of any agent shall not invalidate the results."

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Sir, I would add,  "shall not of itself invalidate."

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kaggwa, now your problem is becoming bigger.  I hope you captured that one.  There is an important addition.  It is a kind of proviso,  but I do not know how you will put it.  It is, "provided that the refusal or the failure by the agent to do those things does not of itself invalidate the results."  Have you captured that?  It is gone into the microphone.  There is an addition to what the hon. Kaggwa was going to propose, and it is an important to addition.  (Mr. Ongom rose_).  Hon. Abel Ongom you do not seem to be comfortable.  But let us hear it because it has not been moved.  This is a suggestion, it has not been moved.  We are all trying to clarify something,  let it come out.  when we read it, then you can seek your clarification;  or is it on a different matter?

MRS. NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to ask whether that amendment which we are trying to formulate,  caters for the situation where there are no agents or where there is only one agent at the station.  That is what I wanted to ask.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Well, hon. Member, the law we are proposing is providing for agents,  alright?  An agent may not be available for several reasons,  but he or she is assumed to have been appointed an agent.  Your point is that where there is no agent - do you mean that no agent has been appointed or -(Mr. Ogalo rose_). hon. Chairperson?

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Clause 6(c) reads; "where this comes from the presiding officer and also the agents of the sides contesting, if any."  

THE CHAIRMAN:  'If any,'  are the key words there.  Hon. Kaggwa,  no, no,  we are not drafting,  but let us get the principle.

MR. KAGGWA:  Okay.  "The agents of the sides contesting shall sign the declaration form before the announcement of the results of the voting at that station.  Where the agent refuses or fails to do so, he or she shall state and record reasons for refusal; and where he or she refuses to sign or record,  then the presiding officer shall record this fact,  provided such refusal or failure does not invalidate results."  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Just add, "will not of itself."

MR. KAGGWA:  "Provided such refusal or failure on itself shall not invalidate the results."  Can I give it another try? 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, hon. Kaggwa.

MR. KAGGWA:  "The agents of the sides contesting, shall sign the declaration form before the announcement of the results of the voting at that station.  Where the agent refuses or fails to do so, he or she shall state and record reasons for refusal;  and where he or she refuses or fails to sign or record,  then the presiding officer shall record this fact provided such a refusal,  failure or absence on themselves do not invalidate the results."

THE CHAIRMAN:  Of it self,  not of themselves,  no.

MR. KAGGWA:  Of themselves because -(Interruption)- it cannot be of itself because you are talking of refusal,  failure or absence.  That is the issue that came in as a third leg.  So, itself cannot now arise,  they must be on themselves because they are three components we are talking about.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kaggwa,  suppose you deleted, 'of themselves,'  how does it read?  Because the moment you put such a failure it becomes a singular,  and then you will use it at the end of itself.  Provided such a -(Interruption)- will not.  Make a final trial now.  

MR. KAGGWA:  "The agents of the sides contesting shall sign the declaration form before the announcement of the results of the voting at that station.  Where the agent refuses or fails to do so, he or she shall state and record reasons for refusal and where he or she refuses or fails to sign or record, then the presiding officer shall record this fact provided such refusal, failure or absence of itself will not invalidate the results."

THE CHAIRMAN:  Can we have the amendment?

MR. OWINY DOLLO (Agago County, Kitgum):  I have difficulty with the proposed amendment as brought by the Committee,  and as intended to be perfected by hon. Medi Kaggwa.  The original text of clause 6 makes it obligatory for the presiding officer to sign and retain a copy of the declaration.  But on the agents or the sides,  it is optional.  It is a clear "if any is present and willing."  

I find difficulty in having the intended clause 6(c) mandating or obligating the agents without removing the optional provision in clause 6,  because then it becomes a contradiction.  In the opening clause 6, we are saying, "present and willing."  In other words, it is optional.  Then in (c),  we are saying, "he must" without first eradicating the optional provision.  That is where I have difficulty.   I would have thought that what we need to do is now at that provision where the agent "declines, refuses or fails",  we continue without saying "he must",  as it is stated.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Where is it that "he must"?

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  The agents of the sides contesting shall sign the declaration.  This is in the Committee report,  and the hon. Medi Kaggwa is saying the same thing through a different avenue,  whereas in the original text they need not.  May be the problem, Mr. Chairman, is that we are turning ourselves into draftsmen.  I do not know if the Chairman appreciates the point I am making.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are just saying somewhere,  which you have not indicated.  If you can refer me to the clauses,  that it is optional to sign,  and somewhere where it is being made mandatory,  if you can refer us to that. 

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  Mr. Chairman, it is clause 6.  At least the Bill I was supplied with reads as follows: "the presiding office and also the sides or the agents of the sides contesting, if any, present and willing."  My interpretation of those three words is that it is optional,  they "shall sign and retain a copy."  The "shall" really refers more to the presiding officer.  Because on the side of the presiding officer, "willing" or "present" or "if any" does not refer to him;  he has to be there.  The "if any, present and willing" refers to the agents or sides.  So it is the returning officer or the presiding officer for that matter on whom alone it is obligatory and mandatory to sign.  This is my understanding of this text.  

Then in the Committee report, the proposed amendment by the Committee which is now supposed to be clause 6(c).  The new invention is, "the agents of the sides contesting shall sign."  It is now deviating from "present and willing,"  which was optional.  That is the contradiction, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, the first "shall" refers to all those people,  including those who are willing.   If they are willing they shall sign.  In other words, they must sign something,  you cannot just say, 'yes, I am willing.'  What demonstrates that you are willing?  It is your signature.  This is how I look at it.  Maybe I have not understood you?

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  No,  you have understood me,  but you disagreed with me.  I am saying, if you give me the option, then you do not say I must.  "Shall" is really "must do it."  If you say it is up to me if I am willing, then you cannot say, 'you must.'  Then the new introduction in the intended clause 6(c) by the Chairman of the Committee as well as hon. Medi Kaggwa,  is now deviating from the opening remarks of clause 6.  It is no longer optional,  and what I was saying,  Mr. Chairman,  is that we retain what is in the opening remarks of clause 6,  then we still introduce clause 6(c).  But we do not say, "as for the sides they shall sign," we just say, "where they fail,  decline or refrain from signing a reason is given."  This is the point I am making, thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  To appreciate your point,  may be you could move the amendment or improve on the amendment that we are making.  I know what you are saying is that it should be made obligatory for the presiding officer to sign.  But where it comes to the agents,  they can only do so if they are willing.  That is your argument. Can you then propose something, for example that the Presiding Officer shall,  and then when it comes to the agents who are willing, we say they may?

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  Mr. Chairman, clause 6(c) would read something to this effect -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  But do you not think you should start first of all with the main clause 6 itself?  Because you are complaining about that "shall" which follows the word willing.

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  No, I am not.  I am complaining of the introduction of "shall" in clause 6(c).  I have no problem or difficulty with the construction,  to me it is good English.  It is very clear that it does not mandate the agent to sign.  But I thought the relevance of (c) is that in the event of an agent either not being present or,  although present,  not willing to sign,  then reason is given by the presiding officer for such absence of signature.  I thought that is really the importance of (c) and then the rest flows normally.

THE CHAIRMAN:  No.  The point seems to be that this is the agent,  the person who is watching on behalf of the principle one.  He has disagreed with something and he does not wish to sign.  Or he has not signed,  his signature is not there because he is absent for one reason or another.  

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  Mr. Chairman, may be let me go back.  My understanding of clause 6, is that it mandates the presiding officer to sign and retain a copy of the declaration in the prescribed form.  And then in respect of agents,  if there is an agent,  'present and willing,'  they may,  it is not obligatory as you rightly repeated.  I thought the relevance of paragraph (c) which is intended to be added,  is to say that in a situation where there is only a signature of the presiding officer and one or some of the sides with at least one side,  not attested,  then it is the duty of the presiding officer to explain why such a signature does not appear.  This is my understanding.  

It is not for the agents because the agents,  either because they have lost or in his view there has been foul play,  will say, 'I am not signing,  such things have happened.'  Then it is the duty of the presiding officer to indicate why such a signature is not appearing to the documents.  This is my understanding,  and this is why I was saying that if hon. Medi Kaggwa can read it out, it could assist us.  I agree with his proposed amendment except the opening remark of clause 6 which says, "the agents shall sign."  Just let him remove the provision of the agents being mandated to sign and then proceed to say, "the presiding officer." I do not have a copy of his -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  You give it to the hon. Member.  Yes, you are supposed to help us - I passed on this document to you - on the way forward.  I thought it was a simple matter, but I think we are getting involved in drafting.  

MR. KAJARA: May I give the way forward,  Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, the way forward, hon. Kinobe.

LT. KINOBE:  Mr. Chairman,  as a way forward to address the concerns raised by the Member,  I propose to delete,  in sub clause (6),  right from the beginning,  all the words up to the word 'willing,'  so as to start with, "The presiding officer..," because we are addressing functions and responsibilities of a presiding officer.  It should read, "The presiding officer shall sign and retain a copy...."  Then we can create a new sub clause (7) for responsibilities of the agents including signing,  if they are willing.  This would address the concerns of the hon. Member,  instead of making (c) as a sub clause of (6) where it is not compatible with the original phrasing.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. chairperson, your amendment is causing us problems.

MR. OGALO WANDERA:  Hon. Dollo,  I am wondering whether if we removed "present and willing" from the clause 6 and left the rest,  it would answer your problem? 

MR. OWINY DOLLO:  But we would be introducing something new,  if we said that the agents must also be obligated to sign.  Then we debate on that.  But if the intention of the House is that only the presiding officer must,  as a matter of obligation,  sign, then we also debate it.  But if the intention is to say that both the Presiding Officer and the agents must sign,  I have no problem with it.  Then we need not debate it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then we can take away "present and willing."

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  It seems to me, Sir, that this "shall" under 6 as it is now,  really refers to the importance of the action itself.

THE CHAIRMAN:  To the?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Importance of the result of what is being taken.  We are simply saying that once you are there,  you must do so.  The intention is to make sure that the results are announced and recorded.  It does not refer to the question of, "you must do so, if you do not, we shall do so and so."  Once you are there, it is saying,  then you shall sign for purposes of the record.  Then the amendment comes by the Chairman to say that if however, for any reason, you do not want to sign,  or you are not there,  then something will happen.  I think we should leave the "shall" and "willing" under clause 6 as it is now,  and go straight to the hon. Chairman's amendment.

We should follow the line actually put forward by the hon. Kaggwa.  I do not read the "shall,  present and willing",  to mean that the agent is obliged to sign.  "Present and willing to sign" is not strong enough.  In law we normally draft in that if you are there then you shall sign,  for purposes of making sure that the results are authentic.  So the shall we refer to is to oblige them.  It is there really to make the results authentic.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, it has been suggested that if you remove "present and willing,"  everybody will be obligated.  If you remove "willing",  maybe then everybody will be obligated.  That is the point the hon. Member here was making,  to make everybody sign.  If it is a must,  then just remove one or two words from there,  and everybody will be compelled to sign.  In that case,  then your (b) as it has been proposed by hon. Kaggwa will be okay.   Everybody should sign:  the agents, the presiding officer and so on.  Hon. Minister,  this is my understanding of his proposal.

MR. KYEMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I am not a lawyer, but I seem to understand that Article 68 (4) makes the signing obligatory.  Are we now trying to amend that section,  or are we going to come back to it at some stage?  I thought that position is very clear and I am being confused as to why this debate is going on,  on this particular aspect.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Well, that is what I am saying, I am agreeing with you.  Let it be made mandatory for everybody to sign and then hon. Kaggwa's amendment or improvement on the Committee's new (c) is taken care of.  What are we deleting in 6 in order to make everybody else willing or unwilling?  Let somebody move the first amendment.  It is not deleting the word willing,  it has to be moved.

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Mr. Chairman,  I beg to move that the words " and willing" in clause 5 sub clause (6) be deleted.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I put the question that the words "and willing" which appear in the second line of sub clause (6) of clause 5 be deleted.

                  (Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us go to new (c).  Hon. Minister of Works, Housing and Communications.

ENG. NASASIRA:  I think this amendment,  before we consider it,  should not be 6(c).  If they want to move this amendment, it should be 7, because (a) and (b) of clause 6 refer to what is going to be in the form to be signed.  But (c) is talking about something else, it cannot follow for (c).  If the Chairman,  whom I have consulted,  can move it as an amendment as section 5(7).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Chairman, I am sure you got the Minister.

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  I had no objection to that,  we had discussed it with him.  But as for the proposed amendment,  I beg to move that the proposed amendment be numbered clause 5 sub clause (7).  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kaggwa, proceed with your amendment which is now going to be -(Interruption).

MR. KAGGWA:  Mr. Chairman, I had passed it on to you. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I passed it to the hon. Minister of Justice.  It was intended to be passed on to the hon. Kaggwa. (Miss. Namusoke rose_) Clarification while hon. Kaggwa prepares.

MISS. NAMUSOKE:  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification in relation to the amendment 7.  Will it come immediately after (b)?  Clause 6 has an extension which says, "and the presiding officer shall there and then announce the results of voting of a polling station,  before communicating them to the returning officer."  So, where do we fit that amendment if we have to make it (7)?  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Chairperson, she is saying that your (7) will be on its own,  and has no relevance to 5 (6),  and yet it should.

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, the (6) as it is reads; "the presiding officer and also the sides or agents of the sides contesting,  if any,  present and willing,  shall sign and retain the copy of a declaration in the prescribed form stating...."  The import of this is that it is the declaration form which is being addressed, that should be in that.  (c) as it had been suggested earlier,  is really an action of an agent.  It seems to fall out of line with (a) and (b),  because (a) and (b) is providing what should be in a declaration. It is the name of the polling station and the number of votes cast in favour of each question.  

The problem I indeed see is that if it comes as 7,  it is coming after the announcement of the results.  I do believe that this is a thing which we should possibly leave to the drafting people to see how they could fit it in,  how it will be made to logically flow. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  The point is this.  The hon. Kaggwa's amendment,  if accepted,  is going to go further to state that such failure by the agents and all those people there,  will not invalidate the results.  His actions,  and this determination should actually precede the declaration of the results.  It is after those things have been verified and they are in order,  that the presiding officer comes and says, 'this is the position.'  And I think the issue raised by the hon. Minister worth thinking about.

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I had suggested that we could leave it - if the amendment is approved - we could leave it to the drafting people to see where it will meet the requirement.

MR. KAGGWA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to move a motion to amend the proposal by the Committee to read, "the agents of the sides contesting shall sign the declaration form before the announcement of the results of the voting at that station, where the agent refuses to do so, he or she shall state and record reasons for refusal and where he or she refuses to sign or record them, then the presiding officer shall record this fact, provide a search refusal, failure or absence or itself, will not invalidate the results."  
THE CHAIRMAN:  Can we have the copy?  Let me have a copy of your amendment.  Hon. Members, I now put the question that after paragraph (b) of clause 6, a new paragraph (c) be inserted in terms of the amendment moved by the hon. Medi Kaggwa.
            
      (Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5 sub clause (5)(c).

MR. WANGUBO:  Mr. Chairman, it is sub clause (6),  not (5)(c).

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, we have disposed of that one,  it was rejected.  Hon. Member, I hope you are  -(Interjections)- hon. Members -(Interjections).

Clause 6

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

MR. KARUHANGA: For purposes of our record,  Mr. Chairman, would you kindly put the question that we move from the Committee to the whole House so that we can accept?  Because the question was proposed by the Minister, but it was not put to us to pronounce ourselves on it.  So just to correct the Hansard, let us follow procedure.  

MOTION

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses one to five of the Referendum and Other Provisions Bill, 1999 and passed them with some amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
  
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS( Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Speaker,  I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House, as reported,  be adopted.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, we have been here for fairly long today, but I think there is no regret because we have managed to do some serious business - although with a lot of difficulties.  Before I adjourn the House, I would like to make this announcement.  

Tomorrow there will be an official opening of the Library,  Information and Technology Centre,  and I believe hon. Members you have been invited for the function and you will attend.  The House is adjourned to 2.00 O'clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.15 p.m and adjourned to Wednesday 30th June,  1999 at 2.00 p.m.)
