
Thursday 24th June, 1993
The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, H.E. the President, Mr. Y.K. Museveni, in the Chair).

(The Council was called to order).

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE PRESIDENT:  Hon. Members, on this occasion of opening the 7th Session of the National Resistance Council, I would like to bring to your attention five points.

First of all, I would like to inform you that our GDP has continued to grow at a faster rate than the population rate of growth.  Even when our GDP rate of growth estimated to an all time low in the NRM period of the level of 3.4 per cent in 1991, and 3.2 per cent in 1992 on account of the drought of those two years, it was still higher than the population rate of growth that was 2.5 per cent.  However, the economy has now resumed its high rate of growth, recording 7.1 per cent in the financial year ending tomorrow. The projection for the next financial year is 5 per cent of GDP growth.  Contrary to the situation in other African countries, and contrary to claims in some quarters, the high rate of growth of GDP in Uganda is not largely donor-driven; there is a feeling that the growth in Uganda is because of donors, largely.  This is not so.  The last two years of drought, excluding the present one, that so our GDP growth come fro our annual average of 6 per cent to just above 3 per cent in spite of the fact that donor funding had not been relaxed, should prove this point.  

Last year our rate of growth went from 6 per cent to 3 per cent in spite of the fact that we were still getting the same level of donor funding.  And it has now gone back to 7 per cent, not because of the increased donor funding but because of the activities of our people especially, agriculture. I think these figures have thrown some light on this debate as far as Uganda is concerned.  Much of our growth is on agriculture and that is manned by peasants.  However, funds from donors have played a catalytic role - they have been catalyst, especially in repairing infrastructure and supporting imports, imports support.  

So, donor funding plays a role of a catalyst, but it is not the real meet, the real meet is totality of the activities of our people.  If we lose sight of those ones, we concentrate on this other factor, then we can miss the point.  More over donor funds have also enabled us to fight inflation.  They have enabled us to fight inflation because they help us to maintain certain level of imports, because that one is done in foreign currency, we do not do it in Uganda Shillings.  So, if you have got dollars, then you can import, so people who are buying things from the shops can be kept happy and the rate of inflation will be stabilised.

Talking of inflation, I would like to inform you that the May, the figure for May, last May, analyzed rate that means 12 months backwards was minus 1.3 per cent if you include food.  If you exclude food, if you do not put the food prices in the equation, then the rate of inflation would have been 7.8 per cent.  Still it would be good.  Still a remarkable achievement bearing in mind where we came from.  At this point, I would like to record my grievances to you and to also to the elements of the recent Uganda middle class, of the young Uganda middle class.  These are my grievances to you and to those gentlemen outside in the shops.  Our economy could grow at the rate of 9 or 10 per cent, if we could expeditiously remove all obstacles to the privatisation of numerous government enterprises that are now idle, we are able to get a rate of growth of 7 per cent with Nytil producing under capacity.  East African Steel corporation is closed, Hima far below the capacity, all these factories, I cannot enumerate all of them, suppose all these were producing at full scale, what would be the rate of growth?  So, I thought I should bring my grievance here.  Because I am told that in democracy you demonstrate.  So, I have come here to demonstrate. (Laughter)  Only that I forgot my precards.  

With liberalisation in the world, there are now plenty of opportunities for investors in other parts of the world.  You should not think that investors are dying to come to Uganda.  Because unlike in the past when economic nationalism block avenues for foreign investment, they have now got plenty other opportunities.

With collapse of Communism, the capitalists in the world are having a feel day, they can go to Soviet Unions, and they can go to all those places that were closed to them in the past.  This is what we do not realise now.  The capitalists have got more room now.  In the past, yes.  They were dying to come to every opening because in those days, the philosophy was nationalisation and all that, but now philosophy everywhere is privatisation.  So we must compete for these investors.

Furthermore, do not forget that Uganda is deep inside the continent with long distance to the sea.  That is also something you should not forget.  Investors like to invest near the sea so that they can transport their goods quickly and cheaply by water not by land.  So that is also another something you should not forget.

Nevertheless, we have got other advantages in the form of abundant raw materials and so on.  However, the advantages Uganda offers investors can not sustain their interest in spite of big costs they incur while waiting for the internal wrangles within Uganda power structure to resolve themselves.  An investor is not going to stay in a hotel for seven months waiting for big men in Uganda to decide whether they are moving right or left.  That one will go away.  I think it is my job to tell you this.  Whatever the internal weakness, investors must not be made to wait for extended periods.  Internal weakness must be solved differently, not at the expense of losing investors.  I therefore hope that you will resolve quickly the problems of the Bill on Privatisation currently before you.

Another grievance that I have, I address to the elements of the tiny Ugandan middle class in connection with numerous obstructions put in the path of Uganda Asians repossessing their property.  Although we agree on the policy of deprivatisation, these poor Indians are facing a lot of problems.  When they go to enter a house, they find soldiers there, hired by the big local chaps.  These Asians once they repossess their properties, will put new money and skills of enterprise in our economy, it is not their economy, it is ours.  You seem to think that when an Asian invests here is investing in his economy; it is ours.  They will boost our economy.  Moreover if the Ugandans who have been in these buildings were shroud and disciplined businessmen, they would have got by now their own buildings.  Because some of them have been there - if these businessmen, our middle class had been serious businessmen, you give me something free for 20 years, I will have three buildings out of it.  

So, I do not even know what we are arguing about.  Or are the complaints - I am now asking a question, or are the complaints the newest wave of owners in courts of these properties since there has been a new set of owners in every new regime?  Unless these are the latest group of owners otherwise, they should have built new buildings by now.  Is it not this vulgarisation of property rights at the route of economic problems we have had in the past the fact that these Indian buildings have been a battle ground for the supporting of different regimes, each regime comes with new owners of those unpainted shops?  Some two years or three years ago I invited some American persons and they came to visit me.  Now after they had looked around, they came back to see me and I said, what is your impression?  Then one of the ladies said, evidently you need a paint factory. (Laughter)  Let us return Indian properties and close this ignonimous chapter.  There are plenty of opportunities in the economy of other opportunities in the economy.  I am therefore calling on the concerned state organs to ensure that the Asians repossess their properties soonest.

As I have said above, these two factors; privatisation and repossession could push our GDP rate of growth to 9 or 10 per cent.

On the political front, I would like to array the fears of those who are worried about the intended coronation of one of the traditional leaders.  Some of the not so clear minded compatriots have been going around in some parts of Uganda saying that in quotes; ‘Baganda arrogant have been crashed by Obote and that now Museveni is going to revive that arrogant by allowing the re-emergency of these traditional leaderships.  They go on to say that, ‘the Buganda problem had been solved in courts, therefore, Museveni is resurrecting a problem which had been solved.  So, Museveni is a bad man because if a problem has been solved and he brings it back, he cannot be a good man’.  This has been the talk in some parts that I am always following.  So, my job is to follow all those talks. 

Now by solving in courts, the Buganda problem, these gentlemen are referring to the events of 1966.  That was solved.  Certainly for any serious person, the Buganda problem was not solved in 1966, it was in fact compounded.  So we are now trying to uncompound that compounded problem.  I think the least some of the people can do is to wish us a good luck in how we uncompound it.  But not to say that they had solved the problem, not to say that a problem had been solved and we have now resurrected a problem that had been solved.  Besides, it is an error, it is a mistake to equate the fate of the traditional leaders with the fate of the whole community, because some of these people who talk about Buganda, they talk about Buganda as if it is a homogeneous group, as if all the people are traditionalist or they are traditional chiefs.  Now, this is the type of wrong analysis that caused us problems in the past and I do not accept it, I am now calling on the public to ignore those ghosts from the past and I am using the word ‘ghost’ because ghost is a ghost of somebody who died, so these are ghosts from the past.  The question of the role of the traditional leaders is going to be discussed rationally by all of us and, we shall come out with an appropriate solution so that every Ugandan will have the dignity of knowing that his interests are respected by his country.  I personally would not like to belong to a country that does not respect my interests, my fundamental interests; I would not like to see that.  

So, we must respect the interest of every small group, every community, if our people in Bugisu want to circumcise themselves, why do you complain?  Even some of our people are still circumcising women, which is not really a very friendly act, but we are handling it politically not by force, because they mistaken the thing that it is a good thing.  I would like to remind all of you that the National Resistance Movement and before it, FRONASA have always defended the rights of the injured, when somebody is injured, we defend him, the right of the aggrieved, when somebody is aggrieved we defend him, the rights of the insulted, when somebody is insulted, we defend him, the rights of the weak, when somebody is weak, we defend him, this is the record. (Applause)  I will have more to say about this in the coming month.  Nevertheless, it is high time our traditional friends had our public statement of what we have on many occasions told some of them in private.  We the nationalists, we the Pan Africanistis, respect our tradition.  We, however, also know that the traditions of our people must be modernised to ensure survival of our very people in the modern world of giants. (Applause)  When you talk of modern society, you are talking of the need to have large - markets you cannot talk of a modern society without talking of large markets.  When you talk of modern society, you are talking of the need to have a large raw material base, and when you talk of modern society, you are talking of harnessing varied skills to improve the quality of life.  

Compared to many countries of the world, Uganda is a very small country with the land area of only 93,000 square miles, although these 93,000 square miles are endowed with a lot of natural resources, but it is still a small country.  On the other hand, if you look at the country like Russia, even after the break away of the 14 or so, Republics of the former Soviet Union, Russia has got a land area of 5 million square miles, and yet we must compete with Russia in the modern world in order to survive, otherwise, if we do not want to hermes strength, then we should invite some people to colonise us, to protect us, we could become a protectorate.  If we do not have enough eternal strength to protect ourselves, then the other thing is to have somebody to protect us.  How shall we compete with these giants if we do not concentrate strength?  Therefore, we the nationalists want create great unity within the existing African countries and between them, between the countries also.  The traditional should, therefore, avoid promoting partriarchy for opportunist reasons. We should glorify whatever was positive in the past and also discard the negative, because there were a lot of negative elements in the past without forgetting that a viable future only lies in the integration.  Whatever we say or do should bear this in mind.  I would therefore, be bringing before you a Bill to amend the 1967 Constitution in order to allow the coronation of Ssebataka of Buganda -(Applause)- and have the way for other areas of our country that may want to restore their traditional leaders, purely for cultural roles to do so.  I do not see any danger to the country in this, unless the usual opportunists try to start up tremble.  However, if they do, the NRM will oppose them as we have opposed galaxy of other opportunist in the past.  

The third point, I would like to inform you about, is the trouble cattle rustlers from Karamoja have been causing within Karamoja itself, as well as in the neighbouring districts of Teso, Lango, Acholi and Sebei.  These activities as well as those of the rebels have so impoverished the North East so much that Moroto District last financial year collected only Shs. 3,000,000/= as revenue for the district.  To pay Moroto, Moroto administration staff for one month, you need Shs. 9,000,000/=.  Therefore Moroto district cannot pay their staff even for one month, just paying the Gombolola Chief and the Clerk and this situation is not acceptable, I recently made a tour of those areas and instructed that dialogue under the Chairmanship of Brig. Chef Ali, Commanding Officer of 3rd Army Division should start without delay in Mbale, and Mbale is considered neutral territory that is why we chose Mbale for the purpose of ending this thuggery.  Mbale is neutral territory because the Karimojong cannot come to Soroti and Itesots cannot go to Moroto and so on and so forth.  So, Mbale is a neutral territory, you can see how ridiculous the situation has become.  So, using this neutral territory, we are going to resolve this problem one way or the other.  We should not forget, however, that the Karimojong problem has got its genesis in the two linked factors.  One, this is in the past, absence infrastructure, especially water for livestock.  They have not been having water, this is a genuine problem.  

Secondly, a weak Central Government that could not guard the cattle of the Karimojong in the 1960s and 70s against the Turkanas, against the Topoth from the Sudan and against the Pokoti from Kenya.  If you remember in 60s, the Turkanas used to get guns from Ethiopia, so they had guns while the Karimojong had no guns, they had spears.  So it was unequal and that is why this situation, thereby forced the Karimojong to fend for themselves by using every opportunity to get arms to defend their cows.  Having got arms, however, they did not use them for only defending the cows but also for raiding within and with outside Karamoja.  So, this should be live on mind because if you want to solve this problem, we simultaneously solve the problem of water in Karamoja and also guard the boarders against the Turkanas and against the Topother in the Southern Sudan.  

Fourthly, I would like to again express my concern on the rampant insecurity in the form of car robberies and robbing of case in Kampala.  The Police have been assisted to become mobile by giving them vehicles and I hope they will get more resources in the new budget, so that they can be mobile because this seems to be problem.  

Fifthly, I would like to inform you that our battle with corruption is being intensified.  Some people talking about corruption in a non-serious way, it is like those who talk about rights in Europe.  Recently, when I was in Washington, I met the Manager of Armrest International I have forgotten his name, and we spent a long time to discussing human rights in Africa.  What I discovered is that, while he is very well intentioned, he does not know the battle ground of human rights situation in Africa, he will imagine things are very easy, there is witnesses to come to court and there is money to - I had to dis-abuse him of notions and tell him that he would be lucky to be able to transport one witness to court, because do not have the money, so the situation of human rights is determined by the resources, partly determined by the resources available to the stale.  There are other regimes in Africa that violate human rights deliberately as a policy, but this is not the case in the case of Uganda because we fought for human rights in the past.  

Similarly, for corruption, some people have been talking about corruption without indicating how this corruption could be fought.  What I have discovered is that the biggest problem are the investigative branches of the state, the CIDs, the Auditor General, occasionally he does not compile reports very quickly, the Permanent Secretaries if you are talking about money, the director of Public Prosecutions those group of people who should take cases in court, it is not the President who can compile a case against somebody who has stolen money and go in court and present it, it must be the professional bodies, they are there, they are well known, one of them is CID, the other one is DPA, the other one is Auditor General in fact, if somebody has stolen money, committed a crime, the Minister or the President does not even have to know, you only bring him to court, finished.  But some of the people who talk about corruption seem to emphasise the political authorities, the role of political authorities, which is not that important, if the professional bodies are working.  We are now going to examine these professional bodies as far as corruption is concerned, and that is why recently the Minister of Justice appointed a Commission of Inquiry headed by Justice Porter.  They will unearth all the sudius corruption surrounding the losing of files, the State Attorneys deliberately not pressing things in courts of law, and some of the Judiciary using their discretion in favour of crime.  You see, somebody told me that, in law that I am quite ignorant about, your discretion cannot take the place of my discretion, which means everybody is free to use his discretion the way he wants.  I can say that in my discretion this is not a microphone, so, we are in trouble, but we have got Justice Porter and his group they will help us.  I have been following a few cases myself, we need a very big struggle, anyway, let us wait for Justice Porter’s report and we shall see what to do, my feeling however, is that, if we clean the CID and I thought we had cleaned it because I brought new graduates, new people whom I have recruited in 1990, they are all University Graduates now, so I do not know what the problem is.  And the DPA’s office and the Auditor General, we put Mr. Kahooza there, we shall see what he will do.  Then the next battle line will be the Permanent Secretaries because they are also responsible for the money in the Ministries, in the departments, they are the ones who authorise these things.  These are the four people who can help us, Permanent Secretary, CID, DPA, Auditor General, if these people are doing their work, we shall not even know who has been arrested for corruption, we shall hear that an hon. Minister has just been arrested - and we continue with our business, you see.  But some people try to give the impression that it is the President, it is the Minister who must go and investigate a crime and come to a conclusion and cause prosecution, this is not correct, this is wrong.  I do accept this, this is as usual fighting in some of the - in the same way as people I used to see when we were fighting, people would just come and throw a bomb here that they are fighting, you do not fight like that, you fight a fundamentally system - systematic fighting.  We must talk of systematic fighting, fighting using the system, not just individual running around.  

So, let us wait for this report and see where we as far as corruption is concerned.  All this corruption has led to great indignation in the public; the National Resistance Government cannot indefinitely tolerate this.  Some people in the DPP’s office have already been suspended and we shall continue until we get a clearer picture of who is who.  However, to do all these things, we need increased revenues through taxation.  Uganda Revenue Authority are still collecting only 9 per cent of GDP in taxes, this is not satisfactory at all.  This is where you the hon. Members have got a big job to educate our people about taxes, the importance of taxes, and it is not so difficult to educate the public, somehow some of these people think that we can get all the service we need without paying taxes.  I told you of the case of Moroto 3 million shillings revenue for the whole district, and when you go there, the Karimojong are the most indigenous, they are the most angry, why they do not have water, why they do not have that, why they do not have that, but of course when they are talking with me, I put everybody in his place.  So, I was able to ask them how much tax have you paid, and everybody looked down. (Laughter)  But this is not confined only to the Karimojong, even among the non-Karimojong areas, it is the same story, they want services but they do not want to pay tax.  How are we going to manage our country?  The logic from that is that, we should borrow from abroad, and we should beg from abroad, this is the logic, if you do not want to collect taxes and yet you want services, where do we get the money from?  Either we beg or borrow from abroad.  This begging from abroad is not as cheap as it sounds.  I think annually Uganda pays 110 billion shillings in debt servicing.  It is not a small amount of money, if our ancestors had not borrowed, wouldn’t we be using the 100 billion shillings with 100 billion shillings?  I would use only one third and finish the Fort Portal road.  If we did not pay 100 billion shillings every year in debt servicing - in paying debts by taking us one third of the 100 billion shillings, we would finish Mubende/Fort Portal Road tomorrow within six months.  I think, therefore, hon. Members and Ladies and Gentlemen in the rest of Uganda we shall have to be a bit serious about our future, the destiny of our children, the sovereignty of our country and work and mobilise our resources, internal resources.  But we cannot do this unless we sort out our problems at the conceptual level because people do not yet know how to run a country, how do you run a State, how do you run a Government, we do not seem to know.  Even I have got a feeling that even the people in the treasury spend more time thinking of how to beg and how to borrow -(laughter)- than on how to raise resources from within Uganda, I have come to this conclusion because when I asked them figures about borrowing, they have all the figures -(Laughter).  We borrowed so much, we begged so much but when you ask them about how much could we raise from Kikuubo in form of revenue, then they say that Kikuubo is informal, Kikuubo is not -(Laughter)- Kikuubo is not informal, it is very formal, it is there.  Who does not know the address of Kikuubo?  Why do we not go to Kikuubo and find out how many people are there, how many people do business, what sort of business, why do you not do it?  They do not have figures for Kikuubo, they say, it is informal, but Kikuubo is not informal, it is very formal.  So this gives me the impression that, there is more emphasis on begging and borrowing and I am not in that school of sought.  In fact, I am very, very apprehensive about this begging and borrowing and all that.  I wish we could spend more effort on discovering the potential of our internal resources.

However, I think you the hon. Members could play a role in educating our people about the relationship between paying taxes and getting services, because this is not clear sometimes, some of the people say Oh! but some of the money is being stolen.  The money that is embezzled by these people in these departments is money which has been collected already - if it has not been collected, how could they embezzle it?  Except the only ones who can embezzle money - revenue which has not been allocated are the tax collectors, they are the ones who can forgive and so on and so forth in exchange for services, for a bribe, but the ones in the departments still the money already collected and yet you hear that our collection is only 9 per cent of GDP including the money which is embezzled is all part of the 9 per cent of the GDP.  Other countries are collecting about 16 per cent of GDP.  Recently, I visited the Netherlands, Holland is one of the provinces and they told me that they collect 35 per cent of GDP in taxes!  Of course, the structure of the economy is different their economy is industrial, so it is easier to collect in industries and services and so on.  But 9 per cent is too low, so I am appealing to hon. Members, and through the Radio, I am also talking to the people of the country that we need to do something about this.  We must gain financial independence at least as far as the recurrent budget is concerned.  I am continuing to ask the Minister of Finance to analyse more deeply our GDP in order to see how we can better structure our taxation in order to achieve this financial independence.  As I have said, you should also teach the public about the importance for paying taxes.  I now declare the seventh Session Open. (Applause)  I wish you fruitful deliberations.
 
In accordance with Rule (ii) sub-Rule(i) of the National Resistance Council interim Rules of Procedure, I hereby proclaim that the National Resistance Council Sitting for the Budget Speech, will take place at the Uganda International Conference Centre Main Hall.  Thank you very much.  This is because of room, we want more room there and I am told that once I have proclaimed it like this, it is perfectly legal.  


ADJOURNMENT

(The Council rose at 4.30 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Friday 25th June, 1993).

