Thursday, 24 June 2010

Parliament met at 10.47 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I have two matters to communicate. The first one is that some policy statements have been brought from the government side and as we had agreed, we needed to handle the work of the sessional committees urgently. So, I am now requesting that the standing committees put off their work for the time being and start on the work of the sessional committees so that we can finish that work as quickly as possible, and we leave you, for reasons which I do not want to talk about. 

Secondly, last week I did undertake to tell you that we shall be stepping up security for Members of Parliament and staff within the building. So, I will be issuing the Parliament Powers and Privileges Orders, 2010, which will govern the access to this building; movement within the building; demonstrations; the need for identification tags for all our guests; access to the galleries; access to the facilities of this Parliament; and use of your personal assistants and their identification. It will also cover the press conferences - who is allowed to have press conferences within the precincts of Parliament and all those matters. 

So, the orders will be issued to each of you. They will be put into your pigeon holes so that you can study the details. I am hoping that we shall be able to protect you better than before. 

10.50
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have just talked about those guidelines which will be put in our pigeon holes. Will it be a rule of thumb? Will it be subjected to some kind of debate in case there are certain provisions that may attract some further consideration? I do not know whether that will be the final guideline and order from the Office of the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The guideline is coming from the old guidelines already issued by the Office of the Speaker, but because they were bulky, we have now reduced them to, I think, two or three pages, which you can read quickly. I think most of you misplaced the ones we issued because they were in booklet form. I do not know how many of you still have them. So, we have reduced them to about two pages just to assist you; but they are the same old ones only that they are condensed. If there are issues you would want to raise, you shall raise them after they have been issued. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FISH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

10.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES)(Mr Fred Mukisa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Fish (Amendment) Bill, 2010,” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you complied with the Budget Act?

MR MUKISA: Yes, I have the certificate of financial implications here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is –(Laughter)- you are amused about the title of the Bill? Maybe there used to be a Fish Act. Is it already an Act? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, that is where I have a problem; because if it is an Act, I do not know how you table it for consideration by Parliament. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: It is called, “The Fish Act (Amendment) Bill, 2010”.  

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, what we have here is “The Fish (Amendment) Act, 2010”. If it is an Act, it has no business being tabled for consideration. (Interjections) It is not correctable. The simple advice I give the hon. Minister is that he withdraws and then goes and prepares a Bill, then he can table it; because he cannot table this. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, what I have here is Bill No.7, the Fish (Amendment) Bill, 2010. (Interjections) It is here and it is dated 4 May 2010.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think it was not folded properly. If you look at Bill Supplement No.5 - No.7, if you look on the other side, it is the Fish (Amendment) Bill, 2010.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Still on the other side - the preamble is here - and you move from the preamble to the rest of it. This is the correct face. I think there is a printing problem which the minister – we have no problem with your Bill, but bring a proper Bill which does not confuse people. What is printed here is the problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, Minister, you may have to bring the proper Bill; because on one side it is an Act, and on the other side it is a Bill. 

MR MUKISA: Madam Speaker, I take your guidance.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATION BILL, 2007

10.57
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I had moved the motion for the Bill to be read a second time. Last time - and actually it was the chairman of the committee who was already on the Floor when he was asked to produce a better report. So, I think Parliament should be ready for that report now. Thank you.

10.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nathan Igeme Nabeta): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have produced a more detailed report and as I stated two days ago, the Regulation and Interception of Communication Bill, 2007 was read for the first time on 10 April 2008 and committed to the Committee of Information and Communication Technology in accordance with Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, and now reports.

Methodology

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chair - there is something the Leader of the Opposition wants to say. Just hold on a bit.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My attention was drawn to the structure of the Bill that was presented on the Floor by the Minister of Agriculture in Charge of Fisheries. I think that structure was that the Bill as it is, is okay, and I would like to withdraw my complaint about it, because I have just cross-checked again and the structure is okay and it can be tabled as it is. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Perhaps what is missing is the - 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition for the observation and the fresh input he has made. Our view on the Government side is that we should be given time to look at this so that we make sure everything is done properly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us proceed with the report.

MR IGEME: Madam Speaker, in the methodology, in the process of analysing the Bill, the committee held various discussions and received memorandum from the following stakeholders:

i)	The Ministry of Information and Communication Technology
ii)	The Ministry of Security 
iii)	Uganda Law Society 
iv)	Uganda Communications Commission
v)	Telecommunications service providers
vi)	Human Rights Network - Uganda 
vii)	Uganda Journalists’ Association
viii)	Uganda Women’s Network
ix)	Uganda Joint Christian Council
x)	Uganda Bankers’ Association 
xi)	Amnesty International 
xii)	Uganda Revenue Authority

Members of the committee visited South Africa, which uses the Judicial System in issuing of a warrant of interception, and the United Kingdom, where the Secretary (Minister) issues that warrant.

Objective of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to make provision for the lawful interception and monitoring of certain communications in the course of their transmission through a telecommunication, postal or any other related service or system in Uganda.

The Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of a Communications Monitoring Centre in Uganda.

This proposed Act will reinforce the provisions of Part VII: Interception of Communications and Surveillance, of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002, Act No.14 of 2002, whose main focus is the suppression of terrorism.

Observations and Recommendations

Authorised Persons to Apply for a Warrant of Interception
It was observed that under clause 4(2), the Bill gives wide and sweeping powers to the minister with regard to the issuance of a warrant to intercept any communication.  Such powers will interfere with people’s rights or freedoms.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the application for a warrant should be made to a Judge of the High Court and not the minister responsible for security, for avoidance of conflict of interest and preservation of the protection of the right to privacy contained in Article 27(2) of the Constitution. 

Issue of warrant

The Bill, in clause 5(1), states the grounds on which a warrant for interception of communication is to be issued by the minister to an authorised person, and these include:

a)	a felony has been or is being or will probably be committed;
b)	the gathering of information concerning the actual threat to national security or any other national economic interest;
c)	the gathering of information concerning a potential threat to public safety or national security; and
d)	if there is a threat to the national interest involving the State’s international relations or obligations. 

The committee noted that the provisions of the Bill defining the grounds or purposes of interception are vaguely defined, and the Bill vests, in the Minister in Charge of Security, broad discretionary powers to define and interpret when to issue a warrant authorising interception.

It was further noted that the Minister in Charge of Security, being a member of the Executive, lacks the necessary independence to ensure that such interference does not put into jeopardy the individual rights and freedoms in question.

Recommendations

i)	The warrant for interception should be issued by a High Court Judge.
ii)	The conditions for grant of a warrant of interception by whatever authority, should be precisely defined in the Bill or at least some guiding principles should be provided for determining these conditions.

Evidence obtained by unlawful interception

Under clause 7, evidence obtained in contravention of the Bill is admissible in criminal proceedings, only with the leave of court.

The committee noted that clause 7 is in contravention of Article 27(2) of the Constitution and Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, both of which prohibit unlawful interference with an individual’s right 	to privacy, to the extent that the provision would blanket interception of communication.

It was recommended, therefore, that any evidence obtained in contravention of the Bill should not be admissible in criminal or other proceedings. We thought as a committee that this would defeat the purpose of the Bill. 

Assistance by service providers

Clause 8(1) requires a service provider to ensure that their postal or telecommunications systems are technically capable of supporting lawful interceptions at all times.

The committee noted that the Bill provides that a service provider who fails to give assistance commits an offence. 

Clause 8(2)(b) provides for power of the relevant minister to cancel the license of the service provider in the event that the service provider fails to provide the assistance provided for under sub-section (1).

The committee noted that the above provision not only contravenes the provisions of the Uganda Communications Act, but also usurps the powers and functions of Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) with regard to licensing of service providers in the communications sector.

It was further noted that the licensing and revoking of licenses is not only an elaborate process, but is a quasi-judicial decision, which must be exercised by the mandated regulatory authority as provided for in the relevant laws and licenses.

The committee noted that the Bill gives the authority to revoke licenses of service providers without reference to the licensing authority.  This may not 	only cause conflicts between these authorities and UCC, but may cause confusion in the communication sector.
	
Recommendation

The power to revoke licenses should be exercised by the Minister of ICT in consultation with UCC.

Duties of telecommunication service providers in relation to customers

The committee observed that the requirement in clause 9(1) for the service providers to obtain personal details about their customers has two major challenges in implementation:

i)	The absence of a national identity system in Uganda; and
ii)	Uganda currently does not have a proper address system and as such, it is difficult to locate an individual without a proper description of addresses. 

Recommendation

The government should ensure that the national identity project is implemented, because if it is not implemented, all the information collected may lack authenticity and, therefore, might lead to the Bill not being effective entirely. 

Notice of Disclosure of Protected Information

The committee observed that under clause 10(1) an authorised person may, by notice to any person who he or she believes to have possession of the key 	to any protected information, impose a disclosure requirement in respect of the protected information.

Recommendation

Considering that the two instruments achieve the same objective, as in the case of issuance of a warrant of interception of communication, the imposition of a disclosure requirement should follow a judicial process and the disclosure order should be granted by a judicial officer. 

Interception capability of telecommunication service

It was noted that clause 11(2) requires UCC to issue directives to a telecommunication service provider on how:

a)	clause 11(1) would be effected;
b)	the security, technical and functional requirements of the facilities and devices to be acquired by every telecommunication service provider, to enable the interception and storing of information; and 
c)	the period within which the directive must be complied with.

Recommendation 

The committee recommended that given its function as a regulator in the sector, the directives should be given by the Minister of ICT in consultation with the Uganda Communications Commission.

Application for a detention order of postal articles

The committee observed that clause 13 of the Bill provides for detention of postal articles for purposes of examination. However, this provision of the Bill conflicts with Section 38 of the Penal Code Act Cap. 120, and the Uganda Communications Act Cap. 106. While section 38(1) of the Penal Code Act Cap. 120 provides for power to detain, open and examine any packaging or article by any Police officer not below the rank of inspector, or any officer authorized on that behalf by the minister, which he or she suspects to contain any publication or extract from a publication.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that this clause in the Bill should be harmonised with the Penal Code Act Cap. 120.

Appeals to the Minister

Clause 16(1) of the Bill provides that any person who is aggrieved by the warrant, directive or order issued under the Bill may appeal to the minister.

The committee observed that by virtue of this provision, service providers and those holding protected information are prohibited from disclosing intercepted communication or information about an intended interception of communication. Presumably, it is service providers that will have a right to appeal and not individuals whose communications have been intercepted.

It was also noted that the minister cannot be the issuer of the warrant and have appellate jurisdiction with regard to any matters that are to be referred to appeal. This is contrary to fundamental principles of natural justice. The Bill makes the minister the complainant, judge and the appellate review judge at the same time.

Recommendation

Noting that in practice, one cannot appeal to the same person or authority that exercises discretion or takes a decision, the committee recommends that the powers to appeal should be vested in court.

Conclusion	

The committee has proposed a number of amendments as attached and requests that at an appropriate time, this House considers these amendments to form part of the Bill.
The proposed Bill when passed into law with the proposed amendments, will guard civil liberties and human rights, given the dynamics of crime. The new law will also be an important avenue in the maintenance of national security.

The rampant human sacrifices and regrettable deaths that have more frequently targeted innocent children are facilitated by the efficiency by which criminals execute them because of improved communication. Government will be able to keep up with the criminals through this Bill.

Stakeholders’ comments, observations, proposed amendments and recommendations to the Bill are attached as well for further review by honourable members.

Analysis of the existing laws and international laws vis-a-vis the Regulation of Interception Bill, 2007 is also attached, with some of the case studies and different countries that we understudied, for further review by Members.

The committee recommends that subject to the proposed amendments, the Regulation of Interception of Communications Bill, 2007 be passed into law.
I beg to move. 	

11.11
MR ALEX OCENG (FDC, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I am not yet the shadow; I will be the real minister next time. The minority report on the Regulation of Interception of Communications Bill, 2007.

As we are aware that the Regulation of Interception of Communications Bill, 2007 touches the marrow of the rights and freedoms of human beings, we ought to handle it with utmost care and dexterity. I implore honourable Members of Parliament to use a high degree of reason so that we do not go down into the chronicles of history as ordinary folks who just followed the kraal mentality in times of dire need of action.

You are aware that this Bill spurred a lot of fury and debate among the population of this nation. This cuts across the geo-political and religious divides. It touches the real life of all citizens alive and not yet born.

When the Bill was first introduced by the Minister of Security to the Committee on Information and Communications Technology (ICT), the whole country was awash with the news that the minister claimed to the media that they wanted to regulate on what they were already doing. Phone users in Uganda know that this illegal act is being perpetuated by the security organs.

The intention of the Bill defeats its current form. In the proposed Bill, all powers were vested in the Minister of Security. The applicants for the so-called lawful interception are all security personnel under the minister in one way or another; it is the minister to issue the warrants; any aggrieved party of the act has to appeal to the minister first; and it is the same minister to make regulations for carrying into effect the provision of this Act. Therefore, he is the complainant, the prosecutor, the judge and the executioner at all times.

Findings

Conflict with other existing laws

The Constitution of Uganda

Chapter 4 of the Constitution of Uganda lists those rights and freedoms of individuals and groups which must be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs of Government and all persons.
 
Article 27(2) of the Constitution provides that no person shall be subjected to interference with the privacy of that person’s home, correspondence, communication or other property.

Although this right/freedom is not absolute, under Article 46(1) of the Constitution, it can only be taken away in case of an emergency.

If Government wants to create another exception, it should amend the relevant provisions of the Constitution, which is the supreme law of the land. It is needless to say that the Bill should be harmonised with the Constitution of Uganda. The Bill needs to be in tandem with other laws to ensure uniform practice across all Government agencies in prying into the privacy of the individuals.

The Bill in its current form is overly broad and vague, on the grounds under which the right to privacy may be interfered with. The grounds provided under clause 5 of the Bill are not specific and are subject to the designated Judge’s “reasonable” belief. 

Furthermore, allowing the government to intercept communications of the media practitioners would infringe on the freedom of the media as whistleblowers, who would be afraid to divulge information. 

A felony under the Penal Code Act is any offence punishable by death or imprisonment for over three years. This is even worse if it is read with the provisions of Part 4 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002. The above is compounded by the lack of precise definitions of the terms “National security” and “Economic interests.” 

Generally, the restrictions of the above rights by the Bill in its current form, do not pass the Oakes test, and pose a great threat to the enjoyment of fundamental human rights.

Uganda Communications Act, Cap. 106

Section 63 of the above mentioned Act makes it an offence for one to open any postal article or reveal or disclose the contents of the postal article or destroy or detain any postal article, otherwise than in accordance with the said Act.

Section 66 of the Act makes it an offence for any operator of a communications service or system or its employee to intercept any communication between other persons sent by means of that system or service without a court order.

The obligation for operators to maintain confidentiality of the content of all communications on their networks is further provided for in all the licences issued by UCC.

In view of the above, the Bill must be harmonised with the provisions of the UCC Act. Otherwise, there will be two statutes conflicting with each other.

Anti-Terrorism Act

The Bill is not only trying to legislate on matters which are already provided for by the Anti-Terrorism Act, but in some cases, the Bill contradicts/conflicts with the provisions of the said Act.

For instance, Section 22 of the Anti-Terrorism Act provides that information obtained through interception of communications is admissible in court as evidence, while Section 7 of the Bill provides that such information is admissible as evidence in criminal proceedings, only with leave of court. In the circumstances, therefore, what is provided for in the Bill should be taken as an amendment of the Anti-Terrorism Act.

Domestic Violence 

Many activists objected to the Bill, including the Uganda Women’s Network (UWONET), who issued a statement stating that it would perpetuate domestic violence. The Bill does not safeguard the women. 

HON. MEMBERS: And also men. (Laughter)

Assistance by service-providers 

Under this section, service-providers are required, among other things, to ensure that:

•	Their networks/systems are technically capable of supporting lawful interception.
•	They should install software and hardware facilities, and devices to enable interception.
•	The services are capable of rendering real time and full-time monitoring facilities for interception.
•	They provide interfaces from which intercepted communication can be transmitted.

Section 11(4) of the Bill provides that a telecom service-provider shall, at its own expense, acquire the facilities and devices which will be required. The above provisions have the following ramifications:

The service-providers will meet the cost as directed but they will pass it over to the consumer.

This will impact negatively on the cost of communication services and, therefore, defeat Government’s policy of access to affordable ICT services.

Related to the above is the provision, “In all licences issued by UCC requiring operators to maintain confidentiality of the content of all communications over their networks from interferences, eavesdropping, recording by the licensee, any of its employees or agents.”
The licensees are further required to institute reasonable safeguards against the confidentiality of business and personal data concerning its subscribers, which it acquires in the course of its business.

Apart from the cost, the requirement in section 8(1) of the Bill will amount to a contravention of the provisions of the licences by service-providers. 

If the Bill is passed, it will call for UCC to go through the elaborate process of amending all licences granted to service-providers. But worse still, service-providers may use this window to interfere with the content of all communications on their networks.

Observations 

There is no provision for reporting to Parliament or other agencies regarding the intercepted parcels and communications to ensure accountability and to limit abuse.

There is no mechanism for discriminating and/or for ensuring that communications that are not relevant to detection or investigation of crime are excluded.

The legislation will allow for fishing expeditions by law enforcement authorities. The information collected will not be satisfactorily coherent and no measures are contained in the Bill to ensure cogency and integrity of the information intercepted and monitored for purposes of being used in judicial proceedings. The Bill does not contain safeguards to ensure cogency has been inbuilt in the legislation.

The legislation creates an environment for passive law enforcement. The law enforcer’s office is reduced to a clearing house for information inertly collected. Unwilling ordinary people such as service-providers are compulsorily conscripted into law enforcement. There is a danger of the law enforcer being overwhelmed by irrelevant and large quantities of material. Accordingly, instead of promoting effective law enforcement, the Bill may have a negative impact on effecting law enforcement.

Furthermore, the Bill allows for imposition of the consequences of a search without the positive act of a search by a law enforcement agent. The traditional safeguards against the negative effects of a search and the traditional protection of privacy have not been incorporated into the legislation.

The law imposes an irrational and strenuous compulsion on the service-providers and consumers of electronic and postal services. It calls for expensive processes of installing the required equipment and facilities as well as administrative human resource to carry out the government’s directives. It is undisputable that this will ultimately lead to an increase in the cost of communication-related services to the common man.

Recommendations 

i)	Parliament should amend the Anti-Terrorism Act and include some of the provisions of this Bill instead of passing this Bill. 
ii)	The amendment of the Anti-Terrorism Act should only deal with matters relating to the Act and should not include any other felony.
iii)	Interception of communications should only be permitted in dire times of emergencies like during wars, terrorist attacks and calamities, but not to pry on the rights of persons.

Conclusion (Applause)

The weaknesses identified above, namely: 

i)	Absence of a clear definition of the type of offences which may be monitored; 
ii)	The absence of any reporting mechanism on monitored communication to ensure accountability; 
iii)	The absence of provisions for compensation where communication is monitored unlawfully and the indirect sanctions of unlawful interference in communications to obtain evidence, distinguish this Bill from legislations in other democratic countries.

For now and ever shall be, the Bill vestiges a repressive legislation aimed at shrinking democratic space, unless brought in conformity with human rights enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. (Applause) When the state imposes certain restrictions on the exercise of freedom, this should not put in jeopardy of the right itself. 

Whilst it is true that certain restrictions are permissible for public safety and security, it is also true that some of the vilest human rights violations have been committed in the pretext of such derogations. (Applause)

It is our prayer that this Parliament instead amends the Anti-Terrorism Act and includes some of the provisions of the Bill without enacting another law.

I beg to move.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard the report of the committee and also the minority report of other members of the committee. 

11.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the chair of the committee for the report, and the hon. Member who presented the minority report. 

I think the insights into the Bill presented by these two reports must be commended. The contents are extensive; they provide ‘huge’ food for thought, and I would like to propose that since we have received the reports, Members be given time to study these reports. There are many legal jargons from both the committee and the minority report that need one to put the Bill on one side, the Anti-Terrorism Bill on the other side, and the reports, and then to go through them so that we can help this country. 

Because, at this stage, I must assume that the intention of Government is good -(Interjection)– wait. I must assume that the intention is good. But I must also say that the concerns expressed in the minority report and even in the report of the committee, as well as the proposed amendments, are intended to help Government legislate fairly and without too much distress to the community. My appeal is that now that we have received the report, let us give ourselves some time to study it. 

Secondly, I note that the government side – the owners of the Bill - is fairly empty. I am also aware that the NRM Delegates’ Conference is beginning tomorrow. I believe that many Members - although the Secretary-General is here - are now probably organising the transportation of their delegates who are also very critical to their survival in their constituencies. It will not be okay if we proceed with the debate basing on those two grounds. So, I would beg that we defer the debate of this Bill to Tuesday next week. We shall have time to go through the report over the weekend and then we can proceed. 

11.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, the request by hon. Prof. Ogenga-Latigo is a reasonable one and Government accepts it. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I also find myself in some difficulty, because the bulk of the Members are the members of the committee, and the people who would be responding to both reports are, I think, still on the way. (Laughter) So, let us defer the debate, but can we ask the Clerk to circulate the Uganda Communications Commission Act and the Anti-Terrorism Act so that Members can use them in the course of the debate since they have been mentioned. You already have copies of the Constitution.

Okay, hon. Members, go and study these reports. I hope you do not lose them so that we have to circulate new ones next week. Usually that is what happens when we allow you to go with them during the weekend. Keep them; read them; and then we shall start the debate on Tuesday at 10 O’clock. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 11.32 a.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 June 2010 at 10.00 a.m.)
