IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA
Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament
FIRST SESSION - 13TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING   REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
Thursday, 29 June 2006
Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
PRAYERS
(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)
The House was called to order.
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting.  First, I 
would like to announce that you are encouraged to empty your pigeonholes because the 
policy statements have started arriving and the Clerk has nowhere to put them.  So, kindly 
create room for them.
Secondly, yesterday a strange incident occurred. While we were sitting here, the body of 
Justice Oder arrived at this Parliament with neither my knowledge nor that of the Clerk. That 
is why I had to very abruptly end the debate in case someone demanded that the body be 
brought in.
I would like to inform members that one cannot just drive in here with a dead body.  If it is a 
matter of a state funeral, there are very elaborate procedures how we handle it.  I would have 
had to go out and receive the body myself. We would have had to issue an official statement, 
and Government would have declared a period of mourning. Martial music would have been 
played and the flags should have been flown at half-mast.  But the government did not advise 
me that we expected a state funeral.  
Also, if it was an official funeral, there are equally elaborate procedures that we have to 
undertake before a body arrives here. So, we did not just stubbornly deny entry to the body; 
we expect that the government would have told us what to do if that was the plan.  I would 
like you to know that, and for the press because they wrote in the newspapers that we 
declined to give the Judge access to Parliament; but that was not the position.
I do not know who advised them to come, but it was a regrettable incident, and we hope that 
in future people will wait until they have been advised on what is going to happen before 
bodies arrive here.  I know some of you were disappointed, but I could not allow a dead body 
to remain here and then members would have to ask.  So, we did not know and we were not 
expecting it.  So that is what transpired yesterday.
Thirdly, today is Thursday; it is the day when we give Private Members Business priority.  
But there is business concerning the transportation of milk and milk products pending, and I 
had asked the minister to come and deal with it today.
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): 
Thank you, Madam Speaker.  On Tuesday, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba asked why movement of 
animals from western Uganda and transportation of milk in cans is prohibited.  
Our ministry has prepared a response and we have given copies to the Member who asked the 
question. We have also brought brochures to inform members on how animals can be moved 
in non-quarantine and quarantine areas, and I think they are ready for distribution.
Madam Speaker, why movement of animals is prohibited from the western part of Uganda: In 
February this year, the United Republic of Tanzania started expelling some Ugandans and 
other naturalised Tanzanians from northern Tanzania.  These people came with their animals, 
which are estimated to be over 100,000 head of cattle (Interruption)
DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you colleague for giving 
way.  The minister is about to present a report, a copy of which we were not given, and we 
thought it would be best to have everybody I am just seeing one pushed to me now, but most 
of the members do not have. How do we respond?
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are being distributed; I can see the steward there, is 
distributing them on that side.  Honourable members, our rules say that the minister must 
provide an answer to the hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, although it would have been good for us 
also to have them.  But please listen. He also he has an option document he is giving you. 
Sorry for the inconvenience.
MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, these animals are estimated to be over 
100,000 heads of cattle and concentrated in mainly three districts: Isingiro, Ntungamo and 
Rakai.  Unfortunately, these animals came infected with Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) and 
initially Rakai, Isingiro and Ntungamo districts, which were the major destination, became 
infected.  As a control strategy, in tandem with the Animal Disease Act, (1964) Quarantine 
Restrictions were imposed on these districts.
Due to unscrupulous traders who took advantage of the desperate situation the farmers were 
in, the animals were bought and transferred to other areas of the country mainly in the 
western and central regions.  This movement of animals has led to the spread of FMD 
outbreak into 16 more districts, namely, Mbarara, Bushenyi, Kasese, Kabale, Kanungu, 
Masaka, Mpigi, Luweero, Nakaseke, Kiboga, Mubende, Mityana, Wakiso, Kampala and 
Mukono.
These illegal movements have been exacerbated by lack of a one-chain command in 
veterinary services caused by decentralization, and inadequate infrastructure for enforcement 
of regulations such as holding ground and quarantine stations.  All these affected districts are, 
therefore, currently under quarantine restrictions. Quarantine restrictions if properly imposed, 
do prohibit movement of livestock, livestock products, by-products and co-products into, 
through or out of quarantine areas:   
Movement of animals within the districts that are not under quarantine is permitted. 
However, movement from districts in western Uganda to major meat consuming centers such 
as Kampala is not possible because all routes pass through quarantine zones of Rakai, 
Masaka and Mpigi. Similarly, Mubende, Mityana, Kiboga and Luweero districts are under 
quarantine now.
Why is movement of milk cans prohibited even in Mpigi?  Mpigi district is under FMD 
quarantine restrictions. Ideally no milk or any other products like meat, ghee or hides and 
skin should move out of Mpigi to any other destination during the FMD outbreak. The reason 
behind this is because the FMD virus can be transferred on vehicles, cans, clothes, straw in 
transport lorries and other farm equipment to clean areas. It should be noted that milk 
normally has the highest concentration of the FMD virus in the animal body tissues and is 
potentially the biggest risk to the spread of this disease.  
The sale of raw milk during FMD outbreak is prohibited and that is why moving milk has to 
follow international organisation guidelines issued in a press release in the Daily Monitor 
Newspaper of 27 June 2006. Milk from collection centers should be transported in tanks 
straight to processing plants for pasteurisation and ultra high temperature treatment. This 
prohibition affects all other districts under quarantine restrictions and is not limited to Mpigi 
only.
Quarantine restrictions for other diseases.
The ministry has been reporting and imposing quarantine restrictions for other diseases 
including African swine fever -attached is quarantine restriction for Adjumani issued on 3rd 
February and Moyo on 10th May. The FMD Quarantine Restriction becomes prominent 
because FMD is the single most important trade barrier disease locally, regionally and 
internationally. It also affects many animal products as well as peoples income and welfare. 
Sound economies manage it by massive animal vaccinations and or slaughter, and or 
compensation of all affected stock referred to as stamping out policy. This policy has not yet 
been adopted by Government mainly due to the high costs involved. 
Control of epidemic diseases requires a regional approach since most of these diseases are 
transboundary in nature.  The ministry and the government are advocating for a regional 
meeting for stakeholders to harmonise disease control efforts so that the government can save 
money for other productive activities and enhance sector contribution to GDP.
Avian Influenza.
Madam Speaker and honourable members, we do not have this in the country at the moment, 
but we know there is a looming danger that it could spill over and these are steps being taken 
by Government as precautionary measures.
The Government has established a National Steering Committee that gives policy guidelines 
to issues of Avian Influenza. This is multisectoral in nature comprising of stakeholder 
ministries: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Health, 
Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, National Research Institute and development 
partners.
The Government has established a multi-sectoral national task force on Avian Influenza that 
gives technical guidelines.  It comprises of stakeholders from line ministries and includes 
development partners.  
The national task force has held nine meetings since November 2005 to prepare the strategic 
plan, work plan and budget for Avian Influenza preparedness response. Through FAO and 
World Health Organisation, the funding proposal for an emergency preparedness plan has 
been forwarded to development partners.
Alerted Districts Veterinary Officers and District Directors of Health Services have been 
sensitised on the Avian Influenza threat and what to do in case it happens.
Published in the media messages and interviews aimed at inducting the public on Avian 
Influenza.
The Government has established a hotline in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry 
and Fisheries and Health for Avian Influenza. Sensitisation materials for the public have been 
produced for circulation. Training of journalists on bird flu reporting is in its final stages. 
Conducting epidemiological surveillance of wide migratory and resident birds is going on. 
Collecting samples for laboratory testing; so far 312 samples have been collected and out of 
these 52 have been analysed and found negative for Avian Influenza.
Conducting rapid assessment situation analysis of levels of preparedness and response 
capacity in the country.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries have imposed a selective ban on 
imported poultry and poultry products.
Government has established a dialogue capacity for Avian Influenza diagnosis CDC 
laboratory by capacity to detect Avian Influenza.
A regional Avian Influenza preparedness and response plan and communication strategy for 
the East African Community has been formulated and awaits endorsement by the council of 
ministries.
The training for personnel in Avian Influenza surveillance in wild birds ecology and 
diagnosis is going on.
Diagnostic equipment, assorted reagents and protective gear have been procured through the 
World Health Organisation, DANIDA USAID and CDC.
2000 doses of Tamiflu  has been procured by the Ministry of Health and World Health 
Organisation.
Progress on Resource Mobilisation for Avian Influenza.
i)DANIDA has contributed US $ 50,000 to the Poultry Associations of Uganda and 
USAID has contributed US $ 50,000 to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and 
Fisheries for diagnostic reagents and protective wear.
ii) NARO provided Ugshs 20 million to support surveillance activities. 
iii) DIFID provided 20,000 pounds to support consultancy to fine-tune the 
preparedness and response plan - the strategy and contingency plan.  Part of these funds 
financed the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries workshop for District 
Veterinary Officers from districts that are regarded as hot spots.
iv)UNICEF provided support worth US $ 70,000 to facilitate partial implementation 
of the communication strategy. This has contributed to ongoing radio and TV 
programmes and production of sensitisation materials, posters, brochures et cetera.
v) World Health Organisation supported the Ministry of Health consultant who fine-tuned the 
preparedness plan and also procured 200 copies of personal protective equipment and 
1000 doses of Tamiflu anti-viral drugs.
vi) USAID has procured 200 pieces of protective wear. It contributed US $ 125,000 
through the World Health Organisation/AFFRO, to support the communication strategy. 
It is contributing another US $ 375,000, through FAO, to the national task force 
to support mainly Avian Influenza surveillance activities in the livestock sector. It still has 
another balance of US $ 150,000, which has been obligated and is ready to be used on 
request by the national task force.
vii)The Uganda Wildlife Authority has promised Ugshs 337 million to cater for the 
training workshop for their game wardens on Avian Influenza.
viii)PACE project promised to avail Ugshs 26 million for Avian Influenza activities. It 
is in the process of requesting for more funds from EDF. The funding constitutes 60 
percent of the most immediate activities. There is need, therefore, to look for an 
additional 40 percent and also plan for resources mobilisation for medium term and long-
term activities worth US $ 6,934,000and US $ 10,774,100  respectively.
Challenges/Constraints
i)Being part of the Western Rift Valley, the country lies in the north-south flyway 
and hosts big population of migratory birds during the migration period, for example, 25 
million terns were sighted on Lutembe Beach in January 2006.
ii)The poverty levels in the country encourage poultry management systems like 
backyard and free range systems coupled with improper accommodation and poor 
biosecurity that favour Avian Influenza transmission. 
iii) Commercial poultry production is mainly urban and pre-urban. This is a potential 
risk of exposure to the big population of people in such areas. 
iv)There is need for greater Government commitment the political will, which we 
are giving.
v) Increase in global travel, tourism, trade in poultry and products;
vi)General lack of knowledge of the disease by the farmers and public; 
vii) Social culture attitude; 
viii)Poor mechanisms of law enforcement and management; 
ix)Insufficient planning for the preparedness plan;
x)General lack of biosecurity measures in the country.
The way forward
i) Government is planning to implement the Avian Influenza preparedness and 
response plan. 
ii) Government is also planning to provide funds for medium term and long term 
bird flu prevention and control activities.
iii) The ministry needs to recruit more staff who are well-trained to handle Avian 
Influenza and other emerging epidemics.
iv) Increase sensitization of poultry farmers, other sector stakeholders and the general 
public.
v) There is need to address the current poultry husbandry system to improve on 
security of poultry farms and marketing chains.
Madam Speaker, and honourable members, this is how far we have gone with control of 
diseases especially in stopping the spread of FMD and how we are prepared to deal with 
Avian Influenza. I thank you very much.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, before we proceed to supplementaries, I 
would like to inform you that in the public gallery we have children of Lugeye Primary 
School, Busiro East in Wakiso District. Please stand up for recognition - (Applause)- You can 
see the number of young ladies is really high. You are welcome young children! Honourable 
Baguma Isoke, former Minister of Lands, is out there in the gallery (Laughter)- Okay 
supplementary, hon. Sebuliba.
3.20
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala):  Thank you, 
Madam Speaker. And let me thank the minister who has laboured to tell the august House 
what he had in store regarding the saga of FMD and other diseases in the animal industry. 
Although I was more concerned with milk cans, he went beyond and dwelt much more on 
Avian Influenza than what was my point of contention.
Referring to page 3, first, the minister said: Sound economies manage it by a massive animal 
vaccinations and or slaughter and compensation of all affected stock.  (The stamping out 
policy), and he said: This policy has not been adopted by Government mainly due to the high 
costs involved. 
And on the page 2, he has said in the second last paragraph, the last statement: Milk from 
collection centers should be transported in tankers straight to processing plants for 
pasteurization and ultra high temperature treatment.
It seems in the first instance where I quoted the minister; the problem is of a greater 
magnitude. And when he says that milk must be collected from collection centers using 
tankers, how has he prepared the milk handlers and the product? Are they ready to transport 
the milk in tankers?
Madam Speaker, when we sat with the Dairy Development Authority in the Agricultural 
Committee, we stamped out the use of jerrycans.  We even told the people after the Dairy 
Development Authority had sensitised them being a regulatory body that addition of excess 
water or adulterating milk, must stop.  They heeded to our advice and indeed the Agricultural 
Committee went and visited some of these people who were handling milk.  They acquired 
loans to buy cans, acquired pasteurization plants and cooling plants.
I am not yet clear, the minister should clarify to me how he has prepared his people and 
where are they going to get the tankers?  And all I know in my own capacity, the tankers are 
very expensive and usually transport milk from far.  But here we are, it is an international 
standard that milk is supposed to be transported in milk cans.  But all of a sudden, he has 
loaded it onto the milk handlers and in any case, which is going to collect the milk from the 
gate to the tankers, who is going to handle in between?
The minister would have told this august House that these are the measures we are putting in 
place: One, we are going to sensitise these people. We are going to sit with them on how to 
handle the cans, because cans are everywhere in the whole world; they are used.  
How are they going to transport - are they going to use pots to take milk to the tankers? And 
where are the tankers by the way?  Where are the tankers, are they available and as a minister, 
can the ministry come out with a soft loan again to make the poor farmers save more by 
giving them more loans to buy these tankers?  Madam Speaker, that one is not clear.
They told them according to the Daily Monitor; I forgot my newspaper at home on Tuesday 
page 7, there was a press release which gave so many conditions and one of them was to 
spray all the materials, which are used to handle milk with a certain salt called Dichloride.  
Have you given the farmers this compound?  Have you prepared them?
Madam Speaker, when you read todays Daily Monitor, there are about 20 districts, which 
have been affected and in other districts, some farmers cows may be safe.  Now, all of them 
are lumped together and they are going to suffer.  The ministry should have come up with a 
real elaborate picture on this one. I know Avian Influenza is also bad, but the point here is, 
how can you clamp a ban on milk cans?
As I am talking right now honourable members, at night milk is being transported using other 
routes such that it reaches the consumers.  So, in trying to solve the situation, they are 
exacerbating it. They would move together with the handlers of the milk - traders and the 
farmers rather than this order from the top and this must stop.  It was so abrupt; it was so 
unfair to the farmers and especially to the traders who took loans. The ministry should come 
out clearly on this; otherwise, the whole thing is going to spread with the cows.
The way people are handling the cows also - those who impound cows, is also bad.  
Remember that we have got this Animal Act One time, Madam Speaker, we were here trying 
to fight for the rights of animals.  I think you saw the picture that appeared in the Daily 
Monitor again of Tuesday on page 7, where cows were dying.  Instead of being given 
treatment and they charge the owners, instead of giving them water and food, the cows were 
starving at Police stations. It is unfair and cruelty to animals.  That also should be addressed.  
They were arrested, yes, but it was not their own making.  That is being very cruel to these 
animals.
Madam Speaker, otherwise, if he can come out and tell us about the milk cans, I still feel the 
explanation is far from satisfactory. There is no way you are going to remedy a situation; you 
are only worsening it.  Tell me, which other alternative can transport milk to the tankers?  
There is none apart from the milk cans.  Madam Speaker, let me stop there for a while.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Now, of course that is the Member who asked the question.  
Apart from supplementary question, he has made a long submission.  But now I want 
supplementary questions and not submissions.
3.27
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker.  It is true that the disease control mechanisms in our country have broken down 
following the decentralisation of disease control.  And I want to agree with the minister that 
the chain of command has broken down and that goes to support a proposal that we moved in 
this House in the Seventh Parliament, that there is need for us to re-centralise disease control. 
 There is need for us to establish one clear chain of command; otherwise we shall keep 
addressing symptoms.  I thought I should make that point clear.
We are supposed to make supplementary questions, but Madam Speaker, allow me probably 
refer to page 2.  On page 2, paragraph 2, the reasons behind a ban on transportation of milk is 
because the FMD virus can be transferred on vehicles, cans, clothes and what have you.  So 
vehicles are mentioned, but at the same time the minister says, okay, milk can be transported 
in tankers, are the tankers moving by air?  They are also vehicles.
Madam Speaker, the minister in paragraph 3 talked about some economies that my colleague 
had proposed about control of FMD and not only FMD, but also many notifiable diseases.  
Massive animal vaccination is the most significant preventive measure.  
I would have expected the minister in his statement to tell us what population of animals are 
at risk? We are talking about these districts but what measures has Government taken? How 
many doses of vaccine, for example, has Government procured to undertake the exercise of 
massive vaccination of these animals at risk?
I bet you, many times we have cried here for emergency disease control funds to be availed to 
the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries on time so that they can promptly respond to 
these epidemics, but the funds have conveniently been kept in the Ministry of Finance.  And 
even then, whenever Ministry of Agriculture requests for the funds, it takes ages to break 
through the bureaucratic procedures to get such funds and yet the disease will not be there 
waiting. 
So, I want to know how many doses of FMD vaccine we have; how many animals so far have 
been vaccinated since the threat occurred and what achievements so far since that vaccination 
programme started, if any?
Then the other one, I am sorry that I have been limited, the other one is the last paragraph on 
page 1: Movement of animals within the districts that are not under quarantine is permitted.   
Honourable minister, it should be movement of animals and animal products within and 
between the districts that are not under quarantine which are permitted.  Now, it looks like the 
way this ban has been tailored, it is targeting the daily producers.  
There is need for us to hold a stakeholders dialogue before this ban that I understand was 
slapped on Tuesday is implemented. We should give a more comprehensive guideline to 
everybody so that it does not appear to be targeting the raw daily producers and living the 
heavy commercial ones.
I want to thank the ministry for the efforts so far made in as far as preparedness for control of 
influenza is concerned. I pray that those magnanimous contributions from the various 
organisations are put to judicious use. We have no option but to be thoroughly prepared to 
contain the situation for the good of our country.  I thank you.
3.34
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala):  Thank you very 
much, Madam Speaker.  I also thank my colleague Sebuliba for raising this important issue.  
Honourable members, some of us are representing urban and pre-urban areas and it is well-
known that in our constituencies, people are being encouraged to zero graze. We have urban 
farmers with one or two cattle and we believe there is no other way they can transport their 
milk to the nearest market apart from using cans. 
So, could the minister advise us on how someone who is zero grazing in Bwaise can take 
milk to Kalerwe market? Does that one also require a tanker? It is not practical! Let us be 
practical and we should not put a ban on transporting milk in these cans.
Secondly, Madam Speaker, if we talk about improving the welfare of our people, we must 
fight malnutrition. There is no way our people, especially the urban poor and others in rural 
areas are going to get cheaper milk apart from buying it from farmers in mugs so that they 
can feed their children and fight malnutrition. 
So this programme, honorable minister, is intended to discourage the governments 
programmes especially the Presidents programme of Bonna Bagaggawale .  So, if the ministry 
is trying to fight that programme, the President should come out to stop this kind of scenario 
because there is no way our people are going to kugaggawala when you are fighting some 
avenues that could enable them to achieve those objectives.
3.37
MR JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  
I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement he has made - very good 
statement considering that he has only been there for a short time.
The minister talked about the movement of cattle from Western Uganda while it is restricted. 
I was just wondering whether he is aware that there is still a lot of movement of cattle from 
Western Uganda particularly from Masindi to Teso wetlands.  
Two days ago, I received a message from my constituency, Serere, that cattle were still 
moving from Masindi to Abuket wetland in Serere constituency. And they were saying to be 
coming from the land of my Chief Whip. So, I want the minister to know in form of a 
question: Is he aware that there is that movement of cattle?
I was also informed that there was almost a fight as a result of that in that very wetland.  It is 
actually culminating into a security issue. I am also glad the Minister for Defence is here. It is 
almost culminating into a fight between the residents of that area and the herdsmen who are 
moving to that area and the wetland.
I understand again the Minister for Environment is here. The locals have also invaded the 
environment ever since the herdsmen went to occupy the wetland. The local people are 
saying, Who are we to be denied settlement in the wetland when the invaders have settled 
there. So, I would like to appeal to the minister to take action even if he is new in the office to 
visit Teso wetlands, and sort out that problem.
3.40
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo):  Thank you 
very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the honourable minister for his well 
thought out statement. My concern is Foot and Mouth Disease because my district, 
Ntungamo, has been very badly hit by this particular disease. 
The minister in his submission said that the animals, which were expelled from Northern 
Tanzania, sparked off the Foot and Mouth Disease. I would like to know what prompted this 
arbitrary expulsion of our people from Northern Tanzania?  At this time when we are bracing 
for the East African Federation I think such acts are bound to jeopardise the realisation of this 
objective. 
 So, honourable minister, just let us know the causes of the expulsion so that we may 
appreciate the problem. Because if there were no such expulsions it means the Foot and 
Mouth Disease would never have come to Uganda.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.
3.41
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South): Thank you very 
much, Madam Speaker.  I thank the minister for his statement.  I want to put a question to the 
minister: Have you networked with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness?  Because sincerely 
what you have done to us as cattle keepers, is impacting on our lives negatively. 
As the crop farmers are harvesting their crops to go to the market to get some money for salt, 
sugar and medicine for us the cattle keepers go to the market to get money for salt, sugar and 
medication. What you have created is a disaster.  So, my question is: Have you networked 
with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness?  Thank you.
3.42
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I also 
want to thank the minister for his statement. I was monitoring it from outside and I only want 
to raise one supplementary issue, which I would kindly request him to respond to.
Whereas in the Acholi sub-region cattle were rustled, there are no animals but there are 
animals that are being taken in huge numbers and people who are armed by soldiers in the 
areas of Anaka and Buchoro in my own constituency are grazing them. 
A week ago the district took it upon themselves to go and engage the Brigade Commander in 
that particular area. We are wondering, hon. minister, whether you are aware of this large 
number of animals being grazed in the war zone and in peoples land?  People are being kept 
in camps and animals are grazing their land. I do not know whether you are aware of this, 
hon. minister?  Thank you.
3.44
MS BEATRICE BARUMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kiruhura):  Thank 
you, Madam Speaker.  Much as the government is making all those plans, we should bear in 
mind that people especially in my area depend on milk and cattle to run their affairs. So, 
when the government takes long to implement all that, they should bear in mind that people 
will be suffering.  I am appealing to Government to do it quickly because even the cows need 
drugs and salt. I am appealing to Government to quickly implement what they are doing.  
Thank you very much.
3.45
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara):  Thank you very 
much, Madam Speaker.  I rise on two points. The first point is that over a long time now there 
has been a lot of complacence on disease outbreaks. I would like to quote one example, 
which is devastating our areas on the crop side, the banana wilt. Now this one is coupled with 
the Foot and Mouth Disease.
Honourable minister, over the weekend I was in the constituency and the situation is really 
very bad. Since yesterday I have listened to several radios and some members especially 
those who come from the urban areas look at milk in terms of business or trade and we must 
strike a balance.  
Honourable minister, I would like to contend that the current levels of the disease are at 
epidemic level and we need to have an emergency intervention.  I would like to see in your 
plan first of all, I would like us as Parliament and the government to declare the situation as 
an emergency or disaster.
Secondly, let us put phases so that we have a clear phase where people will appreciate that 
milk and products should not move. Otherwise, when we are under disease and people still 
expect to trade in cattle products, we shall not control the disease.  
Therefore, hon. minister, you should tell us when you are sure of a high level of control being 
achieved in order to resume normal business. Otherwise, it is not necessary to buy milk 
tankers when within the next few months the disease will have been controlled.  Thank you 
very much.
3.47
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, 
Madam Speaker.  I thank the minister for the statement, but my concern is over the way he 
has stressed the Avian Influenza and the expense of the FMD.  
The question was dealing with FMD but he added on the Avian Influenza. I would have liked 
him, in the strength, doses and donations he is giving for the Avian Influenza to show us what 
he is doing or what is in the pipeline for the livestock as well.  
He has told us 1,000 doses from World Health Organisation, 17, 000 and all that to the 
surveillance mechanisms. Why doesnt the government make the same efforts to put in place 
these very measures to contact even the donors if need arises, and indeed it has already 
arisen, to see how we can have a cross cutting approach?
I want to assure him, Madam Speaker, that our farmers down there they are having a heavy 
impact as a result of FMD and indeed we needed results. Up to now there is not any 
vaccination programme going on in those affected areas.  Even in the areas that are not yet 
affected have no preventive measures in place to ensure that the disease does not spread.
The minister has told us about the migration of cattle from Northern Tanzania, but he does 
not know that even within the cattle grazing areas there are movements due to lack of water 
and indeed this is a dry spell. What measures are being put in place to make sure that all areas 
are self sufficient with water? This will help us not to have people moving their animals over 
long distances and under circumstances through which they can get infected and spread to the 
entire region?
Lastly, I wonder whether the minister has consulted the farmers on the ground and the 
middlemen who are selling milk?  He is imposing a ban on trafficking of milk in cans. This is 
not the first time that we are experiencing the outbreak of FMD. In other times it used to be 
even worse. 
They used the Kikuura Mahembe where animals horns could fall off and it was so disastrous 
then, but farmers were never prohibited from trading to get a living. But he is imposing a 
straight ban not knowing the impact this has on the common man on the ground.
I want to assure you, Madam Speaker, that if we cannot devise alternative means, there is 
going to be trouble because people are impoverished. People certainly have to move their 
animals while looking for water; they have to pay school fees; they have to survive as other 
people in Uganda and the minister is just imposing a ban without giving us the alternative. 
Can he come up with an alternative, how to cater for these people?
Lastly, what is the minister thinking about Sembabule.  We have the outbreak in Kiruhura, 
our neighbours in Kabula and in Mubende and in Sembabule they are allowing markets to 
continue operating and certainly these people are moving their animals at night to sell in 
markets in Sembabule. 
I do not know if the ministry is in charge, do they have the surveillance mechanism of 
tracking down animals and the animal disease control?  Madam Speaker, I do not want 
apologies. It is not time for us to wait. Let him come up with concrete steps to ensure that our 
people are ameliorated.  Thank you.
3.52
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Mbarara):   Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. Sometimes I wonder how Government operates! For over three months now this 
problem has been with us the local leaders. Communities have cried out, but there has been 
no response. People Ugandans, some not Ugandans were forcefully removed from their land, 
which they had occupied for so many years. And in his own statement, the minister said these 
were naturalised Tanzanians and they were forced into Uganda.  
Madam Speaker, I want to tell you that if we were to analyse seriously these people, not all of 
them are Ugandans, yes, but look at the problem we are now having. It is high time 
Government came out very clearly, openly and strongly and start owning this country. 
[Opposition: Cross, cross over]  - I can never cross, never.
As we talk today, Isingiro South is yet with another disease,  pneumonia in quotes Kihaha, 
which will automatically catch the whole country. As I talk today, I do not know whether the 
minister has mentioned anything about Kihaha but it is another very dangerous disease, 
which can kill all the animals in this country at a faster rate than FMD.  There is another 
scientific name may be doctors will have to tell us.
I expected the minister to come up with strong measures using the East African Federation 
guidelines to insist that Tanzania halts eviction of the people of East Africa because over 600 
animals cross the border at Kikagati into Uganda everyday with a lot of diseases.  I wish 
measures could be put in place at least to halt it at the moment and we negotiate from there.  I 
thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
3.55
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi):  Thank you very much, 
Madam Speaker.  I am seeking clarification from my colleague who made a sweeping 
statement that cattle are being moved from Masindi to the Teso region.  
Masindi district is also experiencing a similar problem, we are seeing cattle coming in 
Masindi and passing through to an identified destination.  So, when a Member makes a 
sweeping statement that cattle are coming from Masindi, I want to know whether they 
crosschecked that those people are really from Masindi, and with permits because the cattle 
from Masindi have got numbers.  Thank you.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members I would like us to try and close this 
particular debate -( Interjections)
3.56
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  
As the honourable minister figures out what to do with this irregular movement of cattle from 
one part of the country to another, I would like to put it on record that everyday thousands of 
cattle are crossing Pakwach Bridge into the West Nile Region. This is for Government to tell 
us where they are coming.
This is a serious matter, because many of these herdsmen carry firearms and are forcefully 
squatting on peoples land.  I have personally reported some of these cases to Police but the 
Police seem to be incapacitated.  There is great fear that a civil strife might erupt.  Thank you 
for allowing me to put this on record.
3.58
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja):  Thank you very much, 
Madam Speaker.  I am seeking clarification from the hon. minister whether he is aware that 
cattle have been dying in Pallisa, Bunyole and the neighbouring districts, and whether there 
are enough mechanisms to oversee where there has been disease occurrence and what could 
be the cause of this death.
Secondly, for the general observation, there is what they call a cattle corridor in Uganda, and 
unfortunately there are many areas in Uganda where they keep cattle and are not part of the 
cattle corridor.  This has at times biased the way the ministry has implemented programmes 
related to cattle related production and management of disease and enhancement of farmers 
for production.  
I want to find out from the, hon. minister; what is the policy of Government? Because there 
are districts like Butaleja in which the previous governments constructed so many dams and 
dip tanks. They have been silted, they have been ill-managed and there is no deliberate 
Government intervention to ensure that farmers are assisted to become cattle producers like 
they were in the past. What is the government policy on this? I thank you very much.
3.59
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura):  Thank you very 
much, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I want to start by thanking the minister for the 
tight regulations he is putting in place in the Ministry of Agriculture in general and also to 
appeal to my colleagues to be patient with the hardships that we are seeing now. Because in 
order to achieve something good, you sometimes have to go through hardships to achieve 
what you want.  
Why am I saying this? I am very grateful to the Uganda Police Forces because I can see 
action. As you will realise, these measures to control livestock movement have been in place 
for quite some time. In fact I found a brochure dated 2005, but I have never seen the Police 
being as positive as they have been in the last two or so months.
 I am, therefore, requesting Parliament to actually give them support so that they can be 
encouraged to continue to enforce the law. We are the ones who enact these laws here in 
Parliament and once the laws are in place, and we have gone through the Bill, have debated it 
- I even remember the amendment of the Bill, the Animal Disease Control Bill which we 
amended here. What were we doing? We were trying to tighten the control so that we can be 
able to stop what we see today and what we are crying out for. 
I, therefore, think that once we have put in place laws, we need then to support those who are 
enforcing them. I come from Kiruhura district as you know, Madam Speaker. My people are 
suffering. I get a hundred and so telephone calls every day. I want to thank the Ministry of 
Agriculture because every time they call me, I also call them.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But, hon. Mugyenyi, this was a question. Really we wanted 
supplementary but now you are submitting and thanking the minister.  Any way, today, I am 
going to be a bit lenient, but the next round I will edit the questions. and the ministers answer.
MRS MUGYENYI:  Madam Speaker, I think I was building up my argument.  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, hon. Mugyenyi, please the preamble is really long. What is 
the supplementary question?
MRS MUGYENYI:  What I want to ask, Madam Speaker, is for Government to move and 
yield the question of why are cattle keepers moving and continuing to move with their cattle? 
Because I think what we are addressing now is just the symptoms; we are not dealing with 
the cause. 
For me there are two issues; one of the clear examples of what I think is going wrong is that 
cattle keepers are moving because they are searching for water. Is the ministry in charge of 
water working together, going at the same rate responding to the need for the cattle keepers to 
have water so that they can stop to move in search of water in Northern Tanzania, across to 
Congo and so forth?
 I think, Madam Speaker, we continue to blame the victims; we continue to blame the cattle 
keepers - the majority of them are Ugandans. Yes, we could have a few from Rwanda who are 
crossing over, but again it is a responsibility of our Government to ensure that we take care of 
our citizens and the responsibility of other countries is also given to them to take care of that 
responsibility. So, I think that -(Interruption)
MR BANYENZAKI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for giving way, hon. 
Mugyenyi. Honourable member, do you intend to say that while you were still in that 
ministry, the ministry in charge of water frustrated you not to provide water in the cattle 
keeping areas and hence this has been the cause?
MRS MUGYENYI:  Madam Speaker, even when I was still in Government I said it, that the 
water for livestock and for production in the general should come back to the ministry in 
charge of production. Water for crop agriculture; water for livestock agriculture should be in 
the ministry that feels the impact and makes the policies for livestock. I thank you, Madam 
Speaker.
4.05
MRS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala):  Thank you, Rt hon. 
Deputy Speaker. Agriculture is a sector that employs 80 per cent of the population of Uganda 
and contributes 41 per cent of the GDP of this country. I am shocked that we are discussing 
these things three-four months after the catastrophe befell this country and it is not a national 
disaster. 
I am shocked that there are no serious budget cuts, budget reallocations to sort out this issue. 
Eighty per cent of the population is in this sector; 41 per cent of GDP comes from this sector, 
but this sector is given four per cent of the budget. It is time for all Ugandans to start 
redirecting our thoughts and our priorities to where they belong.  
Madam Speaker, we all know that cattle do not move for fun; cattle move, like the previous 
speaker said, because there is a reason. Somebody wants to pay school fees for their children; 
they want to pay medical bills for a relative; cattle were dying, they are looking for water. So, 
the solution cannot be just a ban on cattle movement. There must be found a solution that is 
useful to everybody. 
Government ought to take this very seriously, answer the questions that have been raised in 
this House - questions of vaccination.  This is a predictable thing; Foot and Mouth Disease 
really should have been predicted. It is a predictable disaster in this country; it is not just 
happening for the first time. It should be in the ministrys budget; it should be predictable.  If 
this budget is not in the Ministry of Agriculture, it surely should be in the Ministry of 
Disaster Preparedness. 
I end with the question to Government, to my opposite Member on the other side. What 
measures does Government put to refocus almost 80 per cent of the attention of this country 
to the Ministry of Agriculture? Thank you.
4.09
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank 
you very much, Madam Speaker. I did not expect to make a contribution on this one, but 
since it involves water, allow me to make a few observations. 
There was a question of an allusion to lack of water and indeed animals move because they 
are looking either for pasture or for water or for both. But at the same time, we also have to 
realise that there is nomadism in this country. So, people move and nomadism is one of the 
reasons.  Secondly, the number of animals we keep may not be sustainable on the available 
water and pasture.  
Having said that, I also want to say that Ugandans have been made to believe that everything 
is going to be done by Government; and even when things are done - I think one of our 
honourable members here from Butaleja said that the dams had been made and they have 
been neglected. Who was to repair them? Who was to look after them? Was it the President 
then, the minister or the community that was using it? We need as leaders to sensitise our 
people to look after the facilities that we put in place. 
I want to quote one example. Recently, I was to go and look at an area that badly needed a 
dam, which I am designing now. But when I got there, about four kilometres from that place, 
there is a dam where we have spent nearly Ugshs 500 million. We have put a generator, we 
have put a tank, we have put everything; and the community there vandalised it, took the 
generator, took the pump, and I found an obsolete blank tank in the wilderness. Who is 
supposed to do that? 
For us in Ministry of Water and Environment, our mandate is to construct an asset, pass it on 
to the users and managers. So, if the managers cannot manage, definitely you cannot say the 
person who built the house we need joint meetings with stakeholders to actually see- what is 
required is a multisectoral approach.
Finally, Madam Speaker (Interruption)
MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give the honourable minister is 
what exactly she is saying. While in Butaleja the facilities I am talking about were 
constructed in the 1960s, there are some places like you have been talking about where 
facilities are being constructed now. What should those districts do that are not in the cattle 
corridor, with facilities constructed in the 1950s and 1960s, yet they have farmers that want to 
have cattle or that keep cattle?  
MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much. Of course we cannot pacify the entire country 
all at the same time; we keep saying we have got to start somewhere. Definitely, apart from 
the 21 districts that we consider in the cattle corridor, all the others will definitely fall in and 
we are taking into consideration that one. 
We are actually sending money to the districts under conditional grants and in that provision, 
if the district thinks it is a priority for them to construct a valley tank, it is up to that district to 
make it a priority. They negotiate with us and out of the money we give them, they can 
actually construct a valley tank or water harvesting plant or whatever they do as long as it is 
within the money that we send to them. 
Otherwise at the moment, looking at the resources that we have, and I should make it clear 
that up to now we are using only Uganda Government money to do water for production in 
this country. We do not have money coming from outside; no donor up to now has given us 
money to do water for production. It is only Uganda Government money and this financial 
year, we have a deficit of Ugshs 9 billion.  
4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Maj. (Rtd.) Bright 
Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, you realise that some of 
the questions are actually new and substantive questions. I will answer most of those that 
concern my sector.  
Let me start with my counterpart, the Minister of Agriculture in the shadow cabinet. The 
disease should have been anticipated. Yes, we keep emergency money and hon. Dr Epetait 
was very right. 
In Ministry of Finance, the money does not reside with the Minister of Agriculture and what 
happened this time round is that we had spent almost six years in some sections of the 
country and three years in that part of the country where these people entered from without 
the disease. But the unfortunate part of it is that this disease mutates, so they had to first 
verify the strain in order to identify the vaccine that is needed. Government certainly has 
taken some steps, which I will explain.  
Let me go to hon. Sebuliba Mutumba. Why use tankers and not cans? Some farmers have 
milk from non- infected areas. We have not banned transportation of milk by cans from farms 
to collecting centres.  Cans in quarantine period will be used from farms to milk collecting 
centres so that tankers, which are sealed and refrigerated can take this milk safely to the 
processing plants. 
Why do we ban cans? First of all, it is by-law; you made the law, you cannot turn around here 
in the House and say we are acting contrary we cannot turn against the government for 
implementing the law you passed. When you are transporting cans, for instance, from 
Nyabushozi and you are going through Rakai, Masaka, Mpigi- first of all, as you heard from 
my report, milk has got the highest content of this virus of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in 
the animal body. 
These people who transport cans on the lorries have got several points they collect milk on 
the road. Now, how are you sure in the first place that he has not stopped in Lyantonde and 
loaded? You cannot be sure that these transporters are not going to add on more cans, and 
Government cannot dance to the tune of the interests of a few traders and compromise the 
lives of so many Ugandans who consume the product.  
DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. 
The information I want to give is that FMD is not transmissible from animal to man. 
Therefore, our major worry is that it is transmissible from animal to animal and it causes 
death and lowers production but it is not dangerous to human life. 
MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you very much for that comment and that is what I am 
explaining. When I say, we cannot compromise a million consumers I mean that if you spread 
disease, you prolong quarantine and you deny people milk and meat that would have 
otherwise been available to them easily.
Madam speaker, the picture of those animals that were impounded in Bushenyi is very 
regrettable. It is very bad and I agree with hon. Sebuliba that animal rights were violated. But 
let me explain the circumstances under which these animals ended in Bushenyi. 
There is quarantine in Isingiro and Ntungamo districts but some traders loaded these animals 
in Isingiro and went through panyas all the way to Ntugamo district and to Sheema and they 
were intercepted in Lutoto when they were about to enter the national park. 
The information available is that they wanted to come through Fort Portal and then come to 
Mubende. What happened is that when the people were arrested, they ran away and only the 
ton-boy remained behind. So, in the first place, the Police at Lutoto was handicapped, they 
did not have capacity even to drive the vehicle because they did not have resources. 
They had to get clearance from their district headquarters and the lorry was driven to 
Bushenyi at night and apparently they had spent some time doing those panyas. That is how 
they reached Bushenyi and they could not find the owner of the cows. Apparently, by the time 
of offloading them, some of the cows had started dying. Really, it is regrettable. We need to I 
recently brought brochures here in this House for how people to know animal rights. 
Hon. Dr Epetait, I want to thank you very much for your support of the report and your 
technical input in the report. But I want to say one of your concerns is what is Government 
doing. 
The question was why dont we allow the movement of animals? I have been in the press; we 
have issued press releases. We have been on media telling the people what has happened, how 
has the government reacted and what we intend to do. 
For purposes of putting records correct in this House, when the outbreak came after the influx 
of these immigrants, Government reacted very quickly. I had actually not gone to the 
ministry, somebody who contributed before was there. They waited and tested and they got 
the strain of this FMD. 
At that time, only 200 dosages were required. Quarantine restriction was imposed but 
because people flouted quarantine, by the time we vaccinated using the 200 dosages, the 
traders had reached all over the place. The milk was going and it spread to 12 districts. 
Now, we have been to these districts to sensitise them on what to do and what Government 
has decided is to strengthen the quarantine restriction. We are in the process of procuring 200 
million dosages to add on the 200 and 150 that have already been secured to massively 
vaccinate the animals; those, which are sick and not sick in the affected areas.  
MR SEBULIBA: I want the minister to clarify to me; he has talked about the measures they 
have put down to curb these animal diseases. But I am yet to get clear the measures they have 
put down for the milk handlers to acquire the milk tanks because this is a new phenomenon. 
Already, they are suffering from the loans they got for the cans and batch pasteurisation 
plants and the coolers. What steps has the minister or Government come out with to help the 
milk handlers and traders to get the tanks or even those big vehicles you are talking about?
MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. 
This is a disaster; we have a disease at our hands and we cannot say that we allow people 
with cans to go on spreading it. All we are saying is that if you are trading on cans, please, 
take the cans to the milk cooling plants.  
If you are in central and you are collecting milk from Kapeka to Luweero, nobody is going to 
stop you as long as the milk is coming from zones free of FMD. In areas where there is FMD, 
you must stay your cans because it is not allowed and this is by law. It is not the minister who 
is imposing on the people these laws.  
Two, where are the tanks? Madam Speaker and honourable members, the tanks which are 
available in the country can actually ferry milk from cooling plants; and in the Dairy 
Corporation they have got the drugs which fumigate the vehicles. They have got a chemical 
they use; sometimes they put this drug in water and then the vehicles can move through it. 
So, they can ably bring this milk to Kampala for processing. 
Otherwise, once we have vaccinated and have controlled the disease, we shall allow 
movement of cans as it is stipulated in a hygienic manner. We are not putting a total ban on 
cans and I have already indicated in my submission that farmers can take milk from their 
farms to the nearest collecting milk centers.
MR SEBULIBA: Madam Speaker, can the minister give us the time frame for this one also 
because they way I see things, the whole thing may end up (Interjections)- you know, we 
want to save this industry. We want to come out as leaders to help the Minister and we are 
going to be in that committee because it is open ended and at the same time the tankers are 
not there. I know we must control this disease but do you have a time frame, hon. minister? 
And, where can we come in as leaders to assist in this one?
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Maybe, let him finish his answer and if you find there is 
something he has not done then you come up. Let him finish his response.
MRS MUGYENYI:  Clarification, hon. Minister, through Madam Speaker (Interruption)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Why dont you allow him to finish? I have just asked hon. 
Sebuliba and hon. Ssekikubo to hold on until he has finished and if something is missing, you 
jump up.
MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, again hon. Epetait said that cows can move 
within and between districts, which are not affected provided the district veterinary officer of 
the cows where they are moving from has given a permit and the other one who is receiving 
has given a no-objection. 
Hon. Sebaggala, I have already answered you about the cans. We are not fighting bone 
bagagawale; we are actually implementing it. Stopping animal movement is actually to make 
sure that we have healthy animals, that we can promote healthy trade and increase 
production. 
Hon. Otekat said there is still movement of cattle, especially in the east. Really, this is strange 
to me. We have not given any movement permit, but as you read in my report and my 
colleague hon. Epatait has already alluded to it, I think we erred when we were 
decentralising. In disease control we need one chain of command and actually we cannot 
trade internationally if we do not meet that standard. When we are decentralising veterinary 
officers, we are putting them in local governments. 
In fact one of the problems we are facing is that they are giving permits and some of these 
permits are illegal because they flout the law. For instance, you are not supposed to move live 
animals and animal products from a non-infected area through an infected area, and they are 
doing so. And when (Interruption) 
MR ARUMADRI: Thank you my colleague for giving way. May I inform you honourable 
minister that thousands of cattle are now in Maruzi Ranch in Apac District? I wonder whether 
you are aware of that exodus and what measures are you taking about that?
MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Honourable members, first of all I want you to appreciate 
that for these new questions, I need to establish the truth. The presence of animals in that 
ranch, which belongs to Government - I received it on an sms from a Member of Parliament 
here. I have asked one of our commissioners to go and verify. But while I am responding 
now, I would like to restrict myself to this question. 
Madam Speaker, the movement of cattle is as stipulated in the pamphlets, which I distributed 
this afternoon and in my report. Anything outside is illegal. I want to take this opportunity to 
commend the Police. They have worked with us and in fact some of these outcries you hear 
now are because the Police have decided to implement the law, which has been existing. We 
are not actually the ones telling them to do so; the moment we declare an area under 
quarantine, they have been effecting it. 
Now that you have told me there is movement, as soon as I get out of this Chamber I am 
going to ring the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Gen. Kaihura to take appropriate action. We 
are not allowing movement of cattle first of all to affected areas and to free areas, and we 
have not given anybody permission to occupy Government ranches. 
Hon. Rwakimari, what prompted the expulsion of these Ugandans and other immigrants from 
Tanzania? You remember this is a question I asked the hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs when 
I was the other side. (Laughter) I want to inform the House that if you look at the report, we 
are working together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the government of the Republic 
of Tanzania to make sure that we harmonise our disease control mechanism on our borders so 
that what we do this side, they also do it on the other side. 
Two, we want them if they want to expel people, to tell us so that we can receive them 
formally. So, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is in advanced stages; actually, very soon we 
may enter into cross border meetings.
Hon. Kibanzanga you asked, Have you interfaced with the Minister of Disaster and 
Preparedness? Yes, we have and actually he has responded. He has given some food to the 
people in your area and he has dispatched some food to Nakivale. Recently when I was in 
Rakai I wrote to him a letter and I think they are in the process of responding for emergency. 
But we cannot sustain it. Government is trying to find a way of how they can go about it. 
Some of these people actually are not Ugandans; they are naturalised Tanzanians I think. I 
went there and saw them and actually some of them were killed, we were told and we saw the 
widows. So, we are handling it through our diplomatic channels.
Hon. Mugyenyi, the Police is doing a good job. Yes, I commend them and actually Parliament 
should be seen as helping the Police. These people who are moving in wetlands - if we do not 
give police permission to stop them I think we shall be actually working against ourselves 
because we are the people who pass the laws in this House.
Hon. Rusaniya, said Government is taking too long and asked, When is the remedy? I want to 
tell you honourable members that today our ministry was in contact with those who have 
supplied us the previous vaccines and the Ministry of Finance is trying to get money so that 
we can import this vaccine. We have also prepared all the teams, vaccination is going to be 
simultaneous so that in areas that are disease free, we shall first allow off gate sales from 
farms. People can load their animals on vehicles and bring them to lufula and sell the 
animals. We shall look at areas where we do not have a threat of FMD and allow people to 
transport milk as long as we know that the area is safe and covered.
Hon. Ssekikubo, what steps has Government taken? I have answered that. 
What are our contingence plans on water? Really, water is a serious problem and it is 
incorporated in our priorities as Government. I agree with you 100 percent that most of these 
people actually are moving out of their places of grazing because they have to search for 
water and I want also to tell Members that this influx has brought pressure on the little water 
that was there, and the pasture. Those of you who come from Masaka, who have been to 
Sango Bay to see what is happening there, really the animals are grazing almost on soil. So, 
Government is trying to find a way of availing water for production and not only for animals 
but also for crop production and human consumption.
What are we doing about Sembabule market? This takes us again to what hon. Epatait said 
about the chain of command in disease control. We have put a total ban on markets but I am 
surprised that there are markets in operation. I will ask our commissioner to go and verify 
whether it is true that people are trading in markets when the neighbours are affected because 
this attracts people to smuggle cows in at night to bring them at that market and actually it 
will be spreading disease.

Hon. Byarugaba: it is three months since this problem came, what are we doing; we are 
talking so long? I have been in Isingiro South, I have addressed your farmers and I have told 
them of what is going to happen. I have been on Radio West with my team and as we talk 
now there are all regional FMs, our veterinary staff are educating people on how to prevent 
this disease, how to impose quarantine and the steps taken by Government.  
Hon. Dombo said cows are dying in Pallisa and Butaleja. I am learning it for the first time 
and I am going to verify it. Then if we discover it is FMD, you will be under quarantine. 
(Laughter) Hon. Dombo again asked about dams, which were silted and that the government 
is digging new dams elsewhere. I think hon. Mutagamba has ably answered that but let me 
chip in that you have a dam and the community there cannot remove weed and the dirt in the 
dam and you are waiting for the government to really clean your wells? I think it is also not 
being serious as far as farming is concerned. Even for human consumption, once Government 
has put a facility in place, the community should take responsibility to maintain that facility.  
Finally, there was a question on dams again.  Honourable members, you know our budget - 
we are about to discuss the policy statement and the water falls under the Ministry of Water. 
We shall reserve this question for the appropriate portfolio and at an appropriate time. Thank 
you very much, Madam Speaker.


