Monday 23rd June, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

LAYING OF PAPERS 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel): Mr. Speaker, although we distributed 'The background to the Budget' to the Members of Parliament, we have been requested to lay a copy on the Table.  Mr. Speaker, I lay 'The Background to the Budget' on the Table.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr. Speaker,  we are going to consider the Vote on Account but I do not see a quorum in the House for this important item.  Thank you.  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I suspend the proceeding for 15 minutes.

(The House was adjourned for 15 minutes).

(The House resumed at 2.50 pm, the Deputy Speaker presiding).

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF

1. The Supplementary expenditure for the fiscal year 1998/99
2. Vote on Account for the fiscal year 19999/2000.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel):  Mr. Speaker, I have consulted with the Chairman of the National Economy Committee and we have agreed that we postpone the motion on the supplementary,  but move ahead with the Vote on Account.  One of the reasons is that they have not discussed the matter with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR. LWANGA:  Mr. Speaker, the clarification I seek is, I heard the Minister say that he had consulted the Chairman of the National Economy Committee.  I would have thought that he should have consulted the Chairman of the Finance and Economic Planning Committee because that is the one charged with checking in detail the recurrent and capital expenditures.  I thought that the Committee on Economy is supposed to check generally on finance and the economy,  and I think it is in section 128 of our rules.  I wish to be clarified on that.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking further clarification on this matter.  I am a Member serving on the Sessional Committee on Finance and Economic Planning and when I look at the rules of procedure of the House,  rule number 128 specifically stipulates the roles and functions of the Committee on National Economy.  Again if you look at rule number 143,  it clearly states out the functions of the Sessional Committees.  In this case,  even though I am new on that Committee,  I have noted that the Committee on National Economy usurps the functions of the Sessional Committee.  Could I seek clarification from you, Mr. Speaker, so that we could - in future - proceed in an orderly manner on such matters?  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think the clarification should be sought from the Minister concerned because it is the Minister who said he consulted the Chairperson.  Maybe he may have to explain why he did that.

MR. OPIO: Mr. Speaker,  we have had these areas which overlap and this is one of them.  I consulted with the Chairperson of the Sectoral Committee on Finance and Planning and also my Colleague hon. Manzi.  Before he left he told me that he had had a brief discussion with the Chairman of National Economy,  hon. Isaac Musumba.  When I met hon. Isaac Musumba as I was coming to the House,  he raised an issue that his Committee had not discussed this item,  and I informed him that I had been informed by hon. Manzi that he had already discussed with him personally,  although not within the meeting.  

In order to avoid wrangles on the Floor,  I thought that the two Committees should sit and decide so that we do not keep on moving like I have been moving,  from the Sectoral Committee on Finance and Economic Planning,  then move to the Committee on National Economy.  I think we should get some guidelines so that we solve this item once and for all.

MISS. KIRASO:  Mr. Speaker,  I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance and Economic Planning and since I came to Parliament I have been serving on the same Committee.  It is true that sometimes there have been issues where there is no clear demarcation on where that issue should fall.  The hon. Minister was the last Chairman of this Committee,  and he knows this problem very well.  I discussed with him yesterday,  I discussed with hon. Manzi and some Members of my Committee yesterday.  When he says that the two Committees should sit,  discuss and agree and yet we have got rules which guide us and they are very clear on the issue,  I need to be clarified.  Should it be the functions of the Committees to decide who should handle what,  or things are very clear and we should go according to those rules?  In which case I would like to propose that since the relevant Committee was not consulted,  we should proceed.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  It is obvious that there is an anomaly in the handling of this vote on account,  but I want to make a specific appeal.  The other day we came here and adjourned yet  every time we meet Shs 28 million is spent.  The other day we adjourned because of lack of preparedness,  but the Vote on Account is not traditionally something that will cause a lot of acrimony or needs a lot of adjustment.  In any case,  Parliament's hands are even tied in the sense that we cannot even increase the amount.  I am saying that while you call the two relevant Chairpersons of those Committees and help to re-read and re-define the boundaries upon which they will act - which to me are obvious and I do not even see where the conflict comes from - I suggest that we proceed with today's Vote on Account and see how far we will go, instead of wasting the tax payer's money again like we did last week.  With those words I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes,  hon. Member.  I will then make a ruling.

MR. MUSUMBA:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  I had no intention of being drawn into this discussion, neither I as Musumba or as a Chairman of the Committee.  But the Minister has said that he did consult me and we agreed that he can go ahead and present the Vote on Account.  This is because one;  it is constitutional.  There is not much we can do about it.  In any case it is a fraction of what is in the estimates,  that is a foregone conclusion.  

I however told him that when it comes to Supplementary Schedule which is already a postmortem of what has been spent already,  there is a need for a Committee of this House to inform the whole House of why certain expenditures were made, when they were made,  and what the problem is.  Was the problem under budgeting, was the event unforeseen,  why is it that in some cases we have an over 100 percent increment in terms of the budgeted amount and the Supplementary?  Sir, these are pertinent questions which this House must satisfy itself on.  We did agree between Government and ourselves that Government will not spend over 3 percent of the budgeted amount,  by way of Supplementary.  If the Government has overstepped that,  must we not get an explanation?  These are the issues on which I said this House is entitled to an explanation.  For anybody to sit here and say that we should just close our eyes and proceed and yet it is our duty to examine and evaluate the functions of the Government with respect to a Budget that we have passed in this House,  is not tenable. 

If I may conclude,  as for who does what, yesterday I was accosted -(Mr. Lwanga rose_)-  yes, that is the word, Sir.  An hon. Member of this House, hon. Lwanga, who is a Member of the Sessional Committee said, 'you, who told you that your Committee is the one supposed to look at the Budget?  This supplementary is a matter for Finance and Economic Planning,  it has nothing to do with the economy.'  And I told him, 'we are a busy Committee,'  - by the way I can inform this House that our Committee on National Economy is full to the brim.  I said, 'we are a busy Committee,  we have work and we are not interested in fighting for work.'   I added, 'I have no interest in the Budget,  it may be yours,  it may be mine,'  -(Interruption)-  if I may continue, Sir, 'it may be done by any Committee,  as long as there is a report.' -(Mr. Lwanga rose_).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not allowing you.

MR. LWANGA: He has mentioned my name.

MR. MUSUMBA: I said, 'as long as there is a report I have no objection.'  Then hon. Kiraso who is the Chairperson -(Interruption).

MR. LWANGA:  I have been a Member of the Finance Committee since I joined Parliament and,  Mr. Speaker,  I happen to be a very well trained accountant as well.  In rule 143 (d), the general functions of Sessional committees read: "To examine critically Government recurrent and capital budget estimates and to make recommendations on them for the general debate in the House",  and here for Sessional Committee can you read Finance and Economic Planning Committee?  Is the hon. Member in order to come here and allege that I accosted him when I was trying to show him how things are done,  Mr. Speaker?  I was trying to educate him.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, I do not know.  It is the Member who said you accosted him. I think what you can say is that, 'can he substantiate why he said you accosted him?'  If he does not then we can rule on that.

MR. KAGGWA:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister has tabled his motion,  the Chairperson of the Finance Committee has agreed to proceed despite the small errors made.  The Minister has said that he has withdrawn the Supplementary issue.  Why do you now labour to go into these details when we can move onto another issue that has been agreed upon?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Fine,  but then I think I will make a ruling on this matter so that we do not have a problem in future about the same issue.  When we pass the Supplementaries which were intended to be passed today,  we end them with a Supplementary Appropriation Bill which becomes an Act.  To understand who deals with what,  you also take into account the Appropriation Bill; when we deal with the Appropriation Bill who is responsible for what we put in it?  I think that what we put in the Appropriation Bill is considered by the Sessional Committee,  therefore in the same way,  matters that end in Supplementary Appropriation Bill should be handled by the Appropriation Sessional Committee.  I think that ends the matter.  

If the Minister wants to consult he can consult whoever,  but we consult the appropriate Committee.  We have gathered from the Chairperson that they have no objection,  therefore I do not know whether we can proceed or not, then we can move on to another matter after that.

MR. OPIO:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker,  for your ruling.  As I have stated,  we agreed that we move to Vote on Account and also now that I know the relevant Committee,  I would request that we meet very early tomorrow so that we go for the Supplementaries.  

I want to move the resolution of Parliament to resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of Vote on Account for year 1999/2000 financial year.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is your motion seconded?

MR. OPIO:  Yes it is seconded.

CAPT. GUMA:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker. I have a problem.  The hon. Minister can bail me out.  On 12th May,  the Clerk to Parliament wrote to the Minister of Finance requesting for a Supplementary Budget for Parliament,  to the tune of about Shs 1.2 billion to fund certain arrears of mileage for Women's day,  Labour day and so on.  -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But hon. Member,  we are not dealing with Supplementary.  We are dealing with Vote on Account,  that is the Budget which was read.  But because we have not passed it,  we want Vote on Account to run the services for the next three to  four months.  When Supplementary comes, then that question can be raised.

MR. OPIO:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to read the resolution.  It says, "Whereas clause (4) of Article 154 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the consolidated fund account for the purposes of meeting expenditures necessary to carry on the services of the Government until expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year, or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is earlier; and whereas the Government financial year will end on the 30th June 1999,  and it is the belief of the President by that date this House will not have approved estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the financial year 1999/2000; whereas it is necessary that the President authorises the issue of monies from the consolidated fund account for the purposes of meeting expenditure to carry out the service of Government;  and whereas clause (5) (a) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorization of issue of funds from the consolidated fund account for purposes of clause (4) are to be approved by a resolution of Parliament; now therefore be it resolved that Parliament approve Vote on Account allocated to various votes and heads attached to this resolution."  Mr. Speaker,  I beg to move.

As per the figures on the Vote on Account 1999/2000,  the Government spending for year 1999/2000 is estimated at Shs 1,836.4 billion.  This includes Shs 908.76 billion for recurrent expenditure and Shs 927.64 billion for development, of which Shs 406.34 billion for development is collected locally,  including taxes and other local funds,  and Shs 521.3 billion is from donor sources.  The tables to the House indicate the estimate of vote for wage and non wage in the recurrent budget and development budget both locally and externally sourced.

Vote on Account present centre votes  - Shs 193,046,181; 
District Votes                        - Shs 109,874,132; 
Recurrent total                       - Shs 302,920,314.

MR. RWABITA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  While the Minister is reading the recurrent estimates for districts and other Ministries, I have looked through the two pages on the recurrent and I do not see Parliament there.  Where do we stand?  Can you clarify?

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Speaker, I was just about to come to that,  if the hon. Member could give me time.  When we come to development centre,  we have Vote on Account under Local,  we have Shs 5,234,269 and the district is O9750.  Total development therefore for Vote on Account is Shs 5,744,019.  Vote on Account local Government of Uganda development centre, we have Shs 97,445,674, district vote Shs 10,188,033 total Shs 107,633,707.  Vote on Account taxes you have Shs 20,836,097, district vote Shs 1,232,393, then we have development total for Vote on Account taxes Shs 22,068,491.  

To answer hon. Rwabiita, the issue he has raised is fundamental because we have statutory bodies,  Parliament is one of them,  and we have them stipulated in our Budget speech.  What we are going to do although it is to go according to Article 155 of the Constitution.  Constitutional bodies which include the Electoral Commission, the Human Rights Commission, Parliamentary Commission and others will be reflected.  I thank you very much for reminding us.  

The approval of these votes will facilitate Government's operations without interruption, until the Budget is discussed and approved.  I therefore would like to request Parliament to approve Vote on Account as stipulated on my paper and the addition which we are going to be put aside for Statutory bodies which are not yet on paper.  I thank you,  Mr. Speaker.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY
VOTE ON ACCOUNT

CENTRE VOTES

VOTE 001  Office of the President
Vote 002  State House
Vote 004  Office of the Prime Minister
Vote 005  Public Service
Vote 006  Foreign Affairs
Vote 007  Justice
Vote 008  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you Mr. Chairman. I am seeking clarification on Vote 008.  This clarification may go to other votes so that I do not raise the same issue thereafter.  This is in regard to what was provided for in the Budget speech of the Minister of Finance to the effect that there is going to be adequate provision to settle domestic arrears arising out of court judgement, compensations and such verified expenses.  The amount which is provided for here - what has been estimated to cater for domestic arrears,  when you look through the entire provision - is very small.  Could the Minister tell the House in general terms how domestic arrears would be catered for?  Is it through the votes of individual Ministries or this will be catered for separately as financial provision by the Ministry of Finance in order to reduce on the back log particularly of local suppliers and those who have legitimate claims against the Government?  I am seeking clarification.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, in supplementing my Colleagues's point,  we have been going through a very difficult period in this country in as far as respecting court judgement by Government is concerned.  While unlike Government,  when the citizens of Uganda get judgements against them their properties are sold off or attached and money is realised,  it has not been the case with the Government of Uganda.  Many of our clients who win cases against Government do not get paid and the laws do not allow us to attach Parliament or the Office of the President or any such a thing in order to sell and get the judgement respected.  In the process, it appears that we are putting up courts for other people but as far as justice which you are supposed to get from Government is concerned,  it is only the lucky ones who get their judgement debts settled.  And there is no way to know which one of these cases are to be settled or who determines the priority of who should be paid.  

Furthermore, we have now opened commercial courts in order to transact business faster and pass more judgements.  The list of indebtedness of Government which have not been honoured has been low but now with the coming in of effective commercial courts, it is increasing.  Do we see any hope in regularising the constitutional right of citizens and companies of this country whose rights are infringed upon by Government,  so that when they get judgements they will be honoured?  I think it is very important to answer this question now or in future.  But if we do not in the medium term,  I shall put a direct question to get an answer from the Attorney General,  the Minister of Justice,  from the Prime Minister,  the Leader of Government Business,  or whoever it will be.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But hon. Members,  this is a Vote on Account!  We shall really have time to discuss the Budget some time later, in details.  I think that is when these questions will be raised, but here it is just a measure which is being taken pending the approval of the entire Budget.  When we come to that stage, that is where you can talk about such details.  Proceed.

Vote 008  Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR. NATHAN BYANYIMA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to be clarified about Ministry of Finance.  Some time back, we blocked the payment of Shs 7 billion to Mehta.  This House wants to be informed whether this blocked figure does not include the payments to Mehta.  A number of times,  our hard earned money has been going to Mehta and Scoul,  and yet they are not productive.  It has lost meaning for us to continue giving in the money yet we are not getting anything productive.  We would want to be informed by the Minister whether this money will not go to Scoul and Mehta,  including the money that we got from Bank of Baroda,  because the Government guarantees their loans in the Bank of Baroda.  We would want to be informed about the matter.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OPIO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If the House will debate and pass that we pay Mehta,  we shall cater for it.  Otherwise we are not decided on paying,  until the House has debated and passed it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No.  The point was that last time this Parliament blocked the payment to Mehta.  He was wondering whether Mehta was being paid.  I think that was the question.  

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Chairman, we cannot pay out of this Budget until we have discussed and approved the Budget,  but on Vote on Account I have been advised by my ST and my Permanent Secretary,  we are not going to pay from here,  until it has been debated and passed here.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The question is, are you paying?  I think that is the question.  They said they blocked it.  Are you paying despite of the fact that it was blocked?  I think that is the question.

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Chairman, I think the question on whether we have paid Mehta or not will be appropriate when we are discussing supplementary.  This one is for Vote on Account. The relevant question is whether the Vote on Account includes the amount to pay to Mehta,  that would be the most appropriate question,  because we are now discussing Vote on Account,  the money which the Government intends to disperse in the next quarter of the year.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The answer is that you are not paying this money?

MR. OPIO:  We are not paying until the matter is cleared by Parliament.  This is the information I have.  Should there be any other future information contrary to this,  I would disclaim it.  Thank you.

Vote 010  Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.
Vote 012  Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment.

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Mr. Chairman, I am aware that this Budget was done some time back but in the last few months,  parts of Masaka,  the whole of Sembabule,  the whole of Mbarara district and most of the districts on that side,  Bushenyi and the rest of them,  have been hit by drought.  This is affecting agriculture in the area, it is affecting the animals and the people.  I am therefore wondering if there are funds set aside to take care of this disaster and provide water,  because if this is not done,  this Budget is going to be history.  Since this is an agriculture backed economy,  if the animals are not catered for, if the people are not able to produce,  I do not think we are going to be able to realise this income.  I am therefore wondering if there is any provision somewhere,  either under Lands, Water and Environment or under the Prime Minister's office,  to take care of this disaster.  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.

MR. OPIO:  The hon. Member is referring to Disaster Preparedness and we have catered for these votes.  If there will a bigger emergency,  we shall bring the matter here for more consideration.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  The Minister is assuring that he has made adequate preparations for disaster. I was wondering whether he has adequately catered for the looming food shortage that is going to hit the northern, southern and south western regions.  Have you adequately catered for this?

MR. KIKULUKUNYU:  Recently when addressing the nation,  His Excellency talked about the youth schemes.  Remember last year, the youth entrepreneur schemes and leavers schemes?  Last year the youths of Uganda were not considered on grounds that there was no money.  Mr. Chairman, we want to be reassured that this time this estimate is catering for the interests of the youths this financial year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Member, I thought this question would have come when we reach Vote 030.  I think that is the appropriate vote.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman,  when the hon. Member for Lwemiyaga stood up to raise the issue of drought and water,  the Minister of Finance answered that this is a case for Disaster Preparedness.  I have been looking at the items here and I do not see one on Disaster Preparedness.  The Minister in charge of Water recently paid a visit to my constituency and saw with his eyes,  200 families which have camped and invaded the National Park,  and he saw with his own eyes,  cows which were dying.  A letter has gone to the Prime Minister and others concerned.  

This now is a Vote on Account,  a third of the money is supposed to be spent.  We want to know whether this money includes that money which is going to come to help the people who are in dire need of assistance.  Is this part of that money,  and if there is a disaster,  which vote is it in?  Disaster is not very clear.  We do not know whether it is in the Prime Minister's office, whether it is in Ministry of Finance or whether it is in Lands.  Because if it is in Lands and this is the money we are looking at yet we have to enforce the Land Tribunals and the Land bank and the Land Committees,  I do not know what is happening here.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think let us get these clarifications from the Minister first.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  This morning on our national radio,  we heard that His Excellency the President has withdrawn the digging of water dams and that he is taking it over himself.  Is this kind of money part of the money we are now talking about?

MR. PINTO:  I would like also to add to what hon. Rwakoojo and my Colleague from Nyabushozi have talked about.  If I look under the Office of the Prime Minister,  I see an amount of Shs 664 million only for this Vote on Account.  It is unlikely that the magnitude of the disaster we are talking about can be catered for within such a small amount.  And if this vote on account is going to operate for the next three to four months, then you can see that the problem is going to be with us for a long time and Government has not responded to it yet.  What is going to happen then if it is not included in this Vote on Account?  And there is really a danger of disaster not only in Mbarara but in Rakai too.

MR. LOKERIS:  Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, I would just like to bring fresh information from the field,  regarding what we are discussing.  Some time back when we had a lot of rain we were talking about El Nino,  and we were anticipating that there will be another one called,  is it La Nina?  La Nina has started from Karamoja and there is no cultivation which has taken place in Karamoja.  I travelled from the south across,  up to Kidepo,  the people have put their ploughs and hoes down, there is nothing going on.  

When I got here I was talked to some hon. Members from the West and they were saying the cows are dying,  there are no crops in the West also.  No cows, no crops, what do we eat?  I think it is high time the hon. House critically looked at that item and increases money for it appropriately so that we save the people of Uganda.  Thank you very much.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  In the recent past Uganda has lost a number of citizens due to fish poisoning.  As a matter of fact very few people have seriously resumed eating fish,  due to that calamity of poisoning.  The people of Lubaga requested me to be hesitant in approving this vote,  if the Minister concerned does not give an explanation as to whether part of this money will include a relief fund to ensure that the fish we eat is safe from poisoning.  

MR. OPIO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  With regard to disasters which are particular to certain line Ministries, the line Ministries are supposed to prioritise on their accounts.  I will repeat that:  with regard to disasters within the line Ministries, they have the vote and they can prioritise within those votes.  For disaster that is an emergency,  we have already provided a contingency fund which can be called upon for such disaster.  The money may not be enough,  but we have already provided money for disaster. About Shs 3 billion for contingency -(An hon. Member rose_).  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Why do you not allow him to finish his explanation then you can bring in another clarification?

MR. OPIO:  I am saying Shs 3 billion is contingency provided within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

I would like to refer to the issue of the youth.  In the previous Budget we had provided over Shs 400 million,  which has not been activated up to now,  and we are encouraging the youth to move forward and utilise some of this money for future projects.  But we are in a position to consider more money to this vote if we can have the first amount of money utilised by the youth,  under YES programme.  

For hon. Lokeris,  we had a Cabinet meeting this morning, I wish he had re-introduced the issue.  We would have had a position on it then,  and we would have presented it there.  

The hon. Lukyamuzi has gone out, but I have answered his question under priorities.  It is within the line Ministries and therefore the question he had raised should be catered for by the Ministry which caters for Fisheries.  I thank you Mr. Chairman.  

Yes, I am sorry.  Your clarification was whether what we provided was adequate.  I want to repeat,  I did not say that the funds provided were adequate. I said there are funds within the Disaster Preparedness Ministry and the Ministry of Finance which can be utilised.   I also said that should there be more disasters and we are here,  of course we are going to add more to that fund.  

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the Minister's explanation.  I wanted to know if of that Shs 3 billion,  part of it has already been set aside for this water shortage.  Because if it is in the general pool that is fine.  Does it take the Ministry of Lands and Water to declare an area a disaster area so that part of that money is spent for the Prime Minister's Office?  What we are experiencing in our areas is a true disaster,  and I do not know whether part of that money has already been set aside and is ready to be spent?

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Chairman, if I could respond to what hon. Rwakoojo is talking about,  the Office of the Prime Minister is aware of the serious problem of drought in certain parts of the country.  And thanks to hon. Elly Karuhanga for the information we received from him.  
Secondly, we are also aware that one of the Ministers has already physically visited these areas.  I hope hon. Karuhanga will admit that the Government is sufficiently concerned and what is going to happen is that we are going to sit down and see how some money available from the Ministry of Finance and other Ministries is going to be appropriately applied.  But as to awareness and resolve to do something about it,  those are there.  

However,  I would like to also stress what the Minister has said that there is no way the Government can provide adequately because the funds are just not there.  What is going to happen eventually is,  we are just going to have to reallocate money from some items to these types of emergencies so that in future when some programmes get hurt,  the people of Uganda should not be surprised.  The funds are limited and all we can do is to reallocate,  but we are willing and we are aware,  and I hope the Members of Parliament from the areas affected will continuously work with Government to make sure that we do what is possible about the situation.  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports
Vote 014 - Ministry of Health

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Chairman.  There has been a tendency,  when drawing up these votes on account,  not to provide any money for the Mulago Orthopaedic workshop.  Could the Minister assure me that there is money provided,  perhaps under the Ministry of Health or if not that,  under Mulago Hospital?  Thank you.

MR. PINTO:  With your permission,  Mr. Chairman,  on vote 013, can you permit me to ask that question?   Would you allow me Sir?  Not too long ago we did have some disturbing news about the closing of some Primary Teacher Training Colleges.  And this is a matter that has caused great concern countrywide.  There have been meetings,  we have met the Minister of Education,  some of us have written to him,  he has failed to reply.  But the higher authority, the President,  has given general comments that Government is going to look at this matter possibly with a view of addressing it.  

In this Budget, is there any reconsideration for action to mitigate this problem that aroused some sectarian tendencies,  when some Primary Teacher Education Colleges were being ignored?  It is not only Catholic colleges that were affected,  I think we had a meeting and it was very clear that the exercise was done underhandedly,  it was unfair, and  Government has a responsibility to readdress this.  I have failed to receive any sensible response from the Minister of Education, so I would like to get something now that we can go with.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Point of clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  On the same issue?

MISS. BABIHUGA:  On another issue, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, why do we not - because this is directed to the Minister of Education.

DR. MAKUBUYA:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman and I would like to thank hon. Pinto for raising this point.  Exactly because of the considerations which he has articulated,  the matter is receiving the highest consideration and Government will give an appropriate response in the near future.  I thank you.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With regard to the funds allocated to the Department of Sports,  I remember some time last year,  this Parliament recommended that some percentage from the export levy should go to strengthen the Sports Department in the Ministry.  Can I be assured that this is being appropriated?  Thank you. 

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman,  the response of the Minister of Education and Sports is not the kind of response he should give at this time.  Is he implying that we should defer approval of Vote on Account for the Ministry of Education and Sports until he has given sufficient explanation to the question of the hon. Member?  Is that what he means?

PROF. KAGONYERA:  I need to be educated by hon. Mwandha.  We are deliberating on the Vote on Account,  which is a budgetary issue.  Is he suggesting that the business of the closing or not closing of the Teacher Training Colleges has such a close relationship with the Budget, that unless it is resolved the Government of Uganda must cease to operate?  I thank you,  Mr. Chairman. (Mr. Mwandha rose_).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  He does not want an answer, it is an observation.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Chairman, last year we passed about Shs 174 billion specifically for Sports.  The information I have is that not a single shilling was released to the department and I believe it is time to go away from generalities and talk about specifics.  For this House to keep sitting and passing money or taking resolutions which are never fulfilled,  I think we are just wasting time.  I see here that some money is being asked for,  for Education and Sports.  Given this scenario of last year,  how can we now be assured that some of this money will go to Sports?  Because I imagine that even in our constituencies we have our youths there,  there are schools,  and there was a reason why we passed this money.  And there is now a Minister in charge of Sports, if you do not release money,  how do you expect this Minister to perform?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But hon. Members as I indicated,  if you have pressing reservations other than say disaster or something like that, why do we not wait when we have time to debate all these details then you bring up all this?  I know that various Ministries are giving you Policy Statements,  why do you not take that opportunity?  When they come to present their Policy Statements,  raise such issues so that this one is just a fraction of what was proposed.  Eventually you are the one to pass it anyway so let us wait for such a time as we are debating in detail.

DR. NKUUHE:  Mine is a supplementary to hon. Winnie Babihuga about the export levy of two percent levied on export.  We passed a resolution sometime either last year or two years ago that this money should be shared,  and we showed how it should be shared by the Sports Council,  the Council for Science and Technology, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, and I think there was some other, a Tourism something.  I would like an assurance that this resolution has been obeyed, and if not, why? 

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Chairman, this problem is with us and the advice is that there has to be a Bill to create a fund which will become a Statute and we can use that to draw that money.  Because this money which is being collected is going to the Consolidated fund and it cannot come out because of that.  I know we passed the resolution,  but the advice was given that there has to be a definite Bill debated here and then we get that Statute which will help us to get that money.  Without that,  I would like to inform the hon. Member that it is not going to be from this Vote on Account.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Specifically that is under Article 153 of the Constitution.  

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA:  I think there is something which was not clearly grasped in respect to hon. Pinto's point of the institutions - TTCs - which have been set for closure.  This is because political decisions have got financial implications.  On this paper for passing Vote on Account, there was a column.  The way I would want to understand it is that whichever way the decision will be made politically by the top authorities in this country,  suppose a decision comes out that says, 'we are not going to close the institutions.'  What will it mean in money terms?  Will these institutions be catered for as far as wage is concerned and other things,  stationery and so on?  I think this is the point really that we are now discussing money and political decisions,  not simply at political level, but they have implications on the Budget.

MR. SSENDAULA:  I appreciate the concerns of hon. Pinto and hon. Guma Gumisiriza and it is because these matters are taken seriously that I have actually been undertaking the kind of consultations which hon. Pinto himself mentioned.  The matter is still under review.  This Vote on Account is to cover a short period.  By the time we come to consider the full Budget for the Ministry,  I am sure this matter will have been resolved by Government and we will be in position either to provide or not to provide.  

I think we would be moving too fast,  to try to sort out this complicated matter at this time of Vote on Account.  I do not know why these hon. Members cannot accept this tentative position for the time being until all the authorities concerned have had a chance to review the matter and we come to a solution which will satisfy all the stakeholders.  Mr. Chairman,  I would crave hon. Members indulgence that this matter rests here,  until we consider the full Budget.  I thank you.  

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications.

MR. OPIO:  Hon. Mwandha wanted to know whether we have catered for one of the departments at Mulago.  We would like to assure him that we have catered for the workshop and for the whole,  it is Shs 140 million.

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications.
Vote 017 - Audit

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I see that the wage on Audit is shs 790 million and then non wage is about Shs 2 billion.  I suppose that is to audit the allowances for auditing banks.  What I wanted to know was,  on this Vote on Account,  is money being provided to pay Greenland Bank,  Cooperative Bank and other banks where money was locked in?  Are people going to pick the money which was eaten by those people,  where is it?  Is it in Finance, making Finance have all the money,  almost like Defence?  I just wanted an explanation about where the money for paying Greenland Bank is coming from and whether it has been audited.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Chairman, we have a law in place that gives limits as to how much money may be given, under the circumstances we are operating.  If it is in excess and it is outside that law, one would have expected that there is going to be some arrangement where a resolution of Parliament to authorise that to operate would be passed.  In the absence of that, is Government deliberately going to break the existing law and operate,  as we have heard announcements that everybody is going to be paid to such amounts that exceed what is given as limit in the law?  Could I get that assurance?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Perhaps the question would be, who is responsible to pay for the Account Orders in these Banks, is it the Government, is it Bank of Uganda?  

MR. OPIO:  First of all this would not have been brought when we are discussing the Vote on Account,  but since the Members are genuinely seeking information, I would like to give some information.

There is no law which says that depositors should not be paid.  The law in place that is the Financial Institutions Statute,  provides for the insured deposits,  which is shs 3 million as per deposit account.  This is the amount which should be paid to the depositors.  But there is no law which says that the Bank of Uganda cannot pay depositors, over and above the insured deposits,  when there is crisis like the one we have.

With regard to whether we have included this money here, definitely this Vote on Account for Government expenditure does not include money to be paid to depositors who deposited in the various commercial banks.

MR. WACHA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the same point,  I would like to clear my mind of two things:

(a) If there is no law regulating the amount of money that Bank of Uganda should pay to depositors of a collapsed bank,  then what is the insurance for?  Why the limitation of the amount which is collected by Bank of Uganda?

(b) Does it therefore mean that Government,  that is Bank of Uganda,  will go to the rescue of banks where the owners have siphoned off the money,  and pay off the depositors using tax payers money?

MR. MWANDHA:   I am not very sure,  Mr. Chairman,  whether in fact the Government can go ahead and pay this money to depositors without the approval of Parliament.  I need to be clarified.  But further more,  he says there is no law that stops the Bank of Uganda from paying this money.  Where is the Bank of Uganda getting this money?  Clarification please!

MR. OPIO: Thank you very much.  Hon. Wacha has put two questions. First,  why there is the limitation on the insurance,  in this case,  to Shs 3 million.  When you are setting up a policy,  you have to look at the cost and benefits.  For instance, in the United States the insurance is for US$ 100,000.  If you put money in a commercial bank over and above US$ 100,000,  when disaster takes place like this one,  they can only pay you US$ 100,000.

In Amendment to our Financial Institution Statute,  we should learn from experience, when setting up the new insured deposits limit.  Any amount of deposits above the insured deposits will be made at the risk of the depositors and will not be a responsibility of Bank of Uganda.  The issue of Shs 3 million was decided at the time of making the Financial Institution Statute,  1993.  There is a chance to amend this Financial Institution Statute when it comes before the House,  soon.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, I think they are asking you, where are you going to get the money?

MR. OPIO: That is what I am coming to.  The next is, where is the Government going to get the money?  The Bank of Uganda is going to provide money which will be over and above what it found in those banks.  For instance,  if it found let us say,  Shs 40 billion in Greenland Bank,  it will only look for about Shs 20 billion,  which will come from Bank of Uganda's savings,  profits and so forth.  That is where the money will come from.

The next question is whether there is a law,  and I have already stated,  as hon. Mwandha has said,  there is no law which prevents Bank of Uganda from paying more than Shs 3 million to the depositors.  On that one,  I want to just repeat what I said before.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Chairman,  I think the pertinent question really is, who has allotted this money which is going to be used by Bank of Uganda to pay off these people?

MR. OPIO:  bank of Uganda is right in using its own money to pay depositors.  The details is that the Bank of Uganda is going to issue promissory notes,  and that will be within its power to issue promissory notes.  The interest on promissory notes will come from the money which Bank of Uganda earns in the usual process of its operations.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  since the Minister has said that this Vote of Account has nothing to do with the money that is going to be used to pay the Greenland Bank,  I would think that we end this debate but that at appropriate time,  the matter can be raised.  Let us proceed with Vote on Account.  But you are assured that the money that you are being asked here is not going to be used for that purpose.

Vote 019 - Butabika Hospital.

Vote 021 - Ministry of Defence.

Vote 022 - Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Vote 023 - Mulago Hospital Complex.

Vote 024 - Makerere University

Vote 025 - Ministry of Local Government.

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  Mr. Chairman,  we have been implementing decentralised governance for some time now and in addition to the local collections at the districts,  there is money that comes from here in Parliament.  I have information here that 20 districts have now exceeded 15 percent of their actual local revenue collections, which is permitted for spending on their allowances.

In these 20 districts,  there is no indication what-so-ever that the Ministry of Local Government has taken any action to reprimand the 20 districts that have blown their spending beyond as much as 40 per cent of this financial requirement.  There is also no indication what-so-ever that these other 25 districts which have stayed within the acceptable limits,  below 40,  have had any incentive so that there is a good example of how they should stick to the regulations we have given to the Local Governments.  I am rising here,  Mr. Chairman,  to just give notice that I will be moving a motion when we start to vote money for these 20 districts;  that money be withheld, that is the non wage funds,  so that by the time we are reading the Budget,  we will be informed of what corrective action has been taken.

For your information I have circulated a one sheet table whose title is, "Statutory Requirements on Councillors Emoluments, 1998/99."  I am urging you Members to support me in this move, that these districts be brought to book so that they do not eat into money availed for development activities.  These districts are very outrageous.  The highest of them being Moroto which has overspent 436 percent over and above.  There are others like Sembabule that have gone to 189 percent,  there is Kamuli - 162 percent and yet there are other districts like Kisoro which have kept at 4 per cent.  So, where is the baseline and what are we telling these people?  

Unless the Minister of Local Government is able to give me the clarification of what he has done and what he intends to do,  I intend to move this motion,  Mr. Chairman.  This is just to give due notice on the matter,  and the Minister of Local Government should assist me in understanding this anomaly.

MR. PINTO:   The matter that my Colleague has raised is of great concern to all of us.  It is not limited only to the allowances or management.  Management of funds at the districts is a matter that we must give a lot of concern to.  I know that there is no standard accounting procedure and we continue to send the money nationally to the districts.  They spend it,  but we do not have a system today of auditing these districts, yet we are adding more and more districts.  We have 45 districts now,  this problem is big.  What can we get as an assurance from Ministry of Finance or Local Government that they are taking this matter seriously, that the money that we send down is going to be used appropriately and accounted for properly within an established mechanism,  because there is an outcry right now,  Mr. Chairman.  

MRS. AKECH:  I am glad that hon. Members are very critical of the spending of Local Governments.  But I would like hon. Members to also note that the Constitution as well as the Local Government Act put in place certain Statutory bodies like the Local Government Tender Boards, the District Service Commissions, the Local Government Public Accounts Committee.  In putting in place these Statutory Bodies and giving them to Local Governments, no corresponding funding from central Government accompanied the creation of these institutions.  Therefore,  because of the narrow tax base of most of the districts especially those quoted, a number have had to go over and above the 15 percent that is allowed from Local Government Revenue base.  

We are trying to put in place,  and we will be discussing with the Office of the Prime Minister to see how funding from the central Government can go to the Local Governments,  to handle the issues of these institutions which are created.  Thank you.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I thank the hon. Minister for her honourable. explanation.  I would like the hon. Minister to further clarify on whether or not these Local Governments are not overspending intentionally.  Local Governments have got the guidelines,  the law that they should be operating within.  From the figures that have been availed by the decentralisation Secretariat,  some of them have not even made an attempt to exhaust the local revenue avenues that should be available to them.  Could the hon. Minister further clarify whether or not these Local Governments are not overspending knowingly?

MR. KARUHANGA:  I want by way of information to alert the Minister that I have seen a letter from UNICEF saying that UNICEF was receiving US$ 27 million - which is a very big increase from US$ 18 million and the Local Government,  where the money was sent,  could not account for that money.  UNICEF headquarters has therefore ordered that there will be no more disbursements to Uganda because of lack of accountability from the districts.  Is she aware of this fact,  and is she doing anything about it so that the UNICEF programme can continue in Uganda?

MRS. MUSUMBA:  I am not really satisfied with the Minister's explanation.  Because using the same baseline,  the same financial regulations,  the same Local Government law,  there are districts in this country that have done business within those rules.  Kisoro I know is a very tiny district, and its income is equally small - unless under Local Government that is not true  - and they have managed to exceed by just 4 percent,  using the same rules.  

The Ministry has not even presented to us any proposed Amendment to the Local Government Act with which they will then do financial and other regulations.  They have not presented anything to show that they have a problem,  and may be the problem is with the law.  Now that the problem is not with the law,  the problem must be with the administrators of this law and me,  I already have support of my proposed motion.  I think these districts must be brought to book,  at least for the next four months so that they put their act together.  After the four months in which vote on account is going to apply,  I am sure that the Minister will report back that there has been order. Thank you very much.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me take this opportunity to assure the House that Government is aware - and fully aware at that - of this problem,  and even the figures hon. Salaamu Musumba is quoting are with Government.  As a matter of fact,  even as early as tomorrow there is a meeting in the office of the Prime Minister about this issue.  What I would have expected from Members of the House is that they themselves also study the problem.  If for example my Colleague from Rukungiri had sat down with our Chairman,  she would have known the severe problems within which these Local Governments are operating.  

It is not quite correct to say that we just must bring the club down on these Governments.  We have a real problem out there,  and as Members of Parliament in fact you are supposed - I would expect you personally - to be the ones to come and support your Local Governments.  They are in real problems,  some of them.  If you look at the tax base, if you look at the conditions involved -(Interruption).

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, is it really in order for the hon. Minister to anticipate this motion which the hon. Member for Bugabula is going to introduce and before it is introduced, for the hon. Minister to go ahead and debate the motion.  Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  My understanding of the complaint as raised by hon. Salaamu Musumba and other Members,  was to the effect that the law is not being followed.  If Members raised that matter that the law is not being followed,  it cannot be said that they are not supporting their Local Governments.  If that is what the hon. Member said, I will say he is not in order.  Proceed.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  If I can finish, Mr. Chairman.  I stated clearly that Government is aware of the problem.  I said that even as early as tomorrow,  there is a meeting in the Office of the Prime Minister.  I cannot tell offhand,  because I was not prepared,  as to what type of stakeholders have been invited to this meeting,  but if I can risk saying this,  any Member who is interested would be free to attend.  I have to check and make sure about the time,  I was not aware of this.  But definitely Members should appreciate the fact that the Executive arm of Government is aware of this problem and it is very concerned because there is no way these local Governments can continue to spend to such a magnitude as she has quoted.  I also do not want to anticipate motions that are going to be moved ahead,  but I think in future when we are debating on how many more districts are to created,  we should bear such issues in mind.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to inform hon. Members that there are many problems surrounding Local Governments.  On the one hand a lot of functions were allocated to them under the Constitution,  especially under Schedule 6 to the Constitution.  If you take for example Article 200 of the Constitution,  the right to hire, fire and discipline now belongs essentially to Local Governments.  So, what is the problem?  

The problem is that on the one hand we would like to give more functions and even resources to these Local Governments and allow them to enjoy sufficient administrative and political space to run their affairs.  On the other, we have also to create the capacity for them to manage and - sorry first of all they have to receive the powers and responsibilities.  That is really the dilemma which we are having at the moment.  

There is also an additional problem namely that many functions were allocated to them. As a Member of the Constituent Assembly, I hold that some of these functions and responsibilities given to them were not properly costed.  In the event you may find that they may not have absorption capacity to cope with the functions,  in light of their capacity.  Article 176 of the Constitution makes it clear that when we are devolving functions to these Local entities you must do it in a coordinated manner, in a measured manner.  That is why we are now going to interface with these institutions,  beginning especially tomorrow,  because tomorrow I have invited the Minister for Local Government.

Of course I have also to interface with the Ministry of Finance, I have to deal with the umbrella which is in charge of Local Governments to see the problems afflicting their performance and the way forward.  What I would request is that you allow us to internalize these problems and solve them before we open a pandora's box,  lest we paralyse them before they have taken off.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I want to draw your attention to the problem I have,  namely that under rule 137,  the House shall consider any Vote on Account in Committee of Supply for a period not exceeding one day.  We have not dealt with the Current Account of the Central Government,  we have districts then we have the Capital Development.  I suggest that we minimize these observations,  which should be appropriately put when we consider the budget in detail,  unless it is very, very pressing.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In view of these disparities that are being highlighted on the ground and given that the Ministry of Local Government is in charge of monitoring and strengthening the capacity on the ground,  I hope that the hon. Minister notes that this money is actually spent on allowances and emoluments of councillors rather than on the development of the district.  Can I be clarified on why the Ministry of Local Government's expenditure has been so critically minimized as to cripple it and hinder it from carrying out the capacity building functions within Local Governments?

MR. WACHA:  Sorry, Mr. Chairman, but I think there is one question which has not been asked and I do  not want the Minister to leave without answering it.  We are talking about percentages over and above 100 percent.  My question is, if the money supposed to be spent on councillors' emoluments is to be restricted to 15 percent of the revenue collections,  where is all this money coming from?  Talk about 189 percent, 162 percent, 436 percent, 94 percent.  Where is the other money,  over and above 15 percent,  coming from?  And who is it hurting?  Is it hurting some other sector in the district or is it hurting the Local Government Ministry directly?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister are you ready to give an answer?

MRS. AKECH:  I just wanted to say that in the overspending, definitely the money that the districts get normally comes from local revenue,  central Government and also from donor funding.  So when a district overspends,  it means that district is eating into some of those funding definitely.  And as my Prime Minister has already stated,  the problems are there.  Capacity needs to be built,  and Local Government needs to be empowered to do this,  down up to the sub county level.  

I am glad my 'Sister' apologized for her slip of the tongue but, she is very concerned about the Local Government affairs because she is also the Chairperson of the concerned Commiitee, and she will assist us here.  

An issue was raised on UNICEF funding.  UNICEF normally sends its funding directly to the districts without the Local Government Ministry getting involved.  We have only been asked to come in now because accountability at the district level became a problem.  The Local Government Ministry is now taking over and following up on accountability of this donor funding.  But of course sometimes we are also incapacitated because of the limited resources.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Vote 027 - Public Service Commission.

Vote 028 - Tourism, Trade  and Industry.

Vote 029 - Energy and Minerals.

Vote 030 - Gender, Labour and Social Development.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, under the Vote for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development,  there has been some confusion as to the funding of rehabilitation centres.  I wanted the Minister to assure this House that there is money provided during this period,  for running rehabilitation centres around the country.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr.Chairman. Earlier on the representative of the youth had too wanted to know whether money for running youth programmes and women's programmes was part of this,  and if it is,  how much is it?  When we go to our constituencies,  we tell the youth and women groups who have been ignored in the past votes,  that this time during the budget the Minister for Finance read something for you, and they clap.  We would like to know exactly how much of this is earmarked or what percentage is earmarked to revamp the women and youth councils?  And is the Entandikwa scheme part of it,  so that we can go and talk to our constituents meaningfully?  

MR. OPIO:  Mr. chairman, the amount we are discussing here was discussed in the Cabinet and the Minister was in the Cabinet,  and this is what has come up for that Vote.  I would like to say that what we are discussing now is a third of that amount which is here.  

Also on the issue of the youth, I answered it.  I said, in the previous budget we put aside money for the youth and that money is still in the banks.  We want to request the youth to utilize that money, and we are going to put more as that money us utilized.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Point of information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Give him time because we want an answer.  I think he has got the details.

MR. OPIO: Hon. Mwandha wanted to know how much is put aside  specifically for rehabilitation centres.  The specific figure is Shs 196 million for the year,  out of which Shs 135 million is for wage. -(Several Hon. Members rose_).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the problem is that the Minister does not have that detailed book where they break down the figures.  Okay, let me now get one person.  Hon. Karuhanga please exhaust your question then we move on.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you.  The Minister should not worry because he comes with a complete contingent of his staff.  The secretary, the treasurer, with all his department heads, are there on the Government bench.  The Minister for Gender is here,  or supposed to be here,  and so many of the Ministers who were sitting here.  My question is very important to us as Members of Parliament.  We want to know because when we go on a weekend to address our people,  we tell them that we have provided money for women and for youth and indeed we have and we have confirmed that.  Out of this a third,  what is the percentage for the youth and what is the percentage for women councils?  

This is a simple,  straight forward question and I do not expect you to carry the figures in your head.  All I am asking is,  just go to the bench find out from your team,  and inform hon. Members so that we know what to go and tell our constituencies.  This is the time for some of us to explain,  these people are on our case. Mr. Chairman, that is all.  If the Minister could answer the amount of money for rehabilitation centres,  how can he fail to answer this one?

MAJ. OKWIR: Mr. Chairman, I want to thank hon. Karuhanga for supporting the youth and women's cause,  but I would like to also point out that there are two issues at stake here.  First there is the programme the hon. Minister referred to which programme is the Youth and Entrepreneur Scheme.  This Parliament has been passing money for this scheme up to the tune of Shs 1.9 billion and at the time,  no money has been released for the youth.  The little money which had gone to the Co-operative Bank,  about Shs 290 million,  was locked up in the collapsed bank.  

The other component is the one the President referred to which is the funding of the youth and women councils.  So, we are talking about two components on this:  we are talking about the component of the Youth Entrepreneur Scheme and we are also talking about the component of the regular funding that is supposed to go to the youth and women councils.  Can you please highlight both,  and the percentages within each component.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman,  the answer given by the Minister is a very clear demonstration of how much the disabled are being forgotten when budgeting for this country,  and they are remembered during voting.  These rehabilitation centres are very, very, important for the disabled people.  They help them to achieve mobility, they help them to get capacity so that they can actually live as independent people without having to be a burden to society.  All that is required is to make sure that these centres are provided with all the necessary facilities so that they can perform.  Government,  year after year, has been forgetting this.  And when I asked this question I was sure the Minister did not have an answer for it.  Apart from paying money for people at the headquarters to keep the department going without actually providing money to run the rehabilitation centre,  where is the money for running these centres?

Further more,  in the whole of this budget there is no money for programmes of disabled persons except money provided for maintaining officers at headquarters.  Really, Mr. Chairman, I think the Minister must look at this matter as one of great concern to everybody and when we come to discuss the budget he should give us details of how much money has been budgeted for disability.  Thank you. (Miss Babihuga rose_).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I hope that will be the last clarification.

MISS. BABIHUGA: Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Historically the Ministry of Gender,  Labour and Social Development has always had the smallest resource allocation, and in terms of decentralisation this is one Ministry that goes right down to the grassroots.  I am raising concern regarding the facilitation of the numerous Departments in this Ministry which up to this time almost do not have any transport and office facilities.  Has the Minister of Finance catered for the facilitation of these Ministers in order to upgrade their dignity.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OPIO:  On the question of the youth councils on which hon. Karuhanga requested to get some information,  I would like to inform the House that the non wage amount provided for is Shs 528.5 million,  the wage provided for is Shs 221.4 million.  For the youth scheme we have provided Shs 1.1 billion under development.  For hon. Karuhanga who would like me to repeat it,  the youth councils non wage is Shs 528.5 million and wage is Shs 221.4 million.  

For hon. Mwandha I had already stated that under the rehabilitation centres - and I had given him a figure of Shs 196 million for the year.  For the non wage and wage was Shs 130 million,  that is what I had given him.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now propose that the total sum of Shs 19,346,181 be provided for on account for the centre votes as the current expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  Motion, Mr. Chairman. I want to move a motion under rule 113 (10)(d) that the Votes on Account of the following districts be deferred until their accounts are put in order.  The districts I am talking about are Arua which has exceeded by 47 percent,  Gulu by 51 percent,  Lira has exceed by 82 percent,  Mbale by 42 percent,  Mukono by 83 percent,  Masaka by 49 percent,  Apac by 43 percent,  Soroti by 94 percent,  Kibale 92 percent -(Interruption). 

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Chairman, as a matter of procedure,  would it be proper for the hon. Member to move the motion when we are in the Committee stage or would she wait until we have resumed into the Plenary?  Can a motion be moved when we are in a Committee stage?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  She can move it,  because we are going to pass it here.  She is saying we should not consider the votes of these districts.

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  I would like to continue and take you back to vote number 27,  Soroti district has exceed by 94 percent,  Kibaale has exceeded by 92 percent, Masindi by 63 percent, Kotido by 54 percent,  Moroto by 436 percent,  Ntugamo by 59 percent,  Kamuli by 162 percent, Budibugyo by 73 percent,  Adjumani by 93 percent, Katakwi by 48 percent, Nakasongola by 70 percent and Sembabule by 189 percent. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, the motion is not supported apparently.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Before we move on to that motion,  my problem is to understand some of the districts which are not applicable. I see in my district,  Mbarara,  the figures are not available.  I want an explanation on what this means.  Does it mean that the district of Mbarara and  -(Interjection)- the district of Kampala I can understand because the Mayor is in America and a new one is just coming on today.  But for Mbarara,  we have a dynamic district council, we have a dynamic Chairman,  what does this mean?  I would like to get information on what that means before I start voting on stopping the other districts from becoming unavailable.  Can the Minister explain what happened to Mbarara?  It is the biggest district in -(Interjection)- unfortunately the Member for Mbarara Municipality is not here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You see the problem I have is I do not have that piece of paper where these details have been given.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to be clarified:  we have been considering Vote on Account just to enable the Government machinery to continue operating while Parliament if scrutinizing the details of the expenditure of the previous year,  and the provision for this year.  I want to find out whether if this would be an appropriate motion at this particular time,  or whether it should wait for when we are considering the substantive Votes at which we could be able to move on either withholding or reduction due to misbehaviour of certain district councils?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Although I do not participate in debates, I would have thought that Vote on Account should not have presented any problem.  We should just pass it and when we come to debate the detailed budget that is where we can raise all these matters,  and make a deduction of a shilling or so instead of -(Interruption).

MR. WACHA:  With all due respect, Mr. chairman,  I want to seek your indulgence and draw the Chair's attention to rule 113 sub rule 10(d) under which I understand hon. Salaamu  Musumba has moved this motion.  Sub rule 10(d) says: "when the House is in Committee of Supply to consider annual or supplementary estimates notwithstanding the rules relating to motions,  any Member may ask for information relating to the details of any vote."  My understanding is that what hon. Salaamu Musumba is doing is to suspend, withhold or defer the passing of these votes until she gets information in respect to why this particular districts have extended to this respect,  and I think our rules permit it.  That is my understanding.  As to the possibility of the motion being misunderstood,  some of us are ready to amend it so that everybody understands it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I thought that the Minister of Local Government came and give an explanation why the law is not being followed in the districts.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister also justified why this anomaly is there. There was an explanation.  Whether it is justified or not,  that explanation was given.  The explanation was that they have a lot of functions for which funds were not provided,  that is why they have gone beyond the mandatory 15 percent.  It is for you to be convinced whether this is a good explanation or not,  but the explanation was given.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, a motion was moved and I want to contribute to it.

THEE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Okay, but I think Members are trying to get some clarification before they can contribute.

MR. KAYONDE:  Can I contribute on the motion which she has  -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No,  she should contribute first.  Unless she says she has already told us what she wanted.

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  Mr. Chairman, as some Members have the statistics in their hands,  you will see that there are districts that have made an effort,  within the limited resources available to them,  to implement the law that we passed.  I am getting worried that if we pass these votes, the Minister of Local Government will be asking us to implement an illegality.  I am not clear whether the Minister is asking us that it is alright to break the law and that the other 25 districts that are doing well by spending less than 40 per cent of their local revenues should also be encouraged to break the law further.  I just do not understand which signals the Minister wants us to send, because I believe an illegality is an illegality and this House should not be party to that.  That is why -(An hon. Member rose_)- Mr. Chairman, I will not accept the information because the information he is about to give me is verbal and I have statistics here which he cannot refute.  So, I do not want to engage in a conversation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But hon. Member, I think these figures which you show here are the expenditures that have happened in the past financial year.  What we are considering is the next financial year and I know we shall have an occasion to deal with the supplementary budget,  that is where a district which is affected comes in.  That is the appropriate time to say, 'do not give this money because they have squandered money.'  But this is the money for the next financial year and they have not started spending it.  I do not know,  but you are free to proceed.

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  I am aware that prevention is better than cure,  I know that.  Given this scenario,  I do not want to send more money to be diverted,  because there are mechanisms in place to ensure that the picture of last year is not repeated.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  I wish to inform the hon. Member that it is the duty of this House to supervise the public expenditure,  we have that constitutional obligation.  The only way we can do that is to send a clear,  unequivocal,  precise,  strong message to our districts that unless they conform to certain accounting principles,  this Parliament is going to find it very difficult to give them more money.  We cannot just put in money in the drain all the time,  especially when it is money paying for allowances to themselves.  How do they do that and exceed it by 107 percent, 400 percent,  and then they expect us to pass a Vote on Account for another year only for them to repeat that?

Look at my own district Mbarara,  it is not even capable of sending us as Parliament, figures to pass.  How do we,  as Parliamentarians,  then say that we are responsible for holding other public officers accountable when they misappropriate funds? I think we better start with our own constituencies and therefore I want to support the hon. Member in her mission to stop it.  I would like to add to the list my own district Mbarara,  Kampala, Kapchorwa and  Kalangala,  for those who have even failed to provide any figures for us to approve.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:   Mr. Chairman, I rise on a point of order.  The issue raised by the hon. Salaamu Musumba relates to what was spent in the last financial year.  This would actually be considered as supplementary in terms of over expenditure in as far as budgeting is concerned,  and we have already passed the centre votes.  Nearly all the centre votes have had supplementary estimates which we have deferred and we are going to discuss after the Sessional Committee responsible considers it.  Is it in order for us to single this one out and discuss it separately,  and differ any approval on Vote on Account when we have not done the same for the other centre votes?  Are we in order in doing this, Mr. Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  We are considering district Vote on Account,  that is where this problem came from.  We cannot now go back and talk about the centre vote which we have passed.  So, if you feel that the motion is not merited, then you do not support it.

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to speak for my motion and finish so that the Members who want to assist me  -(Interruption).

MR. NASASIRA:  I want to thank hon. Musumba for giving way.  I stood up for an appeal.  Nobody will entertain any institution, any district,  to overspend or do something that is unconstitutional.  But hon. Musumba as she is moving her motion, she says she will wait until an explanation is given. My understanding is that we approve the Vote on Account to allow Government - for this matter Government at local level - to be able to run until the full Budget is approved.  Although we approve for a third which is four months, if the Budget is approved in a months' time,  what counts is what is approved then.  Whether we have approved Vote on Account or not,  what comes after that is the actual figure approved in the Budget.  

I would therefore appeal to hon. Musumba and others that instead of paralysing districts now,  let us approve the Vote on Account, the detailed explanation comes - in a few weeks' time we are going to start debating the Budget - and it is at that time that everything will come out.  Then Parliament can send this serious message that hon. Karuhanga was talking about,  rather than stop the money before we get the explanation.  

Suppose you get a good explanation in three weeks time when you have paralysed the district Governments now,  how will we compensate the loss at that time?  This is just to say, 'spend until we approve the Budget.'  It would be appropriate at a later time to bring this motion and deal with those districts that have overspent,  rather than do it now before a full explanation,  and when the Budget is not yet approved.  This is just an appeal.  

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  I want to thank hon. Nasasira for the information but I would like to say that the House has been informed that tomorrow there will be a meeting.  If this explanation is provided to me and to this House tomorrow,  it will be in good time.  But for today,  let us send a proper signal to those districts that are overspending so that we as a Government - I think Parliament will be assisting Government - to use both the carrot and the stick.  

Those districts that are doing well should be encouraged,  and these others should be punished,  even if it is just for one night.  I would like to urge my Colleagues to support me in this motion that the districts that have exceeded 40 percent - normally even for supplementary what is allowed is 3 percent - but my motion is seeking to expand it beyond even 10 percent, which is contingency,  to 40 percent.  Those districts that have spent beyond 40 percent should feel the pinch of this withholding.  That is self explanatory in that the action is desirable at this time so that the districts can check themselves sooner than later.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But something which I want to clear my mind on is how authentic is this document?  We are acting on this document which has been handed to me,  but is it authentic?

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  Mr. Chairman,  the document is authentic and if it is doubted,  I would like to lay it on the Table, because the source is the Ministry of Local Government itself.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Because you see, the documents which I received myself did not include this one.  Where does it come from?  It has to be authentic if we are to rely on it.

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:   This information is from the Ministry of Local Government's headquarters in Kampala.  I received it two weeks ago by special request from Kamuli Parliamentary group and I would like to lay it on the Table.  If it is contested,  then every thing will be null and void. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, let us clear this.

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Chairman, although I am not supposed to disclose anything that takes place in Cabinet,  I would like to say that this document appeared there but it could not be discussed because the Ministry of Local Government said it did not know anything about it.  I am wondering whether we are going to discuss it when the Minister said he did not know the document, and it does not bear any signature?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, laying it on Table does not make it authentic.  I just want to know the source.

MR. WACHA:  Mr. Chairman, the mover of this motion has indicated to us the source of her information.  The persons who could verify or reject the authenticity of the source are here.  Can the Minister of Local Government tell us whether this document is a true document or it is a lie?  And taking into account the fact that:

(a)  the Right hon. Prime Minister spoke without alluding to the possibility of this document not being authentic and; 

(b)  the Minister in charge of General Duties in the Prime Minister's office never alluded to the fact that this thing could be a fraud;  could the Minister of State for Local Government tell us whether we are wasting our time on a fraudulent document?

MRS. AKECH:  I would not like to commit myself to this document as yet,  because I have just been given a copy of it here in this House, by the hon. Elly Karuhanga.  I however feel that given our explanation earlier,  I want to appeal to hon. Members to give us time to study this.  But while we study it,  let the districts operate also.  If they do not, we are going to be in a lot of problems.  I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Chairman, what has transpired is a situation which has taken everybody by surprise,  but I believe hon. Musumba has made a very strong point.  We appreciate the gravity of the matter.  I would like to think that the Prime Minister and Government in general will spare no effort in trying to bring these errant districts to book.  Considering that appeals have been made, I would like to add my appeal to the rest of the Members from the Back Bench,  to my Colleague, hon. Musumba.  Under the circumstances and in the spirit that we are going to hold the Prime Minister and his Government accountable to try to bring this to stop and that he is having a meeting tomorrow -  although it has been expressed that many times we express ourselves here and resolutions are taken and they do not take the matter seriously -  under these circumstances,  the message has gone out very strongly.  Hon. Salaamu Musumba, could you be persuaded to withdraw your motion on condition that the Prime Minister takes the burden to put the culprits to book?

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I may soon be persuaded,  if I get an assurance from the Leader of Government Business on account of this motion and the concerns I have expressed,  that something will be done tomorrow.  Tomorrow is the day they are meeting,  and I want an assurance that order will be instituted by the time we come back to debate the Budget.  If it is not,  the bulk - bigger than the Vote on Account - may suffer out of that kind of delay.  But before I do anything,  I would like to get an assurance from the Leader of Government Business.

THE PRIME MINISTER  (Prof. Nsibambi Apolo):  Mr. Chairman, I am delighted to learn that this motion is being withdrawn,  because there are many imponderables which have not been listened to.  For example if you take the district of Gulu which has been confronted by the state of war and other skirmishes,  its base must be very narrow.  And so when you take 15 percent of a narrow base,  can you comply with it?  If you take Lira,  take Sembabule,  we have been dealing with the state of the endowment profile.  We have been working out the endowment profile of these districts.  These have not been completed for us to know how much they are capable of harnessing.  

There are also questions of leadership.  Are we having adequate political hygiene to ensure that these districts can perform?  Speaking about capacity,  do we have the personnel?  I am knowledgeable on these matters,  having written a whole book on them,  and I donated the four copies to you.  The issues are as follows:  One, there is a Minister of Local Government who handles these matters and I know that he has been handling them.  He has for example instituted a Commissions of Inquiry,  a Judicial Commissions,  in the case of Mbarara.  People have been taken to court,  some have been sacked,  some have even lost leadership positions because of poor governance.  

The assurance I would like to give you is that the Ministry of Local Government,  working along with me,  will ensure that after ascertaining the detailed causes of these problems,  shall take corrective measures - as indeed we have been taking.  I want to assure you that tomorrow we are going to spend a whole day - but tomorrow we must be here by 10.00 a.m - what do you expect us to do within an hour,  although I normally start dead on time?  If I start dead on time and some prime movers are not around,  what do you expect me to do within an hour?  The request I would make is that the relevant Minister, of Local Government,  will give you a detailed statement on these matters.  
Meanwhile, I want to state that because of so many circumstances which have surrounded us,  many of these polities or sub polities have not performed.  Because even the centre itself has been lugubriosed by factors beyond its control.  And what it was supposed to give to them has not been delivered.  So the problems are compounded.  May I ask you to withdraw it,  having been assured that the Ministry of Local Government will continue to take appropriate corrective measures,  and I shall ensure that I buttress him?  I thank you.

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  Thank you.  I was getting worried because the Leader of Government Business did not also seem sure that he could deal with the level of lugubriousness at Local Government.  But to avoid paralysis as he says,  Mr. Chairman,  I would like to withdraw my motion and only say that it may resurface at an appropriate time this year.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Okay,  motion withdrawn.  Hon. Members,  in view of the problem I told you about of rule 113 (7), I am invoking rule 113 (8).  I now propose that a total sum of Shs 109,874,132,000 billion be provided for as a Vote on Account for the districts votes,  as recurrent expenditure.  

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 108,874,132,000 billion be provided for as a Vote on Account for the district votes as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

CENTRE VOTE DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now propose that the total sum of Shs 118,280,771,000 billion be provided for as a Vote on Account for Centre votes as development expenditure.  I now put the question that a total sum of shillings  -(Interruption).

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, the document I have does not - I do not have the figure you are referring to,  but I mean the second page.  Could you advise whether or not we have different documents?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Have you got the document for summary of development expenditure?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Yes, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You add the last two.  You know,  the amount itself plus the taxes,  that is how you get it.  Is it okay?  I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 118,281,771,000 billion be provided for as a Vote on Account for the centre votes as development expenditure.

(question put and agreed to)

DISTRICT VOTE DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now propose that a total sum of Shs 11,420,426,000 billion be provided for as a Vote on Account for the district votes as development expenditure.  

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,420,226,000 billion be provided for as a Vote on Account for the districts votes and development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, The Deputy Speaker presiding).

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Vote on Account for the financial year 1999/2000 and passed it without any Amendments.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio Gabriel):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think this brings us to the end of today's business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.43 pm and adjourned until Thursday 24th June, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)
