Thursday 24th June, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker,  Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

     MR. ELLY KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to ask an oral question to the Minister responsible for Lands, Water and Environment. What steps are you taking to implement the Land Act?  

And to elaborate further,  it covers the whole spectrum of the Act:  the Land bank, the Land Tribunals, et cetera.  Thank you.

   THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The question put covers the entire spectrum of the Land Act.  It covers all the 99 sections of the Act and I am afraid that within the time availed to me for an oral answer,  I cannot probably fulfil all the aspirations of the questioner.  I promise,  however,  that next week I will be circulating to all Members of Parliament a Status Report on the implementation of the Land Act.  May I now proceed to give an oral answer?  

It is this Parliament which 11 months ago enacted the Land Act.  That Land Act came into effect on 2nd July,  last year,  at a time when the Budget had been read.  As such it met its first problem,  the non provision of a funding line for its implementation.  

I want to emphasize,  Mr. Speaker,  that this Act is one of the fundamental laws of our country.  This Act has ushered in social and economic reforms and it has set up thousands of land  management institutions at grassroots and community levels, thereby giving power to the people of Uganda to manage their own affairs.

Its implementation is multi-institutional.  It is not the singular function of my Ministry to implement this Act.  My Ministry,  responsible for Lands,  is only a lead agency.  The other partners with whom we implement the Act are the Ministries of Local Government,  at the centre there is the Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Planning,  the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries,  the Ministry for Gender, Labour and Social Affairs, the Judicial Service Commission, the Law Reform Commission.  We also have partners in the NGO world.  Those are the Uganda National Farmers Association, the Uganda Tenants Association, the Uganda Land Alliance,  professional bodies of lawyers, surveyors, valuers and planners,  and individual land owners.   In all the actions my Ministry has taken towards its implementation,  all these partners - of course recently we have brought on board the donors,  are carrying out the implementation.  

The people of Uganda have a lot of expectations in its implementation because they believe the Government policies and programmes like Poverty Eradication Plan, the modernisation of agriculture, the National Environmental Action Plan, the National Gender Policy,  decentralisation and good governance are all going to be fulfilled and enhanced through the implementation of the Land Act.  

Let me go to specific actions of implementation.  Initially in my Ministry,  we set up a task force composed of the senior technical staff from the disciplines of land management, valuation,  surveying and law,  in order to peruse the Act and then identify those sections that require action.  Through their work,  studies and workshops,  we found out that this task force which was working on a daily basis could not handle the magnitude of the work required to be put on the ground to implement this Act.  

We therefore approached friends,  partners in development,  and the first to come to our assistance was the U.K. Department for International Development that assisted us in a preliminary study that recommended the implementation to be done through a project.  We now have a project co-funded by the Uganda Government and the British DID,  a project entitled "Sustainable Livelihoods Through Land Tenure Reform".  This project is funded by Shs 220 million provided to my Ministry,  through a supplementary budget.  As I said earlier,  the Act came into effect after the Budget was read and we had to apply to the Ministry of Finance for a supplementary budget and we got that Shs 220 million, through of course cuts in other departmental budgets in my Ministry.  

On top of the Shs 220 million,  we also got a grant of 1.2 million from the United Kingdom Government.  I believe you remember that last April, the U.K Secretary of State for International Development,  the hon. Clare Short,  signed an agreement with our Minister for Finance under which this grant was made to the Government and the people of Uganda.  

Under this project, we have got structures to implement the Act.  These structures are at central secretariat where all these partners focus their reports.  For co-ordination of their actions,  we have got an inter-institutional steering committee composed of the Permanent Secretaries and Heads of Departments of the implementing Ministries.  There is a technical advisory panel composed of professionals who qualify the technical documents that are for disseminating information to the public,  and other communications of a technical nature.

Because of the fact that much of the implementation is taking place in the Local Governments at district,  sub county and parish levels,  we also set up a structure called the Central/Local Government Forum.  This is an interface between the Local Governments and the Ministry of Local Government on the one hand, and my Ministry and other Departments on the other,  so that we co-ordinate implementation activities in a rational way.  
As hon. Members will recall,  at the time of passing the Land Bill,  we did not have draft regulations and section 94 of the Act stipulates that the Minister will issue a Statutory Instrument covering regulations for the better carrying into effect of the provisions of the Act.  It is these regulations that are needed by the Parish Land Committees, by the District Land Boards and the bureaucrats who do the titling,  surveying, and evaluation.  These were not in place, not even a draft was available.  We had to set up a technical committee to originate these regulations.  Sir,  within three weeks,  I will be able to present those proposals for the regulations to this House,  as required under section 94 of the Land Act,  for approval by this Parliament so that the land management institutions on the ground can carry out their statutory functions.  This is one of the main reasons why there has been a delay in implementing the Land Act.  
The tools have not been in place.  There are three kinds of tools.  The first tool, I have identified, is funding.  The second tool, Sir, is regulations.  The third tool is human resources.  The Land Act has established 4,517 Parish land committees,  each composed of four members.  If each Committee is to hold two sittings in one month,  we need Shs 7 billion to finance them,  and whether this function is delegated to the sub county or district, still the centre has got to provide the funds.

At sub county level - the Act established 962 sub county and town council land tribunals,  each composed of four members - if they were to work full time and be remunerated according to the Act,  they would require Shs 20 billion annually.  But if they were to work whenever there is business,  and only get sitting allowance for the task accomplished, our estimate is that they would require only Shs 6.9 billion.

At the district level,  we have got land offices, each one composed of five professionals:  a physical planner,  a valuer,  a surveyor,  a cadastral surveyor,  a registrar and a land officer - the last two are legal officers.  Of course these need support staff of a technical nature like cartographers,  they also need chain men and clerks,  about 20 people in all,  per district.  Our estimate is that all these would need Shs 5.2 billion annually to carry out their work,  and of course this money was not provided in the 1998/99 Budget.  The Shs 200 million I talked about cannot cover any of these management institutions.  

Faced with those findings,  we decided in the Ministry to build within the project an activity called a comprehensive study,  to indicate to Government what it takes in form of human resources, what it takes to fund the activities and what equipment are needed,  and probably how the implementation can be phased out,  because one activity alone can consume the budget of an entire Ministry,  as I have illustrated earlier.  

I have not talked about the Land Fund.  The Land Fund is set out in section 42 of the Act,  to be used to cover the needs of four categories of Ugandans.  There is a special study again being conducted under this project.  The expert is here,  an external consultant,  and a Ugandan valuer from the private practice,  they are now out in the field.  They have just reported to me that they will be in Buhweju next week, Kabale, Mbale, areas where we anticipate in the short run,  this fund will be applicable and of course,  not to mention Kibaale district.

The figure for the Land Fund is not yet available,  although section 42 of the Act stipulates that this Fund should be in place by 2nd July,  this year.  In order to fulfil that statutory requirement, we have opened a Land Fund account in a reputable bank,  with the understanding that this fund will be operated on a soft credit scheme.  The intermediary agencies or even commercial banks,  will access it from the Central Bank.  We have already fulfilled that statutory requirement.

May I mention here,  Sir,  that some districts have not assisted Government in fulfilling their part,  especially in regard to the establishment of Land Management Institutions, the district Land Boards and the Land Committees at parish level.  Sections 57, 58 and 60 of the Act oblige Local Governments,  to establish Boards and Committees not later than the 31st day of December, 1998.  Most districts have fulfilled that requirement,  with the exception of Kamuli district and Sembabule.  I am calling upon my Colleagues in Parliament representing these districts to help the district leaders fulfil that legal requirement.  

I talked about the implementation study.  We have taken on 18 consultants:  nine foreign, nine Ugandans.  They are out in the field right now and they are working out details of what it takes to implement the Land Act.  

I am also under direction from Cabinet to produce these figures in terms of personnel,  in terms of equipment,  and monies required,  not later than December, 1999.  But I am happy to report here that the study report will be out before the end of August this year,  to indicate to the country what is needed and also recommending the way forward.  I will, judging from the report,  be required to periodically come to the House to report to the House,  especially to the Sessional Committee responsible for Lands and the one for Natural Resources,  so that Parliament is kept aware of the steps being taken by Government in implementing the Act.  

My Ministry interfaced with the Ministry of Finance at the time of coming out with proposals for the Ministry budget,  and the issue of the funding for implementing the Land Act had question marks.  Those question marks arose out of the non availability of defendable data on what I have already said.  However according to our preliminary presentation in the budget just read,  Shs 3.5 billion has been provided for the activity of implementing the Land Act.  That money is to be used by Judicial Service Commission to put in place land tribunals,  by all the other Ministries as I mentioned them,  to fulfil their roles,   but also to carry out an activity that is very much demanded at the moment by the public and leaders,  the one of sensitizing the public on the Land Act.  They also have to make the Land Act public in local languages and also train the boards and the committees in the technical matters that they must know before they embark on their duties.  

May I report here that we have just accomplished the summarising of the Land Act,  the summary is necessary for easy use.  There is a handbook entitled "a citizens' guide", that I will be circulating to all Members of Parliament with your permission, Mr. Speaker,  next week.  The abridged version of the Land Act and its translations in the languages we have covered, Luganda, Lugbara, Runyoro - Rutoro - Runyankole - Rukiga,  and Atesot.  Kupsabiny and Luo are still at the drawing table.  It is not easy, Mr. Speaker, probably you know this more than I do,  to translate legal concepts into cultural terms, it is not easy.  These translations have got to be vetted by experts in law,  and it is rare to find one expert combining that with language proficiency -(Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The question paused by hon. Karuhanga was straight forward,  demanding a specific answer from the Minister.  What we are listening to right now is a semblance of a Ministerial statement,  bogging down the totality of what we are discussing.  Is the hon. Minister in order to meander instead of answering the specifics of the question?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I hope you have a copy of the question.  The question is simply this:  what steps are you taking to implement the Land Act?  The person who asked the question went further to orally ask for an elaboration,  and I think the Minister is just doing that.  He is in order.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE:  I respect your ruling,  Sir.  I want to conclude my oral response by reporting to the House that this morning I was in a session with the study group on one hand and the donor community on the other.  There are indications that donor countries are very much interested in the land tenure reform that was ushered in through this Land Act.  Those who are targeting modernisation of agriculture are seeing no way of achieving that target without participating in the facilitation of the implementation of the Land Act,  and this they have said in clear and definite terms when we concluded definite protocols with them.  I will again come back to report to this hon. House on the issue.  

We have planned a national workshop,  after regional ones, involving Members of Parliament,  basically to indicate to the country the magnitude of the work that has got to be financed in year I of implementation,  year II, and progressively.  This law is a fundamental law and because it is a precursor to achieving other national development targets,  we shall all participate in deciding its implementation.   We enacted the law,  but we are also going to participate in deciding the implementation plan because there are indications that all cannot be implemented at a go, or even in three or five years.  Implementation will be phased,  and that needs the decision of Parliament. I will be coming back, Sir,  I will also be coming back with minor Amendments to the Land Act.  

I believe since our meeting in the International Conference Centre July 18th,  last year when we circulated to Members of Parliament the text of the Land Act,  hon. Members have since read it and they have come across typographical mistakes due to the pressure of work at the time of printing the proceedings of Parliament.  They are obvious mistakes,  that cannot be changed without a decision of Parliament,  and of course I will be coming back with what is popularly called the "lost Amendment" on the co-ownership of land by spouses.  I thank you,  Sir.

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is evident,  from the reply of the Minister,  that the implementation of this Land Act  is almost impossible,  we do not seem to have the resources to implement it.  As he was saying, the implementation alone,  say facilitating committees,  will require even more money than the Ministry is able to get from the Budget.  For some time,  this country will not be able to martial resources to effectively and efficiently implement the Land Act.  Does the Minister,  considering the fact that many people in the countryside are now totally confused and many of them are losing land as a result of the non implementation of the Act,  consider the possibility of this law being suspended until such a time as Government is in a position to implement it?  Thank you.

MR. SEMBAJJA:  Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister aware that as a result of the delay in implementing the Land Act,  the delay in putting up land tribunals,  certain developments have taken place in the rural areas whereby magistrates have taken it upon themselves to go ahead and carry out jurisdiction contrary to the Land Act?  If he is aware, what steps has he taken to restrain these magistrates,  not to entertain any land disputes in these districts?  Thank you.

MR. RWABITA:  In addition to what my neighbour has said,  is the Minister aware that there is a lot of insecurity in the villages because of land disputes?  People are killing each other,  the LCs have given up,  they say the law does not allow them to tackle these questions,  and unless something is done,  people have taken advantage of these delays to even start taking others' lands.  They go set up new dimensions,  and the land owner cannot complain because he has no where to complain to.  The result is just fighting and killing each other.  So, Mr. Minister,  you better tell us what you are going to do to stop that insecurity about land disputes.

MR. MUTYABA:  Thank you.  Is the Minister aware that under the Act,  measures can be taken to reduce the cost of implementing the Act in its present form?  For example, by utilizing the structures which are already on the ground?  For the case of the land tribunal,  it would require using for example the parish courts,  because the Chairman of the land tribunal should be someone who is qualified to be a magistrate.  And when this court is sitting as a tribunal,  such a magistrate is joined by other members of the tribunal so that the costs are reduced?  Is the Minister aware that this can be done,  and this can considerably reduce the cost of implementing the Act for both land tribunals and parish committees?

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. Minister has enumerated a lot of incidences of costs for implementing the Land Act.  Could he tell us whether it is envisaged that some of those costs will be borne by district councils,  and which ones?  Or is it intended that all costs of implementing the Land Act will be borne by the central Government?  If district councils will be involved,  how much consultation is going on with them in this stage of preparation for implementation so that they are brought on board and made ready to react at the same time with the central Government?  I thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I want by way of supplementing,  to thank the Minister for an elaborate answer to my question and regret that I wish he had answered these issues in the last session when I put the last question,  which was abandoned.  We had a lot of problems during the recess,  in answering these questions,  but I thank him for what he has done.  

It is very clear to all of us that this is too expensive an Act to implement by this Government,  and by this budget because the budget is already out.  Is he considering,  instead of proposing minor Amendments,  to make major Amendments to suspend some financial provisions requiring establishment of certain institutions until such a time that the country can afford the Land Bill?  And which areas would he think would be suspended to reduce on the impasse the country is facing,  and also to reduce on the number of disputes and the fear in the population about lack of a move forward?  

I do not know whether I am the only one who receives this problem,  being in the legal profession,  but hon. Members must be facing numerous problems of disputes.  People have nowhere to go,  and now our offices are being turned into dispute settlement centres.  I want to ask the hon. Minister whether he has considered using arbitration centres set up in Uganda to solve disputes,  to take over this matter temporarily?  

Lastly, is the Minister contacting other NGOs,  apart from the British ones,  to help mobilize other funds to implement this Act?  Thank you.  

MR. PINTO:  May I ask this supplementary question to what hon. Karuhanga has asked,  and also call in the Leader of Government Business.   In terms of priority,  if it is true that Government does not have funds to implement the Land Act,  what is on the table and what was given to us yesterday,  Government is very keen and has moved tremendously in trying to mobilize funds in order to settle the depositors of the collapsed banks.  Which of the two items is of more critical importance?  I would like to inform the Right hon. Prime Minister that I have here a document which shows the money stock for Uganda comprised in currency in circulation being Shs 270 billion,  demand deposit Shs 330 billion,  time and savings deposits Shs 310 billion,  a total stock of Shs 911.9 billion.  It is from this consolidated fund that Government is moving to remove Shs 100 billion in order to settle those depositors.  How can you balance these priorities?

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I am seeking further clarification from the hon. Minister,  regarding the article that would have been incorporated in this law,  one to do with co-ownership of the family holding by spouses.  The hon. Minister has informed this House that he intends to bring an Amendment of the law to this House.  I believe you can very clearly remember, Mr. Speaker,  when you were steering this Bill right here in this House,  all the women and all the men were very unanimous on including it and they passed this provision and assented to it.  To us who are interested in this provision, it must have been a typographical error which should be rectified immediately without having to bring this law back into the House for Amendment.  

Is the hon. Minister aware of the millions of women who are suffering out there because of the omission of this law?  We would beg him to rectify the writing of this law and include this provision so that we can actualise what we actually passed in this law.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. BWERERE KASOLE:  I would like to inform the hon. Minister and the entire House that in Buwekula county two people have lost their lives as a result of land conflict,  and unless this Bill is implemented,  there is no way we can avoid such things,  and development will not be easily achieved.  Therefore, I would like to appeal to the hon. Minister concerned to work 24 hours and make sure that the Act is implemented.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE:  Thank you,  Sir.  Can I start with the question put to me by hon. Winnie Babihuga concerning the Amendment that I intend to bring to this House?  As Minister responsible for Lands,  I was given this Act to implement, anything outside this Act is not within my ambit to implement.  Of course there other relevant laws like Registration of Titles Act, the Surveyors Registration Act,  including laws on physical planning,  those are the Acts I am implementing.  

Regarding the "lost amendment" which was moved by the hon. Miria Matembe,  it is only you Sir, the hon. Speaker of this House, to tell this House and the country at large,  the fate of hon. Matembe's amendment.  I am not competent to pronounce myself on the fate of that amendment.  The proceedings of this House were recorded by electronic hardware,  it is you to inform the House and this country.

MR. KARUHANGA:  By way of procedure,  I thought that if Parliament pronounces itself on a Bill,  through the Clerk the Speaker forwards it to the President,  who is another authority.  If the President consents to the Bill,  it becomes law.  So through misprints,  the President did not receive hon. Matembe's amendment,  therefore he did not consent to it.  However,  a Bill can be made by the -(Interruption).

MR. MUTYABA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Is it in order for hon. Elly Karuhanga to mislead this House that Parliament did pass a law which included hon. Matembe's amendment?   I was the Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee.  It is true that hon. Miria Matembe's amendment was debated here in the general debate and the First Parliamentary Counsel was supposed to go and refine it and then bring it back to be tabled.  Unfortunately,  this was not done and the final Hansard record does not incorporate hon. Matembe's amendment.  It is for that reason that the Minister has talked of an amendment, an amendment to re-incorporate that amendment.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to mislead this House that the amendment was in fact passed by Parliament and removed midway between Parliament and the President?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am in an awkward situation but let me say this:  if it is true that hon. Matembe's amendment was passed by this Parliament -(Interjection)-  if it is true - why do you not listen?  I am giving the legal position.  If it is true that the hon. Matembe's amendment was passed by this House and got lost in between here and the Government printery,  then the procedure which the hon. Member for Rukungiri is proposing would apply, in which case there would be a corrigendum. It would not necessitate coming back here for Parliament to pronounce itself,  but that is only if Parliament had pronounced itself and passed it as law.  

The position got on checking with the Hansard is that the amendment was not formerly moved and Parliament did not pronounce itself on it.  It is true the Minister who was then responsible for that Bill did negotiate with the hon. Matembe and accepted the hon. Matembe's proposal on behalf of Government.  When the proposals were taken to the First Parliamentary Counsel for refinement so that they could be moved,  that is where the problem came in.  The position now is that Parliament did not pronounce itself on that amendment and therefore hon. Karuhanga is not in order to stand here and say confidently that it was passed by this Parliament.

MRS. MATEMBE: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, we discussed this amendment which was agreed on in principle, as recorded in the Hansard.  I was asked to go and sit with the Parliamentary Council, the drafts  people,  and shape the principles into the right language.  The principles were four very clear principles. I sat with the Parliamentary Counsel, we drafted these four principles,  the Chairman seated there has them,  Mr. Speaker you were the Minister,  you had it because I handed it over to you,  and I handed it over to the Chairperson,  and I was seated here on that very day. (Interruption).

MR. DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This House has never sat to deliberate when these microphones are not working.  Whenever they are not working the House is adjourned,  and whatever we discuss here is recorded in the Hansard. Why should not a copy of the Hansard be extracted so that the truth can be shown?  I thought that was the use of the Hansard! Why should you waste time on whether it was said or not when the Hansard is in place?  That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you asking for a clarification from me or somebody else?

MR. DOMBO: Mr. Speaker, it is purely clarification which I was seeking.  Thank you very much. (Mrs. Matembe rose_).

THE SPEAKER: I think on this issue, I have said that - hon. Matembe,  we are in a House and we have to listen to each other. I have already said that according to the Hansard, there is no evidence that Parliament pronounced itself on the amendment,  it is not there.  That is why I said that hon. Babihuga's point that it is a matter of correcting - which we legally call putting a corrigendum - cannot apply,  because Parliament did not pronounce itself on it. 

Consequently,  the hon. Karuhanga was not in order to have said that Parliament pronounced itself on this matter.  I had also vowed to the Minister then responsible for that Bill that indeed your proposed amendment was accepted by the Minister,  the principle was accepted.  The first Parliamentary Counsel was supposed to refine it and put it in an appropriate language so that it can be brought here and be moved.  It is between that and the moving,  and that is the time when you were not here,  hon. Member,  that is when the amendment got lost.  

Let us do this hon. Members.  I have already made a ruling that this amendment was not pronounced upon by Parliament,  and the Minister has undertaken to take corrective measures for what happened.  I would like to remind you hon. Members that while we are using this opportunity to ask supplementary question, supplementary questions should not be used to raise completely different matters which do not arise from the original question.  I would like us to take that into account so that we can dispose of this matter as quickly as possible.  Hon. Minister can you run through your answers as quickly as possible.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE:  The point raised by hon. Pinto regarding what is primary -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Order please.  Can you give the hon. Minister an opportunity to respond so that we proceed with other business!

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE:  I was saying that the question put by  hon. Pinto regarding what is primary between implementation of the Land Act and securing deposits in the collapsed banks,  is not for me to answer.  I will now go to the other question mainly revolving around the absence of land tribunals that has - Mr. Speaker, I not being listened to.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed,  please.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE:  Hon. Mwandha raised the concerns about the huge task,  the huge cost of implementation and he was proposing that certain sections of the Act be suspended,  I believe not by way of amendment,  but by way of implementation action plan. I want to state here that Government is totally committed to the implementation of the Land Act, because as I did illustrate,  many programmes of Government will depend on the fulfilment of the aspirations of the people of Uganda as they are enshrined in this Act.  In particular the poverty eradication  action plan and the modernisation of agriculture hinge very much on the reforms that are ensuring that developers and people who are participating in agricultural production have secure tenure to the land they use for production.  

I did mention that the comprehensive study now going on will be accomplished at the end of August and at that time there will be a national workshop -(Interruption).


MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Speaker, some of us are interested in land matters and we are very keen on following the hon. Minister but,  Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Ethics and Integrity is holding a parallel debate while the Minister is trying to inform us. The Minister of Ethics and Integrity was not in the House to present the refined motion,  I was here,  she had left for he masters studies.  Is she in order to continue conducting a private debate thereby disturbing us and disabling us from listening to our hon. Minister,  Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, my ruling is that I was not privileged to hear the Minister carry on some other conversation when the debate was going on. But if she was doing that then she was out of order.  However let me put this matter to rest.  I have now received authoritative information from the Editor of Hansard that this amendment was not moved and was not pronounced on by Parliament.  So let the matter rest there. 

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE:  The issue of land tribunals is a very serious one;  the land tribunals are creations of the Constitution.  The  establishment of land tribunals is provided for under Article 243 of the Constitution and operationalized under section 75 of the Land Act.  There is no way this country or this Government can run away from putting in place land tribunals,  but going by the advise of hon. Mwandha, hon. Okulo Epak, and hon. Karuhanga, on implementation models,  without losing the essence of having land tribunals in districts and at sub counties,  the Judicial Service omission and indeed the Chief Justice have come up with two options for implementation.  

The first one is the blanket and full time as provided in the law.  The second one is having part time members of the tribunal in each district and a zonal Chairperson of the Tribunal who works full time but is responsible to a number of districts in a zone.  For example in the Busoga region,  we would have members for a district Tribunal in each district , but one legal officer who goes to Bugiri,  Kamuli,  Jinja,  Iganga, in rotation.  That makes some savings and it neither violates section 75 nor does it violate the Constitution.  

The people of Uganda did demand that let there be special courts to handle land disputes.  Land Tribunals,  very well laid out in the Odoki Constitutional Commission report and the draft Constitution,  have got that element,  we are under obligation to implement it in pursuance of Article 243.  There is no running away from it.  And for sub counties,  instead of paying them salaries as it is indicated in the Act, this second option from the Judicial Service Commission  proposes that the Chairperson and the members of the Tribunal will work part time,  as and when there is business.   But there will be the equivalent of a Court Clerk that will run the Tribunal office full time.  That one also gives us some savings.  

We have also proposed that we are not running away from the Parish Land Committees,  because these are grassroot institutions that help in land demarcation and spot resolution of disputes that may arise between neighbours.  In order to accommodate them within the Budget,  we are passing on part of the cost for land adjudication by the Committee,  to the parties that need the adjudication.  It falls in line with our traditional system of land adjudication where the applicant,  the new entrant or the new settler,  provides some form of consideration to the village committee of elders.  It may be in form of a calabash of beer,  in my area.  That way, it is our tradition and yes,  beer is a great source of revenue for this country, I cannot be afraid of talking about it.  

It is true there is some insecurity,  not insecurity in the usual sense of the word,  but public disorder arising out of the unresolved land disputes countrywide,  I could say.  The hon. Chief Justice and Chairperson of Judicial Service Commission have proposed that I come here with an amendment restoring the jurisdiction of Local Council Courts and Magistrate Courts on the resolution of land disputes to run side by side with the tribunals following option two.  The way to synchronise them is a management function and that we shall discuss in detail in the workshop that we intend to hold for Members of Parliament,  in August.  

That also answers part of hon. Okulo Epak's question but specifically next week,  we are going to have an interface between district leaders.  The political, the civic and the technical staff in each district are coming to Kampala in that forum I termed the Local Government/Central Government Forum where we are going to discuss the modus operandi of the Land Act.

Lastly, Sir, on this matter of arbitration,  the law provides for traditional institutions and here I have in mind clan leaders, elders, village elders,  as being points of first instance in resolution of land disputes.  They are a legal institution provided for in the Act, section 89.  Those institutions should be exploited to the full and as practice has it,  most disputes are best resolved by the grassroot institutions rather than resorting to the High Court which is distanced from most of the people and in many cases,  is not affordable.  However,  the High Court is still a court of first instance which can be accessed by whoever is seeking redress. 

In conclusion,  our partners in development:  I did not consider it an appropriate time to inform the country now of who has been interfacing with me,  because some of our donors may have been anxious to see what is going on in order to decide.  But since this is a specific question by an hon. Member of this House,  he is entitled to information.  The World Bank is in discussions with us and it has sent one official from Washington to participate in the study.  The Food and Agricultural Organisation of the UN has similarly sent one of their experts to participate.  DANIDA is on board;  of course the U.K Department for International Development,  and the Norwegian Government have also promised technical assistance.  

Those who have availed funds to this programme so far are:  the U.K DID with a grant of 1.2 million that is going to carry out the interim activities of implementation for 15 months.  The study will lead us to more projects,  projects that will focus on land titling,  capacity building in the district, the establishment of land offices, the training of all those personnel including the appointed people that are not professional in land management matters,  the institutions,  our Survey Training School in Entebbe and the Physical Planning Institute,  which are now non functional.  We are planning to revive them through a scheme that will be recommended out of this study.  Again, Sir,  this Parliament made the law, this Parliament will decide on the way forward in the action plan for its implementation.  I thank you.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, I stood up and raised a pertinent question regarding the priorities and the ability to fund.  I addressed it to the Minister who has proclaimed disability to answer that question.  I did say,  if the Minister was not able, now that the Prime Minister is in the House,  further more, I can see Her Excellency the Vice President.  Could I implore that the hon. Prime Minister answers?  Is it in order for the Prime Minister to sit quietly when there is this question which is very pertinent regarding the Land Act and the ability of Government to fund it since it has been expressed that there are no funds and we have an item which has come up where Government has generously expressed itself that it has got the money to settle the depositors?  Is it in order for the Right Hon. Prime Minister to stay quiet and fail to give me this information which I so eagerly demand?

THE SPEAKER:  Well,  hon. Members,  I think we are dealing with a specific question directed to a specific Minister namely,  and the Minister has endeavoured to answer his questions.  And even as far as the hon. Member for Kakuuto is concerned,  the Minister has gone as far as answering by saying that is not a question for him to answer.  I think that is an answer to the question.  In light of the fact that the question was not directed to the Prime Minister,  surely I do not see anything out of order for the Prime Minister to sit and not answer.  However,  if it is now the wish of the Member that the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business should address his mind to this matter, he can say so.  Otherwise,  considering that this question was not originally directed to him,  I do not know whether he is ready to answer,  I leave it to him.

MR. KINTU MUSOKE:  In view of the fact that we are supposed to spend not more than one hour on answering questions in this House,  and we have had a comprehensive report from the Minister,  is it not procedurally important for us that we should proceed to other matters other than going into ones as the Member is raising?

THE SPEAKER:  The hon. Member is quite right that according to our rules of procedure,  we are allocated only one hour for questions,  but the Speaker is given some amount of lee way in allowing to us go slightly beyond that.  I think we can get this question answered,  provided the Prime Minister is ready.  If he is not ready, then he should say so.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi):  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  In general, it is imprudent for a Prime Minister to allow himself to be ambushed on questions where there are sector Ministries,  because you do not get researched answers and therefore it requires a lot of interfacing.  You can get dragged into secondary wars and cease being a neutral court of appeal from sector Ministries.  Some of you may have realised that even when the same hon. Pinto asked me to answer a question regarding the Ministry of Education which I had left,  other questions kept on appearing and yet I had ceased being Minister of Education and appeared really to be interfering in the Ministry I had left. 

Be that as it may,  let me say that when some banks were closed, because I have my pulse on the ground, many people were shuttered and some actually cried.  I came across - some of you may not know,  I am a dairy farmer,  I interact with people - some people were weeping, some appealed to me personally.  Even some of my children who work elsewhere came and said, 'daddy, this matter is very grave,  is this matter being handled expeditiously?'  I am aware of the people who have not paid school fees and their children have not gone back to school.  But I am also aware of people who had almost nothing to eat.  

I would therefore, regard the question of freezing of banks as being a very fundamental matter and all the questions regarding insider lending and the people who may have made mistakes may, in some cases appear to be getting away with it.  These are fundamental matters which are being addressed systematically and you cannot disclose all your cards when you are actually dealing with international and intricate national matters.  

But in my view, it was proper that the State had to come to the rescue of the ordinary people whose money was frozen.  It is a very high priority,  it is extremely urgent and I am delighted that His Excellency the President deemed it fit that it should be handled promptly.  I want to persuade Members of Parliament to support this matter.  It is a very complicated matter and it is being addressed internally and globally.  I thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL,  1999.

(Debate continued).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, the last time we adjourned, the hon. Member for Padyere was on the Floor.  Will you proceed?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  By the time we adjourned I was expounding my point particularly looking at Article 70 of the Constitution, clause (1) paragraph (d).  Paragraph (d) of the clause I have referred to reads: "individual merit as a basis for election to political offices."  Indeed the point I was expounding on is with regard to the aspect of sides in the referendum.  I did reiterate that the people of Padyere county support the principle of referendum and the people of Nebbi district support the principle of referendum.  However, the issues raised in my consultations with the people was that the referendum,  if it should be held,  must be fair and must ensure that we have a level ground so that the result of the referendum is to bring peace, stability and to continue with the peace and stability which the NRM Government has put in place for the last thirteen years.  

The issue of sides is very important,  Mr. Speaker,  because when you look at Article 72, clause (2) reads:  "An organisation shall not operate as a political party or organisation unless it conforms to the principle laid in this Constitution and it is registered."  If in the process of the referendum where you have two sides, you have the Movement side and you have the other side which is virtually non existent, you have individuals forming the sides, you will have a situation where there are as many sides as they are individuals who do not support the Movement political systems,  and this side will be extremely difficult to manage.  This reminds of the primary five book I read when I was in primary school.  It was a story of Abdul.  There was a certain wise man from China who was supposed to be so wise and he was asked as to how many stars are in the sky.  And then the fellow answered, 'there are as many stars in the sky as there is sand on the shores of the lake.'  If you relate this to our side, you are going to have as many sides opposing the referendum as there are the individuals.  

In this case,  I would like to appeal to Colleagues that a way out be found in order to have a level ground.  A level ground so that tomorrow when the Movement Political system is adopted for the next five years or so,  it must be by the wish of the population, and the people will indeed support it.  In my view, for the last 13 years I have been in the Movement,  I have noted that there has been a silent agreement between the multi-parties and the Movement.  If there was no silent agreement,  Mr. Speaker,  we would be having a lot of problems because the multi-partyists would be agitating and agitating.  But one will note with appreciation that those who profess multi-partyism have not agitated to a level where they have caused chaos in this country.  And we should appreciate their wish and their will to ensure that we maintain peace in this country.  

Allow me to touch briefly on the issue of civic education.  Civic education will be very crucial.  Civic education through the print media,  through the action of going from village to village by those concerned,  to teach the population.  We should have a fair system,  we should really have a level ground, so that when the question is framed,  the question should not be misleading, the question should ensure that the people are made to understand it properly.  

I have been a victim of that kind of situation.  I do remember my first election,  somebody just played around with the order of the photographs on the ballot paper, to teach.  And I told people that when you cheat and you cheat massively you can have grave consequences.  So in the process of framing the question,  we should ensure that there is no deception,  we should ensure that there is no manipulation,  we should ensure that there is no intellectual hypocrisy.  Because what is right must be right and what is wrong must be wrong so that we can foster the political stability which this country has enjoyed for the last 13 years.  

The aspect of financing is very crucial and should be properly provided for.  Whereas the Movement political system has a law protecting it,  the other sides must also have laws protecting them.  The other side must not simply have a loose coalition of individuals masquerading as multi-partyists.  If there was a structure for them,  then all those who support multi-partyism  should be protected by a law or a specific provision in this Bill.  Those who support DP, UPC, CP and even those who want to form their own political party would group under that arrangement and call themselves multi-partyists.  But without that situation, even the financing of sides would be very difficult.  It would be individuals collecting money,  to go round and deceive people that they are multi-partyists when actually they have different agenda.  This,  Mr. Speaker,  will cause a lot of confusion.  

The confusion will arise because as of now,  whereas the people who do not support the Movement are loosely organised,  they are a very big force.  They are a force because they can go by deception.  They can go by all sorts of trickery to deceive the population.  Because there will be no law, there will be no clearly defined rules to regulate them.  If you turn round and say, 'well, you are not supposed to do this or that',  there will be a question, 'under what law are you restricting me,  under what political organisation are you restricting me?'  So there would be a problem.

Lastly,  knowing very well that many Members would like to contribute on this particular point,  allow me,  Sir,  to say that the principle of the referendum is fully supported by my constituency and the district of Nebbi.  In my capacity as the Chairman of the District Movement Committee,  I had a meeting of the entire District Movement Committees, and they endorsed the principle of the referendum.  But the only message they wanted me to pass is that,  it should not be by trickery,  it should not be by deception and marginalisation of other competing sides,  it should be on grounds whereby we are able to maintain stability.  I would like to thank you,  Mr. Speaker.

MR. MUTYABA: Motion.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to move under rule 44(d) of our rules of procedure which states,  "The following motions may be moved without notice,  any motion for the suspension of Rules of Procedure."  So we want to suspend rule 39 of our rules of procedure which states:  "A Member shall give written notice of a motion to the Clerk not less than three clear days previous to the sitting at which it is intended to move the motion."  Mr. Speaker, I am moving this motion so that I can introduce a motion that the debate on the Political Organisations Bill do ensue and that the House do sit continuously so as to conclude it before second July, 1999.  I will move that motion afterwards if this first motion is allowed.  I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER:  I suppose the hon. Member is proceeding under rule 8 of our rules of procedure,  is that correct?  The rule reads, "Any Member may,  with the consent of the Speaker,  move that any rule may be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House and if the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended for the time being."  Is that the rule you are applying?

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am seeking clarification on procedure.  My understanding is that there is a motion on the Floor which we are debating and yet the second motion that has just been moved,  in my understanding,  has no relationship whatsoever to the one being debated on the Floor.  It is an issue which is not even on the Floor,  at all.  I would like therefore,  before I pronounce myself on this procedural motion,  to know the relationship between this motion and the motion on the Floor.  Because I thought rule 8 is used in as far as it relates to a Bill on the Floor only.  I would like clarification from the Chair,  Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  there is a motion on the Floor to the effect that the Referendum and Other Provisions Bill be read a Second Time,  moved by the hon. Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs.  A recommendation in the report of the relevant Committee is to the effect that the Political Organisations Bill should precede this Bill,  that is the recommendation of the Committee.  

I think that in debating this motion, if there is anybody who would like to go by the recommendation of the Committee and argue that point, he or she is free to do so.  On the other hand, if there is anybody amongst you who wishes to support the position of the motion, he is also free to do so,  because there are two sides.  Apart from making some amendments,  I think the Committee has made a recommendation that the Political Organisations Bill should precede what we are debating for I think this is exactly what you are here to debate.  So, hon. Member, I am really wondering whether it is necessary for you to move another motion - which is actually stating exactly what is already being discussed on the Floor.  The Committee's recommendation is -(Mr. Kirenga rose_)-  I am trying to make a clarification which the hon. Member there sought on the proposed motion, and if you can give me that opportunity,  as I think you should hon. Kirenga, I will give you an opportunity later.   

My understanding of the situation is that what you are proposing,  hon. Member,  is already taken care of by your Committee.  In fact the Committee is recommending the hon. Minister of Justice's motion notwithstanding,  the Political Organisations Bill should precede this Bill. 

MR. KIRENGA:  Mr. Speaker, the clarification I was seeking is something which is really a problem with regard to hon. Mutyaba's motion.  Is it procedurally correct to say that we should suspend the discussion of the Referendum and Other Provision Bill and discuss something which is not there?  That is the procedure,  because there is no Political Organisations Bill - it is not here.  

MR. NYAI DICK:  Point of order.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I have not yet finished with the hon. Member.

MR. NYAI DICK:  Mr. Speaker I am rising on a point of order.

MR. KIRENGA:  I am sorry,  Mr. Speaker,  I withdraw that because I understand you saved it.

MR. MUTYABA BENEDICT (Makindye East, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to agree with what you are saying.  However, the recommendation in the Report of the Committee does not give for example a definite date by which this motion or the discussion of the Political Party Bill should be passed. I want leave of this House so that I can present another motion.  

The motion which I intend to bring is that the Political Organisations Bill should also be passed by second July.  I am not saying that we should stay debating the Referendum Bill,  but I am saying this because it arises out of the report itself,  as a matter which is already being considered by this House.  And,  Mr. Speaker, I believe that as a Member of the House,  I am entitled at any stage when a debate of this nature is continuing,  to move a motion, unless through your guidance I am told the contrary.  What I am asking now is for the leave of the House to allow me to move that other motion.  

And that other motion is not to suspend the debate on the Referendum Bill, but to emphasize and have a conclusive decision of this House on the recommendation of the Committee that the Political Parties Bill should be debated.  In fact I am improving on what the Committee had suggested,  because the Committee had said that we should stop the Referendum Bill and first consider the Political Parties Bill.  I am saying we can consider the Political Parties Bill maybe even after the Referendum Bill.  But as long as it is passed before second July, 1999,  Mr. Speaker, that is really my reason for moving this. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have had an opportunity to chat with hon. Mutyaba on this motion and I thought there are certain things in it which are very difficult to implement.  I wanted him - yes, he is asking permission to move a motion which motion is already typed out and which has problems which I wanted him to clarify so that we can pronounce ourselves knowing what he is actually trying to achieve.  -(Interruption).

MR. NYAI DICK:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I respect my good friend hon. Elly Karuhanga,  but his tete-a-tete with hon. Benedict Mutyaba notwithstanding,  all this House has is an application from hon. Mutyaba to allow him leave to introduce a motion.  He has not yet circulated that motion.  Is it therefore in order for hon. Elly Karuhanga to discuss what is not on the Floor of this House?  Mr. Speaker, is he in order to anticipate?

THE SPEAKER:  I think we have not been privileged yet to get a copy of what hon. Karuhanga is referring to and therefore, it cannot really be debated.  But if he wants to consult the hon. Mutyaba quietly like he did,  he is entitled to do so.  Although he cannot stand here to argue something which we have not seen. 

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Procedure. 

THE SPEAKER:  I have not yet finished.  You see, the hon. Dick Nyai raised a point of order and I am still developing the argument before I make a ruling.  As I was saying, the hon. Karuhanga is of course entitled to consult his Colleague like he did before, but I do not think he is entitled to debate a document,  or a motion which has not even been moved, and therefore he is not in order as far as that point is concerned.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Speaker, I would like you to clarify to me and this House about procedure.  We have a Bill on the Floor which we are debating and as a result of that Bill, we are discussing the Committee's report.  We have not approved it,  amended it or rejected it, and it is out of that Committee's recommendation that the hon. Member seems to want to suspend the rules.  For which reason,  I do not know.  If he had any reason for bringing us the motion,  then he did not follow the normal procedure.  I have not understood why he wants to suspend the rules.  But the again how could he even move a motion on something which we have neither approved nor disapproved?  Is it procedurally correct?  We are discussing the report of the Committee,  we have neither approved nor disapproved it,  now somebody wants to suspend rules so that we go on to something which is not part of the report!

THE SPEAKER:  You see,  that is precisely what I was trying to get the hon. Mutyaba to appreciate.  Hon. Mutyaba says that what he is talking about is not that the debate on this Bill should not go ahead,  but that he would like the Political Organisations Bill debated before a certain date.  As far as I can see,  I do not know whether what he is saying is that we debate the Political Organisation Bill and fix a date for it.  Hon. Mutyaba, I thought that at an appropriate time,  if for example you accepted the Minister's motion and the law is passed,  you could say, 'I am giving you the Speaker a notice,  I want us to debate the Political Organisations Bill, to be passed by such and such a time.'  I think you will be in order then.  As far as I am concerned, that will be your right.  So really,  it should not have anything to do with this particular motion.

MR. MUTYABA:  Mr. Speaker, definitely I heed your good guidance, but I do not know what appropriate time is because we are discussing this matter and the issue which I seek the leave of this House to introduce is a matter which has been raised in the report.  If I wait and we debate the report and pass it as it is, then we would have adopted what has been proposed in the report.  
However,  I believe that it is normal for a Member to introduce a motion while you are debating another motion and that the House can actually debate that motion,  and when that motion is decided upon by the House,  then the House goes back to debate the motion which was on the Table.  This is why I am saying that I am not by any chance saying that if we pass this motion,  we are going to stop the debate on the Referendum,  but it will strengthen some of us to know that this will come.  

I was just reading the June issue of Africa Business - an interview between Africa Business and His Excellency the President - and he made one quotation which stayed on my mind.  He said, "when freedom blooms,  society also blooms",  and I think I have taken his words very,  very seriously.  What I am trying to do is to make sure that freedom blooms because as His Excellency says that when it does, society blooms.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member,  one other point is that a difference between the Political Organisations Bill and this particular Bill which we are dealing with is that one has a constitutional time frame within which this House must pronounce itself,  whereas the other one which we are talking about can come at any time.  It can come immediately after we have passed or rejected this motion.  That is the slight difference.  You should take it into account because if we pronounce ourselves it is not necessarily that we are going to pass it,  but it is possible that we will reject.  You can even reject it on the basis of the recommendation of the Committee.  Once that happens, you will have time for this other one.

The point however is that if we start debating other substantive motions now, we run the risk not having time to pronounce ourselves on this one which has got a constitutional deadline.

MR. WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have a recommendation of the Legal Committee,  which forms part of the Committee's report, before this House.  My understanding of hon. Mutyaba's application is that he is trying to translate the recommendation of the Committee into a Resolution of the House,  and that is the only way that we can either accept or reject it.  As to whether it should come after the debate on the referendum or not,  really we would be surpassing the point because we have a recommendation and we have to deal with that recommendation - we either accept it or reject it.  

The problem with dealing with the whole report is that there might be a portion of the House which accepts that recommendation and there might be a portion which does not accept that recommendation.  So, I feel it is procedurally right for us to withdraw that portion of the report,  deal with it and then go ahead and deal with the rest of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wacha,  you are almost with there,  but I do not know why you did not go the whole way.  I said earlier on that there is,  in the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee's report,  a recommendation - a very strong one - that it is desirable that the Political Organisations Bill should precede this particular Bill.  Therefore in the course of debate, Members will be debating the motion as moved by hon. Mayanja Nkangi that the Bill be read a Second Time.  That is hon. Mayanja Nkangi's motion.  

The recommendation of the Committee is that the Political Organisations Bill should precede this one;  effectively saying that this Bill should not be read a Second Time.  I think this is really the debate.  In the process of the debate,  you can, on the basis of the report,  move an amendment at that stage.  But I think we should allow Members to debate so that they make up their minds one way or another.  So, I would kindly request the hon. Mutyaba to reconsider his position in this respect.

MR. MUTYABA:  I do not know whether you have made a ruling,  because I was going to seek your leave so that I make my contribution to the debate.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Mr. Speaker,  I think some of us are already in difficulties on how to proceed.  You stated clearly - the hon. Minister of Justice in making his debate on the Political Organisations Bill here said he had no intention to bring it.  

The report of the Committee is saying that the Political Organisations Bill -(Interruptions).

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker, I never said such a thing.  I  only said that if the report of the Committee on that Bill so amended the Bill,  it will be necessary for me to go back to Cabinet for the Cabinet to review the proposed amendments.  I never said anything about time.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I thank the hon. Minister for that equally vague clarification.  Mr. Speaker, the import of the Committee's recommendation that the Political Organisations Bill be discussed before this Bill,  to me,  is tantamount to saying that we do not proceed with the debate on the Referendum Bill.  It is a very controversial matter and yet we are proceeding with debating the report which will ultimately take us to debating the Bill.  That is why some of us thought that this is a very tricky recommendation here,  and the fact that the hon. Minister does not even say when Cabinet will consider the Committee's report and amendments to the original Political Organisations Bill,  leaves us in abeyance.  This is why some of us were of the view that we must clarify this recommendation here.  Technically this amounts to saying, 'do not proceed with the Referendum Bill until the Political Organisations Bill is dealt with and disposed of.'  This is the implication to me.  I want your clarification,  Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What you are saying is that the logical conclusion should be that this Bill must not be read a Second Time.  Hon. Members,  I have explained the position so that we can proceed and pronounce ourselves on this matter.  And I think hon. Mutyaba is persuaded that he can raise this issue.  As you go along with the debate,  you can ensure that this Bill is not read a Second Time, or in between that,  the Political Organisations Bill should be debated and passed within a specified period.  I think that is the major point of his contribution.  

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, the clarification I seek from you is whether right now we are considering the report of the Committee.  If that is so, and within that Committee there is a recommendation,  would it help us if the Chairman and the Members of the Committee agreed to make an amendment to their recommendation to read, "The Committee is of the view that the Political Organisations Bill, whose report it has already concluded,  should precede this Bill?"  If we are to add, "and be passed before 2nd July, 1999",  would that amendment help us?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the position is,  let us debate and you pronounce ourselves on all these matters.  

MR. MUTYABA: I thank you for your wise guidance,  Mr. Speaker,  and I take it that you said that at an appropriate time I can move my motion as I intended to do.  Can I now proceed and debate?

THE SPEAKER: You have the Floor.

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you.  I would like to thank the Committee for its report.  However,  I will concentrate on two salient matters raised in that report.  One of them is the recommendation by the Committee that the Political Parties Bill should have preceded the debate on the Referendum Bill.

I am very,  very grateful to the Movement, to His Excellency the President and to those gallant sons and daughters of Uganda who ushered in the current freedom which we have and without which, I do not think we would be here debating.  I think for that we have to be grateful.  It is for that reason that I think that that freedom, that process of democratisation should be strengthened further by us here,  hon. Members of Parliament,  representatives of the people of Uganda,  by taking bold steps which will ensure that democratisation and the process of freedom and observance of human rights are enshrined within our society.  
The Minister quoted the Constitution and quoted Article 269 to show why under the present system Political Parties cannot campaign as groups - that people cannot campaign as groups,  they can only campaign as individuals.  I take issue with him on that Article.  I think the Minister said "persons" means "natural persons",  it does not include corporate bodies.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I am so grateful to the hon. Member for giving way.  I thought I had spent time to say that under Article 270 (2), "any person" means a "natural person".  I went ahead to quote Article 237 (10)(b) which says,  "singular" means "plural" - it is the other way round.  Hence, I said that "a person" includes "groups".  Then I said,  under Article 270, since parties are not so far incorporated,  they are therefore, in law, groups,  that they can canvass.  This is what I said.

MR. MUTYABA: I thank the Minister for that clarification.  Mr. Speaker,  Article 269 of the Constitution says: "On the commencement of this Constitution and until Parliament makes laws regulating activities of political organisations in accordance with Article 73 of the Constitution, political activities may continue except - mark this - (a) opening and operating branch offices;  (b) holding delegates' conferences;  (c) holding public rallies;  (d)	sponsoring or offering a platform to or in any way campaigning for or against the candidate for any public elections;  (e)	carrying on any activities that may interfere with the movement political system for the time being in force."

My interpretation of that Article is that while it restricts the activities of political organisations, political activities may continue.  Implicitly the Article allows political groups to exist and to campaign as political parties in situations like the one of the referendum.  Mr. Speaker, when we go to Article 271(2) which the Minister has just talked about, which refers to any person being free to canvass for political support for a system of his or her choice,  I agree with the Minister that person here definitely includes persons and their right to join together for a common purpose.  It includes persons and their right to join together for a common purpose.  

Reading Article 269 and 271 together, groups formed by such persons i.e political parties, qualify to canvass under Article 271(2),  on that matter I agree with the Minister.  However,  Article 270 restricts the right to exist to political parties or organisations in existence immediately before the enactment of the Constitution.  In order therefore to allow people to group together, because there are people who do not belong to these two existing organisations, - I mean four, UPM, CP, UPC,  and DP, there are people who do not belong to these groups, there are people who may want to form new groups.  In order to allow these people to group together, a new law is a sine qua non, a prerequisite to realizing the full effect of Article 271 (2).  That is why the Political Organisations Bill must be passed.  

We can consolidate democratisation by striving to create a  political society involving institutions capable not only of competition but also of credible governance.  And for that matter, Mr. Speaker, we need constitutive not destructive leadership which is willing to accommodate other political actors and social interests,  in favour of the maintenance of democratic institutions.  We therefore need to build a consensus.  I had a situation, to use Prof. Mazrui's words when he was referring to Uganda,  he said that Uganda is a country where leadership moves from militocracy that is the rule of the military, to meritocracy, the rule of a few elite.  That is not democracy.  

We must focus on what this country needs, we must focus.  There is a friend of mine who was in a club,  when he saw a beautiful lady.  I am sorry to the hon. Members who are women.  He was taking a beer and he saw a beautiful lady looking at him and he thought that the lady was admiring him.  Casually he picked his beer bottle and walked across to her.  Midway he realized that actually instead of the beer he had picked a bottle of tomato ketchup.  We must focus on what we want.  If we want democracy then we should strive for it.  

The other day I listened sombrely when hon. Members were being told that rights are not absolute.  May be political scientists know the words of Rousseau the French philosopher who distinguished between what people want as separate and particular individuals which when aggregated could be thought of as the will of all,  and what they wanted as citizens - the general will,  and argued that the second should take priority over the first.  
In political science we call these the right to peace, the right to development, we call them solidarity rights, and they fall in the third echelons of human rights.  I agree entirely there is no reason why we should for example allow freedom of association which is going to cause anarchy,  nobody wants it.  But, Mr. Speaker, a democratic Government will work to full advantage only if all the interests that matter are practically unanimous not only in their allegiance to the country, but also in the allegiance to the structural principles of the existing systems,  and here we are.  There are some people who are out there, I go out and someone says, 'no you, you do not belong in our camp.'  But the Constitutions says I belong to this camp!  I belong to the Movement.  But when I go out someone comes and says, 'no, that one does not belong to our camp,' and then I fail to understand it.  

If in practice there are people who we think do not belong to our camp,  those people must be given the platform to exist.  By doing that I think we will be following a political system.  Laws that merely ratify a passing advantage will last only for long as the advantage itself,  and laws that are most prescriptive and substantive are often the least successful.  Mr. Speaker, the process of democratisation must include the creation of authoritative political institutions coupled with a growth of political participation,  there is no short cut.  The higher the levels of tolerance of group opposition, the higher the degree of political democracy. (Applause).   

I would like to agree with one political scientist called Robert Dallo who said that Governments are not in office to exert authority over their citizens,  but the responsive to the demands formulated by them.  I agree with him when he says that for a Government to be responsive to the preferences of its citizens they should, among other things, be offered opportunities. You must offer them opportunities to signify their preferences to their fellow citizens and the Government, by individual and collective action.  

The right to form and join organisations and freedom of expression and  association is at the centre of democracy.  This Government has ensured that Uganda has I think the most expansive freedom of expression, freedom of the press in Africa.  It must go all the way and ensure that there is freedom of association.  Because these are at the centre of democracy.  You may delay it, we may in fact work to stop it as Members of Parliament,  but you know you cannot stop the will of wills of time.  Neither can you stop an idea when its time has come.  

Popular sovereignty needs political liberties to work properly and, Mr. Speaker, political liberties exist to the extent that the people of a country have the freedom to express any political opinion,  and the freedom to form and participate in any political group.  By saying this I am not saying we have to do this at any cost, no.  In 1986 when the Movement came in, this country was in chaos, and the Government decided rightly that we need to be together, we cannot allow ourselves to go into groups because we need some time to mature.  So many years have passed since, and we are now going to decide on something which is so crucial to the very existence of the human being, his freedom to associate.

We are saying that there are people who we think are not with us, what you call the opposition, people formally called multi-partyists but really there are even others like me who think that there must be a mixture of Movement and the multi-partyist kind of Government in order to have stability - I belong to that camp.  But you must allow these people,  give them the platform to have a collective voice and to go out and campaign as a collective voice.  With the restrictions which are in place, Mr. Speaker, it will be very difficult for a person or for UPC, CP or UPM to go and campaign,  because they do not know where they stop or how far they extend.  They do not know what kind of financing they can get.  I think it is good for an ordinary society and for an ordinary political system that we must have a framework through which these groups can exercise their freedom. 

Mr. Speaker, people talk -(Interruption). 

MR. KIRENGA:  I want to be clear in my mind as to what the hon. Member is saying about groups and parties.  He has said that he agrees with the Minister that one person includes so many persons.  Therefore many persons can associate because they are allowed to associate and campaign, for purposes of this Bill,  that is what he seems to be saying.  Already there are parties which are existing, the four parties.  So, do I understand him to say that those many persons who are in that group can hold rallies, under Article 269, because they are many?  Or do I understand him to say that they can only campaign as individuals forming that group, that they can move together if they wish but not as a party.  Can he clarify,  please.

MR. MUTYABA:  I do not understand what the hon. Member is trying to find out.  Because I have said that we need a framework,  a legal framework.  It is true the groups are there,  but there is no legal framework and that is what we are striving to get through the Political Organisations Bill.  When you say that the mere existence of the groups is enough,  then I do not understand what you mean because definitely any group,  especially in this kind of system needs the legal framework - (Mr. Kirenga rose_).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Kirenga,  you do not engage in dialogue with the hon. Member.

MR. WACHA:  I am a member of the Legal Committee,  and hon. Kirenga is also a member and he signed the report of our Committee.  In that report,  Sir, on page three,  for hon. Mutyaba's information,  page three the second last paragraph we said:  "it is the considered view of the Committee therefore, that this question cannot be answered without first considering, debating and enacting the Political Organisations Bill.  If on the other hand political organisations cannot canvass for support of a political system of their choice,  then the law should say so.  This would of course, have far reaching consequences as registered civic bodies or body cooperates will not be able to contribute to this national debate."  Exactly what hon. Mutyaba is talking about,  Sir.

MR. MUTYABA:  I would like to thank the hon. Member for that information,  and also to remind the House that the other day when the hon. Member was talking here,  I heard him say that these groups must be given some space,  some level, I heard the Member saying that.  Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I do not want to disturb you certainly,  but I think many people would like to contribute,  so come to your conclusion.

MR. MUTYABA:  I am about to finish,  Mr. Speaker.  As I conclude, I would like to ask you and to appeal to you to consider the recommendation of the Committee very seriously,  in light of what I have just said.  We can cheer,  but remember the words of Oliver Cromwell,  that person who tried to remove "royaldom" from Britain,  and he was Prime Minister for sometime - 11 years I understand.  He said, "do not trust the cheering,  for those very persons will shout as much if you and me were going to be hanged."  Just look at the reasons being given, be rational and consider whatever you have to consider in the national interest,  knowing that the nation goes beyond the individual.  Thank you very much.

MAJ. RABWONI OKWIR (Youth Representative, Western):  I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and once again I agree with the previous speaker who thanked the Movement Government,  His Excellency the President, and all the heroes who have contributed to the creation of this climate of open discussion and a conscious process of chatting, a course for sustainable democratic governance.  My contribution will be short because most of the issues at stake are familiar to all of us.  We have been through seminars and workshops prior to the tabling of this motion,  and most of us have taken positions on it,  for one reason or another.  

The question of a referendum is like the question of an election.  The only difference is that in our ordinary presidential or parliamentary elections,  you have two or more people contesting for political office,  but in a referendum a question is put to us to determine a model of governance.  And of course in such a scenario,  you have to expect two sides which are contesting the pros and cons of that very question.  

It logically follows that these two sides have to be organised at different levels,  in order to be able to canvass for support.  Mr. Speaker,  in our situation right now,  we have one side which is well organised,  recognised by the law,  and funded by Government.  While it has its ideology,  its structures,  its political programme and leadership,  we have on the other side  - through legal mechanisms - kept the other side at bay for reasons clear to most of us,  for the last 13 years.  How then can we say that there are sides contending when one is active and the other is in limbo?  This is clear to all of us that in regard to sides,  right now we do not have two sides contending for power,  because one has been in limbo for 13 years - and continues to be - and the other is active and financed by Government.  

We come to the second argument.  The argument is that when the question is posed in the referendum it should be contested between persons.  However,  it defeats my understanding how an individual without the capacity to consult, without representative authority,  can go ahead and campaign for an ideal that decides the fate of that very organisation.  An example,  Mr. Speaker,  if I was to stand at Kololo airstrip and campaign for Movement,  it is very easy for me because I know its idealogy.  I can articulate the 15 points programme,  I know what it stands for and what it means.  On the other hand,  if hon. Mao goes to the National Theatre and starts talking people will ask, 'who are you talking on behalf of,  are these your personal views,  what is your mandate?'  

Which even brings in the issue of financing.  We were informed that individuals will be financed.  Will you go to Makerere and finance Nkoba zambogo,  and then Mr. Semujju comes back from abroad you also finance him,  hon. Lukyamuzi is also financed?  How many  different groups are we going to finance in this kind of scenario?  Mr. Speaker, we the youth of Uganda have made demands on these political organisations,  we have told them that, 'you people if you are to surface again,  given your history in this country,  you have to conform to the following:'  - among the things we have been telling them is that, 'you people we do not want your sectarian character, we want you to have a national character.'  I for one would not want a political party called Rwezururu because how does a Mutoro relate to Rwenzururu?  I would not want to have a party called Kabaka Yekka because how does a Karamajong associate himself with Kabaka Yekka?  That has been one of our major quarrels with the political organisations which we have had in the past. 

Secondly,  we have come up and said, 'you people your problem has been that you do not have internal democratic mechanisms to even change leadership.  Obote sits in Zambia and rules over the Uganda People's Congress by remote control. Mzee Ssemogerere has been in power for 30 years,  but there is no mechanism for changing him.'  In 1960 UPC was against Federo,  in 1990 UPC was now for Federo.  When was the decision taken to change the policies of UPC from being anti Federo to pro Federo?  

Another thing we have been talking about with these parties has been the problem of foreign domination.  We do not want parties which are constantly being funded by Friedrich Ebert Foundation, Foundation for African Development,  the Indian People's Congress and whatever.  We are saying we should have an internal mechanism of soliciting for our own funds.  I now ask,  Mr. Speaker,  if these parties cannot be given avenues to rectify these internal problems by themselves,  will we sincerely say that we have prepared a level ground for these people to contest against the Movement?  

In conclusion I would like to say that in the Movement I believe that we have the capacity to defeat the multi-partyists,  because we are very popular due to what we have done.  But I am saying that we do not want somebody to be defeated then he tells you, 'you see,  it was because this ground was slippery,  or it was because I had not eaten that very day,  or it was because of reasons a,b,c and d.'  If we are defeating somebody,  Mr. Speaker,  let us defeat him soundly and convincingly.  I would like to call upon this House to come out convincingly and allow the political organisations to open out so that we can have sustainable peace and security, sustainable democratic governance.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  just by way of reminder,  I can see that many people would like to speak on this matter.  If we can restrict our contributions by being very concise and precise,  I think all of us would appreciate it.

MR. ADROA ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to oppose the motion.  

We have received a report from the Committee,  which has come up with 41 amendments and yet the referendum Bill has only 31 clauses in it.  When the Minister moved that this Bill be read the Second Time and the issue of the political organisations came up,  the Minister also said that the entire Political Organisations Bill was altered.  In fact, each and every clause in that Political Organisations Bill was changed by the same Committee of this Parliament. 

My understanding is that we have a very big problem with these two Bills which have come from the Executive arm of Government and it is because of several restrictive Articles in our Constitution;  which most people consider to be the Movement Constitution,  although there several non political Articles that are pro-people in that Constitution.  But when it comes to the politics of this country,  the Constitution is more of the Movement than of any open politics in this country.  

I am not a UPC myself,  I have never been a UPC and I will never become a UPC but,  Mr. Speaker,  this does not mean that when I am given a chance to contribute in this House which House was also built by UPC -(Laughter)-  I cannot do so.  As a christian and a citizen of this country,  I have a clear conscience and I can tell what good things the UPC did for this country.  Nobody will turn those facts to be false in order to discredit UPC.  It was this party after the overthrow of Amin,  when Obote came in the second time,  which forced us particularly the people of Arua into exile and I was one of them.  I stayed in Congo for four years,  we came back and when we were in exile we gave moral support to the NRA/NRM when they were in the bush fighting to overthrow this Government that forced us into exile.  However, Mr. Speaker,  this is not enough reason to say that for all political parties,  particularly UPC to which references have always been made in regard to sufferings,  the best we can do is to lock them out.  How about other parties which are yet to be born in this country,  are they to suffer because of the shortcomings of some previous old parties or their leaders? (Interruption).

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA:  Is the Member of Parliament holding the Floor in order to state here in public that it was UPC which built these Parliamentary Buildings,  when it is clear that the first Local Government of this country was in fact DP lead by Kiwanuka?  Mr. Speaker,  really I cannot tolerate a Member of Parliament lying openly.  Is he in order to lie like that? (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi rose_).

THE SPEAKER:  Well, hon. Minister,  there is a point of order I have to rule on.  I do not know whether I remember my facts right on whether this Parliament was built by the UPC or DP Government.  But if indeed the hon. Member is misleading the House into believing what actually did not happen,  then he is not in order.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker, I would just like to give this information because I was around -(Laughter).  The UPC as a party was too poor to afford this,  so was DP.  This was a gift from the British Government.  

MR. ADROA ONZIMA: Mr. Speaker, in 1980 as the people of Uganda were preparing for the general elections in which our present President also participated,  he made it absolutely clear that if the elections were going to be rigged he will go into the bush and fight that Government that will have rigged the elections.  The elections went on.  For us in Arua we did not participate because of the rebel activities and indeed after the election the President went into the bush.  He fought and in 1986 they captured State power.  

While we were there in exile,  as I said,  we were of course praying for them,  we were giving them the moral support in the hope that if these people succeeded it would be an opportunity for us to come back to Uganda.  When they succeeded,  Mr. Speaker,  we thought President Yoweri Museveni would be a new political messiah for this country.  This was our understanding because when he was fighting he had his own party,  it was the UPM.  Our conviction was that after capturing power he will consolidate the weak position of UPM,  because during 1980 elections UPM got only one seat which was won by the hon. Kiyonga,  and where the President contested he lost to hon. Sam Kutesa.  We thought that he would use the period of transition to consolidate the position of the UPM after which NRA/NRM would organise a fully fledged democratic elections under political pluralism.  

But after taking over power we saw that the rule of law was restored,  human rights being observed,  and of course we know the behaviour of our previous armies;  all the suffering of this country in the previous Governments were due to the behaviour of the army, the Police and maybe some other security organisations here and there.  But as NRA/NRM moved on there were elections through electoral colleges,  we saw expansion of the NRC,  their term was extended.  After extension of that term we saw the CA elections,  a new Constitution being made, then of course the last general elections we had. 

But as I had said earlier, what disturbed us was surely,  if you are a concerned Ugandan and you really go through those Articles in our Constitution which refer to the political governance of this country,  they are never in favour of democracy.  If you take an Article like 74, where the Movement is saying that if you want to change the system from Movement to multi-partyism,  you must go out there and get at least one sixth of registered voters in a particular constituency like mine,  where you are directly elected, to support a petition to the Electoral Commission;  and they want two thirds of such constituencies countrywide, which is practically impossible. 

In my constituency,  five of us contested and we have a total number of about 60,000 registered voters.  Those colleagues of mine went out just like I did,  they of course used money for moving around,  doing this and that,  but some of them got hardly 2,000 votes of the minimum 6,000.  And here is a man who will not go out and petition the Electoral Commission.  How possible is it going to be for somebody to go to canvass support for the referendum?  We know this coming referendum is automatic,  but any referendum to come after that in my understanding is to the discretion of the Movement.  Why do we make it conditional when you very clearly say that Article 1 states that our people are sovereign and they have the right to decide on how to be governed and by who?  Why do you restrict the referendum?  

Why did they not make it definite that at least after such a period there will be an automatic referendum?  Because I may support you now - there were some people who supported me in the elections in 1996 but today they may not be with me,  just in a matter of two or three years,  that is why I am saying for us in Maracha, we are saying we are not in favour of the referendum.  It is not a good method of regulating the participation of the people in the governance of this country.  What is Movement today is what used to be UPM.  I do not know,  it started maybe in 1980, up to day it is with us, the people who founded the Movement are still with us and you see,  you have now changed from what it used to be UPM,  it is now Movement.  

In one forum, Mr. Speaker, I was together with the National Political Commissar.  He said that in the coming referendum if the Movement loses, the members of the Movement will be free to form their own party with the same aims and objectives of the Movement.  In 1994/95 when those people in the CA were making the Constitution,  parties were asked to come and participate.  When the issue came up whether UPM should be represented in the Constitution making process, they said, 'no.'  Why did they say no?  It is because the Movement is an extension of the UPM.  For that reason,  when people say the Movement is a party,  I think they are right.  

There is no reason for us to go ahead and lock out other people when we have the characteristics of a political system.  Mr. Speaker, my position is this:  in 1996 we enjoyed 75 percent,  I was one of those who most vigorously campaigned for the President.  In fact I did better than any other person in any of the constituencies in Arua.  I even beat hon. Obiga Kania and yet I did not have the funds.  I did best in that if you go to the statistics,  you will find that Maracha did better than any other constituency in my home district.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Speaker,  in campaigning for the President, I was not only restricted to Arua,  I campaigned in Moyo, Adjumani,  Arua and Nebbi.  I only lost in Arua but in the rest of the areas, I passed.  Thank you very much.

MR. ADROA ONZIMA:  Mr. Speaker, our position is that we enjoyed 75 percent in the Presidential elections.  That is a clear sign that we are very strong in this country.  When it came to Parliamentary elections, we scooped 80 percent in this Parliament.  So we are saying, 'we have had enough of the transition period,  let us organise ourselves into a fully fledged political party - call it UPM or anything - then go and face the likes of hon. Okulo Epak,  hon. Wacha,  hon. Mao and any other person,  and we shall surely defeat them.' 

I also want to state here clearly that the Movement should revisit its constitution of being broad based and all inclusive.  You see,  at the beginning there were some people like Ssemogerere who were accommodated in the Movement,  but I am not sure whether these people were accommodated in the spirit of being broad based or it was a means of,  you know,  suffocating their political affiliations.   I think that was the problem. The intention was not to accommodate them, so that we are broad based, but the intention was to kill their political affiliation.  
I say so because in 1996 or there about,  when Ssemogerere chose to leave the Movement and contest as a Presidential candidate, the President was bitter about it.  Why was he bitter about it?  He was bitter,  in my understanding,  because he thought this man he had kept around him for about eight to nine years or so,  was going to abandon his party.  So if you are to be broad based,  you must be the type of our South African President Nelson Mandela,  because when he accommodated those people who were not in his party,  he left them free.  His intention was not that they should abandon their parties.  These people contested in their own parties and they again did so in the recent elections and they have been brought back again.  That is the spirit of forming a broad based Government for national unity and reconciliation.  It is not meant to suffocate other parties,  that I will oppose very strongly. 

The excuse used by those of us in the Movement who say, 'you know every where you went you saw suffering,  under political parties,'  is a wrong argument.  Mr. Speaker,  I think it is a wrong argument because earlier on I had mentioned that the suffering in this country,  the killings,  the looting, the raping,  were done mainly by soldiers.  Today we have an Army called the UPDF which has a very clean record,  we have the Police.  The way I understand it,  do we want to tell the people of Uganda that if you go back to multi-parties,  the UPDF are going to misbehave like UNLA?  My belief is that if you go back to multi-partyism,  the UPDF will remain intact.  So, there is no question of saying, 'when you go back to multi-partyism, we shall go back to anarchy.'  It is deceptive.  If it is the opposite,  I would like to get assurance from my Friend, the hon. Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine whether they will run amok and behave like the - whether you will change your colours and behave like ULA or UNLA,  or remain a national army.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker,  and I thank the hon. Member for provoking me.  To make it categorically clear in this House and to him,  the UPDF has said many times that it will respect the will of the people.

MR. ADROA ONZIMA:  It is now very clear that if you go to full blast multi-partyism,  our security will remain intact, there will be no more suffering.  So we should never use this as an excuse to confuse the electorate in Uganda,  that multi-partyism will once again bring suffering to the people of Uganda. (Maj. Katirima rose_).  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, mind your time.

MAJ. KATIRIMA:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  I want to inform hon. Onzima and the whole House that what Maj. Gen. Tumwine said was that if the people of Uganda decide on any issue in accordance with the Constitution,  the UPDF will respect that will.  But I do not think that the hon. Maj. Gen. has said that if we just sit here in this House and contravene some of the provisions of the Constitution,  that too will be accepted.  Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU:  I thank the Member for giving way.  Of course I support what my comrade General has said,  I would only like to inform the Members that they should note that no army has ever been bad.  It is the leaders that cause armies to become bad.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. ADROA ONZIMA:  I support the recommendation of the Committee that the Political Organisations Bill should precede the Referendum Bill.  But I must add here that it is only a step in the right direction,  because as I earlier said,  I am not in support of holding a referendum when we could reach a consensus and go the way we want to go,  the way that will satisfy all parties involved and put us at par with other countries.  

Recently we were in Nigeria celebrating the enthronement of their President,  then we were in South Africa.  Mr. Speaker, those elections were carried out under multi-party democracy.   When we were there,  being represented by the President,  he threw a lot of praises for the democracy in those countries and yet it is multi-partyism in place in those countries.  This is like a moslem in Uganda here who says that, 'according to the koran, moslems should not eat pork.'  But when that moslem crosses the borders of Uganda,  goes to Kenya or Congo, finds somebody with very tasty pork and he encourages that moslem to eat the pork!  (Laughter)(An Hon. Member rose_).

THE SPEAKER:  When I am addressing someone,  you sit down.  I hope you are aware of that.  You look surprised!  Hon. Minister, what is the point of intervention?  Is it order?

MRS. BBUMBA SYDA:  It is a point of order,  Mr. Speaker.  There is a very clear law in the Koran that moslems do not eat pork wherever they are,  whether on mars, in heaven or wherever.  Is the hon. Member on the Floor in order to suggest that moslems, once they cross over to countries where they are not known,  are free to take pork?  Is he in order, Mr. Speaker?  Is he?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I think we should really avoid making references to issues which are very touchy and personal to the beliefs of individuals. I think we should not make those references. I therefore rule that the hon. Onzima was not in order in this particular case.  So, avoid that.

MR. ADROA ONZIMA:  I said I do not want to engage in - but let me give an analogy of my own faith.  In the Catholic church,  when we go for holy mass,  in the middle of the mass, there is the most important aspect of the prayer,  that is the consecration of the host and the wine into the body and blood of Christ.  When the time comes,  you will find that there are those Catholics who will proceed and receive the holy communion,  these are christians who consider themselves prepared for eucharist, but there are those who will hold back because of their little own spiritual weaknesses.  So if we are to say that this democracy exists in the Movement,  we want it to be the type of democracy which we will compare with those catholics who stay behind.  They do not go for the holy communion and yet they are in the church.  So, it was not intended to hurt the belief of moslems.  What I was saying is, if you do not - 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Onzima, can you get towards the conclusion?

MR. ADROA ONZIMA:  Yes, what I am saying is if you do not support multi-partyism,  and yet you are prepared to go outside there to attend functions and praise people the way they have behaved very democratically in that system outside and yet at home you do not cherish the same system,  then it is double standards on the part of the President.  

Finally I want to make it clear,  and I also made it very clear to the British High Commissioner when he was here,  that the British High Commission in Uganda made its position clear this morning that they also support the idea that the Political Organisations Bill should precede the referendum.  So, Mr. Speaker, this is relevant  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Order.  He is concluding, give him an opportunity.

MR. ADROA ONZIMA:  Mr. Speaker, I know they have no vote here,  but you must also remember, we claim we are independent but our independence is being controlled from outside.  The independence of Africa is being controlled in London and in Washington.  That is why President Moi,  who had rejected multi-partyism,  was forced to accept multi-partyism after the West had placed a lot of pressure on him.  So, if our financiers are saying that this is the right direction we should follow,  I think if we think of throwing it away we should be very careful about the consequences.  

In conclusion,  I am of the view that if parties messed,  or if some parties have been very dormant,  and failed to clean up their own houses, please let us take that advantage to go and destroy them by competing with them on the same platform,  and the people of Uganda will say, 'okay we know it, we do not support them.'  Then as the hon. Okulo Epak said,  if he is to compete with the Movement at party level and the Movement wins for the next 100 years, he will be very happy.  So,  Mr. Speaker, I therefore oppose the referendum.  I am of the view that the most important thing I see here should be the good will on the part the Cabinet.  Should anything come from above that we in the Movement can move in the direction of multi-partyism,  you will just find all of us here who oppose this idea will withdraw from their position then we resume in that direction of pluralism. I am for full blast multi-partyism,  not restrictive Movement politics.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA ELLY (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara):  Mr. Speaker, I thank you.  First I want to thank the hon. Members for endorsing me when I was not here as Chairman for Presidential and Foreign Affairs,  because we were in Mbarara receiving the President.  In my absence I understand I was endorsed as Chairman of Foreign Affairs Committee and I would like to speak in this capacity. 

Uganda is not living in a vacuum,  we live within an international community and we have met a lot of diplomats who have commented seriously about this Bill,  and for some reason they seem to be overly concerned about it.  Even this morning as hon. Onzima said,  the British High Commissioner was addressing the YPA,  and it was on the referendum question that he dwelt for a long time.  It is therefore very important that we also address this debate,  using the words of Prof. Nsibambi, while interfacing globally.  

Before I go into that speech,  I want to react to two issues that were raised by my friend hon. Alex Onzima,  especially when he was referring to the elections which President Museveni lost in 1980.  He also said that UPM is an extension of NRM.  Yes, that Movement is an extension of UPM.  If that was the extension then this would be a very interesting extension.  Because I was looking at this front table here starting from where the Vice President was sitting and I was looking for that extension of UPM,  and I only saw hon. Rugunda there.  So I think that it was not really an extension.  If it was, I think it was more a question of reorganising it inwardly,  than extending it.  And for President Museveni losing elections in Nyabushozi, I would like to put it on record that not only was I one of his campaign managers in that election,  but I know that that constituency has been so gerrymandered.  

Most of you have fortunately visited my constituency in one way or another and you have travelled through the breadth and width of it.  I want to assure you that that constituency you see as you travel,  only part of it voted and the rest was transferred to the borders where hon. Kaijuka comes from.  From Lyatonde to Rushere,  President Museveni was not voted for there.  Nyabushozi was divided in two,  part of it was left at Kazo.  Even where hon. Guma comes from,  Ishongororo,  part of the place near Toro was the one which was identified as the constituency of President Museveni.  As a result of that,  there was a lot of gerrymandering and there was a protest and the Electoral Commission obviously - that is one of the reasons you heard that these -(Interruption).

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA:  Order, Mr. Speaker.  I am getting worried because I do not know exactly how much time each of us has to contribute to this important motion.  I would want to rest assured that we have each been rationed time to make a contribution,  and I am getting worried at this conversation,  Mr. Speaker.  I would therefore like to ask,  is it in order for us to engage in conversation that is far, far thinly linked to the debate here and now?  Because we have not had a referendum before,  what happened in Nyabushozi was not a referendum.  Mr. Speaker, is it in order that we continue debating in this form?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, the hon. Member contributing was making his contribution by making reference to what the earlier Member,  the hon. Onzima,  made reference to.  I really do not see anything wrong in him giving information on hon. Onzima's assertions regarding certain occasions which are similar to what we are discussing.  I think he was in order.  

I nevertheless certainly take your point and I had already advised the Members that this is an important debate on which we should be precise so that as many of you as possible do speak.  To that extent I agree with you and I would like to advise the hon. Karuhanga that he should really stick to the point and be as precise as possible.  Can you proceed.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you Sir.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Information.

MR. KARUHANGA:  No, let me make my point.  Could I make the points on this one,  and then you inform me on the points that the Speaker has identified?  

As I said earlier,  I would like to make my contribution on this debate and especially put emphasis on the global aspect.  As you know,  this Movement system is almost uniquely Ugandan.  Others who are using it have not yet been able to position it the way this country has.  What is very critical in this referendum therefore,  for it to get any credibility,  the important thing our friends,  our foes,  our allies and the population would like to know is that there is a playing field that is level.  That to me is the crux of this debate,  and it is only this Parliament that can make this play field level.  

The playing field must not be obtuse,  it must not have acute angles,  it must not be perpendicular,  it must not be on a plateau looking down on others,  it must not be tangential,  it has to have a focal point where everybody knows that this is a straight line and it is clear,  and it is fair.  That is the purpose of this Parliament.  I thank the Cabinet and the Minister of Justice for what they have done,  I thank the Committee for refining what they have done,  but everything else depends on us.  We must not make an abrupt law where we shall find lacunas along the way.  We must make sure that the playing field is not corrugated, full of potholes and these humps which you find on the road.  It is that law that I am looking for,  that there will be no excuse at the end of the day to say that this was an unfair process in the first place.  

If we are to do that, then a lot of things must be done especially by the Movement side,  not so much by the multi-party side.  Why?  Because the Movement is in power, it has the majority of supporters in the House.  It is up to us to bend over backward to make sure that our sense of justice is paramount  -(Applause).  It is not right for our senior Ministers to go on radio and start pronouncing,  telling RDCs, 'make sure the Movement wins the referendum.'  That is not correct,  in my view.  It was okay to say it before,  but as soon as we declare this race open,  go and campaign for your side.  

What then is the best way forward?  How do we solve the issue of one side being too strong for the other?  Because there are two sides to this debate.  The individual is being asked the question, do you support (a) or (b)?  There are those speaking for (b), there are those speaking for (a).  How do we make sure that the two sides to the coin,  to the question,  to the equation are balanced?  To me, that is the job of this House.  I am proposing that suppose this Parliament said the Movement Secretariat being what it is,  being so supportive of the Movement being funded and by Parliament, supposing it stood aside?  Supposing we created two sides,  one headed by hon. Omara Atubo,  another one headed by hon. Elly Karuhanga for that matter and we say, 'go and form the sides?'  Then we say, 'here is your money,  go ye forward to the people and speak at the same level, canvass according to what the Parliamentary Committee has said.'  Would that be a fair process?  

There is a question of saying that the Movement Secretariat is financed,  it has got a budget,  while the multi-party group doesn't.  There are many people in Uganda I have met who are not supporting DP,  who are not supporting UPC,  but who want to see a multi party system.  They are bored with the old parties,  they would like to form new parties.  But they cannot be seen sharing a platform with any of the other old two sides and they do not feel comfortable sharing a platform with one of the old parties.  But they would like,  as individuals or as a group,  to move together,  to argue and talk to our population,  about the multi-party philosophy.  

For example this afternoon I was listening to hon. Mutyaba, he had done so much research on what Robert said, on what Adams said,  on what the other philosopher said,  and he said,  'I have one foot in the Movement, I have another foot somewhere else.'  He was standing ajar.  That type of person will probably at one time have to decide which side of the group he wants to campaign for.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, in fairness to hon. Mutyaba who is not here, if I recollect what he said,  he said he is both.  He did not say he has one foot here and another there, he said he is both.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Okay, it is unfair to say that the Movement Secretariat should stand aside and be gagged in the debate, because there are individuals there.  How do we then allow them to exercise their rights as citizens and at the same time restrict them?  I think we can only restrict them financially,  by saying the financing will not go to the Movement Secretariat, it will go to a group which the Secretariat selects.  And then those who believe in the multi-party concept,  and they need not be from the Rwanyarare,  Ssemogerere,  UPC,  or hon. Cecilia Ogwal's camp,  should sit down and elect their own kind of groups.  Then we move into the country and ask the people, 'you have seen the Movement perform,  you have seen all its weaknesses,  you know where its strengths are,  you have also seen the multi-partyists,  how do we move forward?'  To me this should be sought out a little bit more,  some of these ideas should be floated and exchanged.  

The other point I would like to bring up,  as I do not have a lot of time left,  is the framing of the question.  This is also another very difficult point.  The Minister,  the Electoral Commission,  and the Parliamentary Committee are saying that the Constitutional Court of three judges appointed by the Chief Justice,  will frame the question.  I am saying,  let those two groups which are formed come up with a proposal,  take it to the Constitutional Court -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  It is not a Constitutional Court.

MR. KARUHANGA:  No, I am proposing.

THE SPEAKER:  The proposal is of a panel.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I am proposing my own.  I am proposing a Constitutional Court,  that instead of the Committee's proposal,  we go to the Constitutional Court,  for it to pronounce itself on what the question should be.  This way we lend credence to the Constitution Court, because after all it is a law making organisation.  Once a Constitutional Court pronounces itself on any matter,  it becomes law.  After all,  we shall also have utilised them in that we have restriction on finances from outside.  I think the question why we are going through all this is because we want to find a donor country.

MR. DOMBO:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank hon. Karuhanga for giving way.  Hon. Karuhanga has just made a very good suggestion and proposal,  that the Constitutional Court could be mandated with the drafting of the question that will be asked during the referendum.   We know the Constitutional Court constitutes of judges who may later preside over the case,  if somebody wishes to appeal against the results of the referendum.  How would this be operationalised,  if the Constitutional Court which would later preside over the petitions of the referendum again participates in the setting of the question?  Thank you very much.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Hon. Dombo should not be over duly concerned about that because in the first place,  even if it was Parliament which pronounces itself on the question,  the Constitutional Court will have to implement the decision.  If Parliament has given them power to decide on the question, that will be the question.  If you petition,  you petition on that question which was already answered by them and they will be the best people to give you a proper interpretation.

Let me now go to the financing of the two sides.  I would like Government to finance those two sides equally,  so that it is free and fair.  I am suspicious about foreign funding because they continuously want to make Africa the third world.  It is part of their problems of the cold war,  part of their problems of domination,  part of their interests and I think it is high time Uganda found its own interests.  I would rather that if they want to help,  let them go and help the Electoral Commission,  let them help civic organisations which are carrying out education,  let them go and help the Human Rights Commission.  But to go and help those sides to campaign,  I think they are bringing their own interests into our own interests,  and we should resist that.  We should be Ugandans,  men and women enough and stop it.  Let us find our money and run our referendum and wait for the results.

On the question of the Political Organisations Bill,  I have had very serious reflections on this matter.  I know for sure that the law will find problems because the Constitution says,  when the Movement is in place,  the other systems shall remain in abeyance.  If you allow the Political Parties Bill to come up, politicians being what they are by nature,  they will say, 'Parliament passed us to be around,  so let us start organising our politics and bring problems.'  

My view is that let us not be too legalistic.  Let us pass the Political Organisations Bill after we have passed the Referendum Bill, and let us put there in that Bill the time for its implementation so that after the Referendum,  if the multi-partyists win,  that is the law they will employ.  But if they do not win,  the law is there,  it is for them to utilise it remains in abeyance.

I would like to amend the Constitution in general terms as an idea.  I do not know which section we shall amend or which section we shall not amend or whether it is going to be an addition.  But my view is that our political system is not static,  it is growing.  What we decided when we were in the Constituent Assembly was the politics of that day.  But we do not have the Constituent Assembly any more.  We cannot even call it again.  The Constituent Assembly is going to be this Parliament and the district councils and the spirit of Ugandans,  because the Constitution is the spirit of the country.  

Let us pass the Referendum Bill.  If the multi-partyists win by 40 percent,  and the Movement wins by 60 percent,  Parliament will have to come here and say, 'the Movement system won,  therefore we make an Act to authorise it to go on.'  But we know what is in the Constitution about the future,  on the referendum.  It requires a majority of Parliament,  and district councils.  It becomes very difficult then,  to change the Movement system,  even if the spirit of the country was such that the 40 percent which supported multi-parties is growing to 50 percent.  

If that happens we will then we have a legal problem.  So moving in the same spirit of unity for our country,  the spirit of interest of our nation,  our citizenship and knowing that we all want to belong here together in happiness,  we have to address the question.  We can even put it in the Referendum Bill and say that if a minimum of 40 percent is achieved by multi-partyists for example,  or one of the systems,  then it means that the spirit of tolerance within the country must be moved to find room in the Constitution.  

The question of how we amend the Constitution to reflect this tolerance can be overcome if everybody is involved,  especially Members of Parliament.  Do not start looking for ways and means of rushing to power quickly.  If we just sit together, this problem can be addressed.  I would hate to find that we are muzzling up the population - one way or another - just because we want to stay and manage the affairs of the country where the general support is lacking.  These issues raise a lot of contemplation.  

The question of just hanging on when we hate the referendum,  is not proper.  I want to confess,  hon. Members,  that within the Movement caucus when we were working on the Constitution,  I was on the side which was opposed to the referendum,  until I was convinced in another caucus.  After a lot of persuasion where the question was put to me that,  'how then will you want the peasants for whom the Movement claims to be fighting for to pronounce themselves on whether they are fed up of the Movement or not?  How can you sit in Kampala and decide for the masses?  What are you thinking about the people's rights enshrined in the first sentence of the Constitution?'  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity.

CAPT. BABU FRANCIS (Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I come here first and foremost to thank the Minister for presenting this Bill on the Referendum to us.  And of course my thanks go to the Chairman and his Committee for such a job well done,  in different areas of the whole report.

I would like to take this opportunity to bring out one or two points that have been mentioned,  which I think are points that should not even be brought because they are just causing a rift for no reason.  I have listened to the Minister very carefully and I listened to the Chairman of the Committee,  who I talked to afterwards,  and I found out that although the Political Organisations Bill went back and did not have time limits,  we now have a small problem with this Bill which the Minister presented to us.  

A lot of things have been said and some are historical,  I do not really want to waste time on that.  Many hon. Members have been very exact in their enumeration of the past,  what has happened in this country.  I remember even in the 1967 Constitution which is no longer there, there was a part on the freedom of association and they were very clear on it.  During our debate in the Constituent Assembly,  I was in Committee number five,  this point came out very clearly that in the future we have to present a Bill to this House that is going to level the field so that the people of Uganda can have an opportunity to -(Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to refer to our rules of procedures,  rule 17(2).  Even if I do not mention the details of the rule,  we are discussing a very,  very important issue related to the referendum,  a constitutional fate of this country.  Aware of the fact that we do not make quorum,  is it in order for us to proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we do not have a quorum,  so the point of order is well taken.  But it is a pity that when we are discussing a matter of national importance, we as legislatures do not seem to be taking our role seriously and instead of sitting here to debate such an important Bill,  we are walking out, even after knowing very well that we must pronounce ourselves on this matter by a certain date.  I think you will have yourselves to blame and posterity will judge us.  My hands are tied by the very rules you made,  so I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes and the bell will be rang.  

(The proceedings were suspended for 15 minutes).

(On resumption, the Speaker presiding_).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have not been able to raise a quorum. I shall adjourn the House to Monday, at 2 o'clock.

(The Parliament rose and adjourned until Monday,  28th June, 1999). 
