Wednesday, 23 June 2010

Parliament met at 11.08 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this meeting and apologise for the delay. I was receiving some petitions from citizens this morning and it took a bit longer than I had expected. But I hope we shall be able to catch up with our programme. 

11.09
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence to raise this issue, which is of utmost importance to the area where I come from, the Busoga Kingdom. I am in receipt of a letter dated 16 June 2010 addressed to the Minister of Local Government by the Isabalangira of Busoga Kingdom. That letter is responding to summons by the Minister of Local Government to some royal chiefs of Busoga to a meeting somewhere in Kampala. 

We need to look at the law. The Constitution is very clear that cultural institutions should not be mixed up with politics. The framers of this Constitution knew exactly that the moment you get cultural matters and mix them up with politics then you cause confusion. The President has been very emphatic on this on a number of public occasions. 

This letter summons the royal chiefs to a certain hotel in Kampala. Busoga Kingdom matters cannot be discussed in a lodge. Why should the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, imagine that he will discuss matters pertaining to our kingdom in a lodge in Kampala? We the Basoga feel insulted and I would like to call upon the Leader of Government Business to restrain hon. Adolf Mwesige from intermeddling in matters concerning Busoga Kingdom. 

We may have problems in the kingdom, but hon. Adolf Mwesige who comes from somewhere in Western Uganda can contribute to the well being of his kingdom but he should not interfere with affairs pertaining to Busoga. We shall find solutions to our own problems and we have not invited him. We are not all that desperate; we shall sort out our problems. 

Secondly, he is talking about discussing vehicles from Government. Busoga Kingdom does not have any vehicle from Government. There was only one vehicle which had been given to the late Kyabazinga, which is now a DMC. How do you summon 11 royal chiefs to come and discuss one DMC vehicle in a Kampala lodge? This is an insult and we feel infuriated by hon. Adolf Mwesige’s letter. We even questioned his intention; what is he up to? Our kingdom is a cultural institution, we are not a government department and he is a minister in charge of Local Government. This is not a government department; what is hon. Adolf Mwesige doing in matters concerning Busoga Cultural Kingdom? 

Madam Speaker, I know I am putting you in a difficult situation because you come from the kingdom; so this is addressed to the Leader of the Government side –(Interjections)– who also comes from Busoga, unfortunately. Maybe some other person will assist us but my intention of raising this statement is to demand as we hereby do that hon. Adolf Mwesige keeps out of Busoga cultural matters. It is not local government and they are not matters of Toro Kingdom. He should restrict himself on matters of Bunyangabo County and leave Busoga alone. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

11.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Katuntu for raising this matter. As far as I am aware, we have the Regional Government Bill in a committee of Parliament and we have been carrying out a number of consultations here and there especially in those kingdom areas, which were deemed to have formed regional governments. 

My understanding of this is that he should be making those consultations in his capacity as the Minister in charge of the sector. But if there are other issues that relate to the kingdom of Busoga that are outside that arrangement that I have talked about, I can only say, I will consult him and he can make clarifications to us.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, his summon is very clear; it is to discuss vehicles – to discuss about honoraria for the Kyabazinga of Busoga. Actually, as we talk now, we still have a problem. Which honorarium is he talking about? So, what he has written here is not correct. He is just using this forum to discuss other issues; in any case, Busoga has got a Lukiiko. If he wants to discuss anything relating to issues of the kingdom, he should go to the organs of the kingdom. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification which I seek from the honourable minister is, in his explanation, he said that Busoga is deemed to have formed a regional tier government and they are consulting with them. In my own understanding, even if we were to have these regional tier governments, are the chiefs the right people to be consulted? And what happens in places like the West Nile and by the way even in the greater Acholi because much as we have the Rwot, I do not think those other chiefs are as well instituted as the 11 chiefs of Busoga. Will the chiefs be the right people for the Minister of Local Government to consult, or the chairpersons? And in this case, the 11 are said to be cultural chiefs; they are not elected leaders of Busoga based on a political basis like the LC V chairpersons and the rest. Can the minister –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: In fact, Madam Speaker, when you look at the list, some of these chiefs have been sacked. They were sacked long ago and no longer hold the offices of the royal chiefs. So really, what he is doing is to fuel the conflict within Busoga and we take exception to this. What he has done is fuelling the conflict, dividing our people more. 

MR WADRI: So, Madam Speaker, as I was advancing my point, can the minister expound on that explanation he has given which to me sounds plausible? That that could have been the right reason behind the minds of those who framed this letter; that they were really trying to consult people with a mind of forming a regional tier government. 

What are you going to do for example in a place like the West Nile where we do not have chiefs of that nature? Are you going to fish or are you going to work with the elected LC V chairpersons? If you are to work with the elected LC V chairpersons, why is it that in the case of Busoga, you chose to ignore the elected LC V chairpersons of the districts of Busoga and you went for the cultural chiefs, some of whom I am meant to understand have even been sacked? Is this what you are going to do if you are to have regional tier governments in this country? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I also know - there are 30 Members of Parliament from Busoga in this Parliament, including the Deputy Speaker of this Parliament. You could not consult the 30 Members of Parliament who are elected, who have the mandate of the people? Perhaps hon. Mwesige should tell us his clan in Busoga –(Laughter)– and maybe six generations of his ancestors so that we can understand his role in this thing. 

11.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the hon. Minister, in trying to explain this letter, has caused himself some problems because as far as I know, the Regional Tiers Bill was tabled before Parliament and, therefore, any process related to the Bill is the business of Parliament. I do not know how the hon. Minister of Local Government now assumes the role of a parliamentary committee dealing with regional tiers to consult with these chiefs. Procedurally, he would be totally out of order. 

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. If I can start with the points advanced by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, I do not think when the Bill is in Parliament, it stops the minister from continuing to consult. It has happened; we have conducted even workshops for Members of Parliament and Members interested in the law. So, I think the procedure is not being flouted. 

Having said that, let me also say that anything outside the consultations on the Regional Governments Bill will be possibly properly explained by the minister himself and I have promised this House that I will ask him to clarify on that. But for sure, if it is about consultations, definitely, it is true that even in the past the Kingdom of Buganda has been consulted by Government. It is not really that we are consulting out of the ordinary –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the minister for giving way. This matter is not restricted to Busoga. In Acholi, for example, the government gave iron sheets to 54 chiefs. The iron sheets were delivered by the Minister for Information and National Guidance; that is another minister not the one of Local Government. Some of these chiefs are becoming political agents of the ruling party. They are even trying to use the chiefs to access land. So, while they are doing this to Busoga, they know the targets. 

The point of procedure I want to raise is that it should now be the Speaker to direct the Minister Of Local Government to come here and explain his letter, rather than leave it to his junior minister, who will go with a lot of respect, very politely and say “They were saying this; can you, Sir ….” (Laughter) I think the Speaker should just direct that the minister comes here and explains this letter. I thank you.

11.22
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The worst thing is to run a government, which is disjointed, a government, which does not follow procedure, a government that is disorganised. As far as I am concerned, I also come from a kingdom. The ministry which is mandated to deal with culture is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. How come that we have the Minister of Information and National Guidance dealing with traditional leaders? We have a Minister of Local Government dealing with the traditional leaders? 

Really, we are being advised that the traditional leaders should not interfere with politics. Can we be directed on which ministry we are answerable to because you are disorganising us? You invite us into politics and when we want to participate, you are the first people to say, “Do not participate!” Madam Speaker, I beg that the Leader of Government Business clarifies this matter. Which ministry of your Government is responsible for cultural affairs? I want to think that when we are in Government, cultural institutions shall be under the gender, labour and community development ministry. I thank you. 

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, let me wind up my submission – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still attempting to justify what your minister is doing? Let us hear from the Leader of Government Business. 

11.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, it is a fact that cultural institutions relate and work directly, whenever the need arises, with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. However, it is also true that as Government, we have been carrying out consultations on this issue of regional governments with our various stakeholders and the cultural institutions, and elected leaders are some of the stakeholders and these consultations are going on and are likely to continue for quite some time because at the end of the day, when we pass the law here, Government would like to see that the law that is passed is one that has received the input of practically every stakeholder.

Regarding the work of the Minister of Information and National Guidance in Northern Uganda, she was delegated the responsibility to provide support to some –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My friend, hon. Katuntu, read to us part of a letter and the letter was clear. The purpose of the meeting is clearly defined in this letter. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to entertain the Leader of Government Business on business that is out of context from what was raised in the House. It is clear that the minister wanted to discuss issues related to vehicles and this is why he invited these chiefs to come to a hotel in Kampala, Hotel Africana, to be precise. 

I do not think this would be the right time for the Leader of Government Business to come and talk about something that is not related to what has been raised. I would like to buy the idea of hon. Okello-Okello that you rule on this matter so that the Leader of Government Business, in consultation with the responsible minister, comes here with a comprehensive statement to the House so that this statement would be debated. 

I feel very sad when the cultural leaders of Buganda are told in no uncertain terms that they should not engage in politics, including those of Toro, Bunyoro, and now we see the Government engaging the cultural institution of Busoga. I think this is unfair.

So, the procedural point I would like to raise is that the matter the Leader of Government Business is responding to is not answering the question that hon. Abdu Katuntu raised in this House. So, would it be procedurally right for you, Madam Speaker, to allow him to continue articulating issues not related to what was raised?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, I think what the country wants to know is what the Minister of Local Government is doing with cultural leaders of Busoga. We want a statement to explain what he was doing.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I will deliver the directive of this House but I also know and I heard many people wanted to know which ministry handles cultural institutions. And I thought it was my responsibility as a responsible acting Leader of Government Business to inform everybody that it is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development that is supposed to relate directly with the cultural institutions. 

I thought that was the information you needed to know but it is also important for Members of Parliament to know that Government and the Ministry  of Local Government are carrying out consultations on the matter of regional governments with various stakeholders and I am sure they will be in touch with you. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the outcome of those consultations must relate to regional government and not anything else? Is that what you are assuring this House?  

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, you have given a directive which I am going to communicate to the Minister of Local Government but it is also our method of work that we build harmony in whatever we do and I will make sure that the outcome of the consultations produce a law that is good for all the regional governments in the country.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank the Leader of Government Business for the explanation and assurance. Although procedurally he was restricted, hon. Okello-Okello mentioned something about the cultural leaders in Acholi. I would want to give this as advice to Government: cultural leaders in Acholi need help; many of them are very happy to have those buildings constructed and we support the construction of the buildings. But those messengers of Government who go and then try to make it look like it is us doing it – you have to help us – you are doing a big disservice to those cultural leaders because in the first place, our people hold them in that position purely in trust. You breach that trust - you go - in fact the cultural leader of Lamogi has already been thrown out. So, if there are those you want to work with, shield them from politics, otherwise they will all be wiped out. And for us we have no problem whatsoever in replacing our leaders provided there is a need to do so. So, it is just advice to Government. 

We thank them for the support they are giving the cultural leaders but make it abundantly clear to them that you are not doing it so that they can help you in the campaigns because they will be the first victims of that effort. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before the Leader of Government Business comes in, I thought I could read the letter. The letter is too long but I will read the relevant part, which says that what they intend to discuss with the kingdom officials include: vehicles, pledges and honoraria for the Kyabazinga of Busoga. You can see; and the people he invites, according to his thinking, are the electoral college to discuss what amounts to corruption, bribery; that is what he intends to discuss with these people. It has nothing to do with the regional government at all. 

It is being diversionary. We should really restrict ourselves to what Minister Adolf Mwesige wants to discuss – pledges, and these pledges are to the kingdom. These people are just royal chiefs; they have nothing to do with the management of the kingdom because the kingdom has its own structures. 

So, Madam Speaker, all said, this is just a meeting relating to discussing bribes; this is purely corruption and hon. Adolf Mwesige should be put on notice that we are infuriated by this. He should not bring bribery and corruption to our kingdom. Let him restrict himself to Toro. They have a king there who has just become of age; he needs his support. We do not need hon. Adolf Mwesige’s support. 

11.34
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have two matters of national importance to raise. 

The whole of Agago County is now completely cut off from the rest of the neighbouring districts and sub-counties within the county because all the Central Government roads are in very bad shape. 

For example, I cannot travel from Patong to Kalong because the bridge between the two sub-counties is impassable. I cannot travel from Patong to Adilang. For the last one week, people have tried to use diversions. When in Patong, they have to travel through Kalong and pass Panyimur, Lapono to get to Adilang. And it is a distance of more than 50kms and yet this distance could be greatly reduced if one had used the Patongo-Adilang Bridge, one would use less than 20kms. 

So, Madam Speaker, something has to be done urgently, especially on the bridge between Adilang and Patong. I understand a grant was given two years ago by the Italian Government. I would like to find out what the Ministry of Works is doing with this money. Two years ago, where is the money lying? People of Agago cannot travel on the bridge of Agago because the money, which has been given by some people is lying somewhere else. So, that is the clarification I want to ask for.

The second point of national importance is about the health centres in Aruu County. For the last three months, some of the health centres have not received drugs. The last batch of drugs that was delivered in Aruu County was received in early March and some health centres did not receive them. I wish you could quickly allow me to read only 14 health centres that have not received drugs since March: Bolo Health Centre II; Lagile Health Centre II: Paiula Health Centre II; Alim Health Centre II; Porogali Health Centre II; Oguta; Angagura; Amilobo; Ogonyo; Wipolo; Okinga; Dure; Ogago and Lawire. All these are health centres that have not received drugs and there have been no explanations at all from the Ministry of Health. 

After I consulted with the Minister of State for Primary Healthcare, hon. Kakooza, and after asking him, he has not acted. So, I do not know what Parliament can do to ensure that these health centres receive drugs.

And above all, Pajule Health Centre IV has not received drugs for the last so many weeks and it is the only health centre IV we have in the county. It is the only place women can go and deliver safely, and we cannot have drugs for weeks? Madam Speaker, we have to be honest to Ugandans.

Yesterday, as I was here in Parliament, I was receiving calls from the health centre. People gathered in the hospital; they needed drugs but there were no drugs. They were being told to go and buy drugs from elsewhere. And here are poor Ugandans who do not have money to go and buy drugs from clinics.  

So, I need an urgent explanation, and not only an explanation, but quick action to be taken so that tomorrow or Friday, I hear that drugs are delivered to these health centres.

And you know the new system that has been introduced requires that National Medical Stores delivers the drugs directly. So, I wonder whether the problem is because of this or something else, but all these reasons - I wish the minister - I can see the Leader of Government Business, maybe he has an answer or he can attempt to give us an answer to this but Ugandans are suffering.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay this on the Table for the records of this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, anything to say about the drugs and the bridge?

11.39
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Akello for raising these very important matters on the state of the roads, bridges and drugs. It is true that many parts of the country have been receiving very heavy rains and bridges have given way and quite a number of roads are in a state of disrepair. I am going to draw this to the attention of the Minister of Works and Transport so that necessary action can be taken.

Similarly, on the issue of drugs for health centres which you have mentioned, I am going to raise this with the Minister of Health. I am sure by lunch time he will have received notification from me in regard to corrective action that is required to be taken so that the lives of our people can be saved.

MS FRANCA AKELLO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hereby lay on the Table, for the record of this Parliament, two documents: one, verification of drugs supplied under credit line from the National Medical Stores, Entebbe, Uganda, transported in vehicle No. UAA 595F, that was in the month of May. This was the last supply. The second-last supply was in March. So, these are the supplies and there is an attachment of the list of those health centres that never received the drugs. I beg to lay them on the Table, and thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure they will assist the minister in transmitting the information.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The state of roads, particularly in the North, is very bad, for example, Gulu-Kitgum. Under normal circumstances, murram as the road is, the journey should take a maximum of one and a half hours. Right now, in a four wheel drive vehicle, you take a minimum of three hours. In fact, last time we had to follow Lira Road up to Kona-Kilak then go to Gulu, making the journey longer by about 40 kilometres.

I would not really buy the idea of the Leader of Government Business saying that he is going to draw the attention of the responsible minister to this. This Government is a government which is all over the place. Does it mean the Minister of Works is not aware? Don’t they have road inspectors? Don’t they have offices in the districts? Does he have to be alerted by the Leader of Government Business? Even the Leader of Government Business, which business are you leading if things are happening as if you do not know? What is your business? 

I think we should stop deceiving Ugandans that we are doing something for them. I think Government should wake up and behave like the government which is in place to serve the people of Uganda. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After hon. Amuriat, the Minister should answer and we move on to the next item. 

11.43
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, on the issue of roads, I think I am beginning to distrust the Leader of Government Business when he says he will go and inform the Minister of Works about what he should actually be informed about. This is not an emergency. This is a state of deterioration of roads that has systematically happened. We have district engineers from the Uganda National Road Authority all over the country and their responsibility, apart from ensuring both periodic and routine maintenance, is to carry out assessment of the conditions of roads. I believe that Kitgum and the entire Northern part of the country and Pader are no exception. 

So, it is not lack of information that the ministry is suffering from. In fact, I would like to tell you that hon. Nasasira is more informed than you are, Mr Leader of Government Business. And so he does not need your information. All that the ministry needs to do is to take deliberate steps towards doing our roads. 

Pader is not the only exception in this country. Everywhere you go in this country there are roads that were taken over by the Central Government from the local governments that have been abandoned. And I have heard about a joke of Shs 30 billion being allocated for the rehabilitation of over 10,000 kilometres of road network. How are you going to do this?

Remember that for an economy to thrive there has to be good road network. And if people have to move an extra 50 kilometres then it costs more to do that. If we have got to repair vehicles every often because of bad roads, then you are retarding development.

So, I would like to challenge Government just like in the case of lack of essential drugs in health units, to tell Ugandans what their plan for Uganda is. It is not enough to come and give us attractive figures when you read the budget. We would like that budget implemented and these are the same stories you have been telling us. Why do MPs have to come and kneel before Government in order for services to be delivered to their people? I know it is part of our job to keep reminding Government but then this has turned into a common song. Is this how people are going to assess you in the next elections? Madam Speaker, I thank you.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on the issue of the state of health in this country. Every time it comes up, you make a promise that we shall have a whole sitting to discuss the state of health in this country. It is not only Pader but the whole country is bleeding. Isn’t it procedurally right that time is around the corner for us to have a full sitting discussing the state of health in this country? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is a commitment we made some time back. We need to fulfill it. Maybe we should find time before we go into the State of Nation Address so that we can discuss it. I undertake to create time next week to discuss the state of health. It is outstanding.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, when I stood to respond to the issues that had been raised by hon. Akello, I clearly pointed out that quite a big number of roads in the country have had bridges washed away due to heavy rains in different parts of the country. Prior to that, many of these roads were in serviceable condition. Funds have been provided but it is also true that many of the districts do not have the equipment ready to handle what has come up as a result of the heavy rains and washing away of bridges. They, therefore, need support from the Ministry of Works and from the Uganda National Roads Authority and this is something I have a duty to communicate to the minister responsible so that the necessary support can be given to the engineers in Kitgum and Pader so that they can be in a position to move as fast as they can to ensure that the roads are in a state that can permit our people to use them. 

The ministry has sent out teams all over the country so that inspection and determination of what needs to be done in a fairly urgent manner on many roads in different parts of the country is undertaken. I am going to request the Minister for Works at an appropriate stage to come over to the House and bring the House on board in regard to the various interventions that are being pursued in different parts of the country. Thank you.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does the chairperson wish to report? We gave you time to go and consult.

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, yesterday we stood over clause 3(b) and I want to report first of all in full on the whole of 3 but I know the hon. Minister - we discussed yesterday with the Leader of the Opposition and we made some agreements but I am sure both of them will talk about this. Let me first read it as the committee had agreed yesterday.

Amendment of section 11 of the principal Act: “Section 11 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for section 6(c) the following: ‘A notice made under sub-section 6(a) shall be submitted to the minister or his or her representative by the clerk to council and the minister or his or her representative shall evaluate the notice for the removal of the speaker and if satisfied that there are sufficient grounds for doing so, shall within 30 days after receipt of notice, convene or cause the convening of a meeting for the removal and election of the speaker’. That was the first section.

Secondly, sub-section (b) inserting immediately after sub-section 12 the following - I am wondering whether we should first finish the first one?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know when we adjourned the Attorney-General had made a slight amendment to add the words “in consultation”. I do not hear them in your submission.

CAPT OTEKAT: Let the minister expound.

MR AHABWE: Madam Chair, when we left this meeting we consulted together with the Leader of the Opposition, the Attorney-General and the chairman of the committee and we agreed that the fears that were embedded in the argument by the Leader of the Opposition were catered for under a different amendment.

Therefore, the amendment that was moved by the Attorney-General would stand. In other words, the minister in consultation with the Attorney-General would evaluate the grounds of the section.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As the hon. Minister reported, we consulted over this matter and we agreed that to protect against possible interests beyond administration, we should amend rule 3 of the Third Schedule to provide for what is in the Constitution so that in case conflicts in the districts arise from that end, it has nothing to do with what the Minister must do to ensure that the district functions properly and so the amendment as proposed by the Attorney-General to add consultation with him was agreeable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think let us first resolve that one. I put the question that section 11 be amended as proposed by the Attorney-General.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 11, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You had something else to add.

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chairperson, still on clause 3(b), the committee had recommended that we insert immediately after sub-section 12 the following. That will now be 13: “A deputy speaker of a district council shall be paid emoluments and allowances in accordance with the First Schedule to the Act”, because we have already allowed the deputy speaker to be paid emoluments and we should, therefore, provide for it in the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Didn’t you have something else? What happened to 18? You had talked about 18 yesterday. Is it also under 3?

CAPT. OTEKAT: Yes, and then we also had added onto another clause. After clause 3, we wanted to insert a new provision. Section 18 of the principal Act is amended by inserting a new provision immediately after sub-section (6) to read as follows: “Not withstanding the provisions of this section, the district executive committee shall be constituted within three months from the date of the first council meeting.” 

The justification is to avoid unnecessary delay in the creation of the district executive committee.

Members, if you read the report, we have deleted “within three months from the date when the last general election was carried out”, because it could take another three months before the first meeting is held. Instead, we have put that. The executive is normally supposed to be formed during the first council meeting of the council and if they do not constitute the executive during that time, then we are saying they will be given at least three months to constitute an executive. That is what the committee is recommending. 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to the ask the chairperson of this committee, supposing we are in a multi-party dispensation, a good example is Ssembabule District where a chairman submits the names of those he thinks should be on the executive and the names are rejected and maybe you do not have the majority in the house. You give them another three months, he has no alternative, he cannot pick from outside the council; what happens? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If he fails within the three months? Does the Minister have something to say about it? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I discussed with the committee members, the former chairperson and the current chairperson. Actually, the former chairperson also used the example of Ssembabule and said, “Up to now, Ssembabule has not constituted an executive.” And I said, “How does giving a deadline of three months make them constitute an executive? And if they do not constitute one, what happens?” The difficulty with this is that it does not cure the problem. The problem is a political problem and we are just into a multi-party system; the electorate will see that if you do not elect a harmonious group to council, you will have a problem. That is how you improve democracy.

If you provide for this, I beg the indulgence of the Attorney-General to guide us. What if it is not constituted? Are there provisions in the law that will then make something happen? If there is nothing, of what value will this law be? Will it dissolve the council? Have you the powers to dissolve the council? Well, the provisions for the President taking over are clearly spelt out. If you look for them, you will find the reasons why he can take over. It cannot include a political disagreement amongst members. He can do that, but he could be challenged. 

So, it is something, which arises from a unique situation and I am reluctant to support legislation that arises from a unique situation because sometimes they become an impediment or a complexity. So, I would ask –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I have not understood. You do not want the three months stated here?

PROF. OGENGA-LATOGO: This proposal does not help. For example, if we pass this proposal now and Ssembabule does not have an executive, what do you do? 

MR AHABWE: Madam Chair, when I met the committee, I faced a similar problem. We deliberated at length and my dilemma was also like that. When the three months expire and they do not constitute an executive, what happens? 

My earlier proposal to them was something similar to when we are making laws here that for sure, a council can really make it difficult. So, once the names are submitted with reasons and three times, the chairperson is submitting the names; once the council refuses, then the chairman constitutes the committee because you have given them enough time to agree with you. But that point did not find favour with the committee.

The other option was introducing the element of a minister; but then, it also has some difficulty. How do you force an executive of a district council? I agree this should be open so that all of us can combine our brains and find a remedy; it is not necessarily true that we should be the ones to make proposals. We are open to all sorts of proposals; where we shall agree, we shall say so.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But Minister, you are not helping us. You know you are trying to deepen democracy, people elect their leaders then they cannot form an executive and there are no sanctions? The people who voted want services; they are talking about roads, there is no one to talk about their roads. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think the Minister of Local Government should help us beyond this amendment. It is just a general policy matter, which should develop from how they operate, the challenges they have faced and so on and so forth in the ministry. However, those who are reluctant to support this proposal have a point and it has been laid on the Floor of the House.

You will wonder because in most of our legislation, there are expressions, which are usually used and you wonder why we use them. Sometimes, it is to avoid rigidity. When you spell out a period, you cast it in stone. You make it very difficult to have it operational if for instance what hon. Nsubuga is raising comes by. So, sometimes you say, “Shall, as soon as is practicable, or expeditiously ….” And in any case, courts have gone around expressions like “shall”.

Sometimes, when the expression “shall” is used, it is not taken as mandatory, it is simply taken as directory where, for instance, courts have argued that where “shall” is used and if the validity of the subject matter does not depend on that expression “shall”, then it is directory. Where the validity of the subject matter depends on its being applied, then it becomes mandatory. We have so many judgments to that effect. But in this particular case you will certainly be tying yourself. I would prefer if the chairperson and the minister could agree, that we use a more flexible expression: “Shall, as soon is practicable, form an executive committee or expeditiously ….,” whichever expression, they will deem expedient.
 
MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Chairperson, my proposal is that if the chairperson submits these names to the council for the first time, second time and third time and within the range of three months the council is rejecting these names; I think we have to borrow a leaf from Parliament that when we pass a Bill and it is sent to the President to assent to; he returns it and if there are no changes, it automatically becomes law. 

So, I would go by that because people who join councils are not really managing clan affairs; they are managing public issues for which Government is sending money and people need services. So, if indeed these people have not sobered up in the three months, then automatically these names have to pass and we conduct business. Otherwise, the differences amongst the councillors bog down the operations of Government, and especially for the population that they are serving.

I would, therefore, buy the view of the minister that these names have to be taken on as the executive members within three months; otherwise, you can pull ropes for five years and nothing takes place.

MR YIGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This is a serious issue because the Government is sending a lot of money to the districts; billions of shillings. Now, if these people cannot really sober up and form an executive to manage the affairs of their district, then it is going to be a matter of serious concern and we cannot let them go on. There are some districts, which up to now do not have fully-fledged executive committees and yet their term is almost ending, while we are seated here watching their business going on like that. We actually have to come out very seriously; that is why we are saying that there should be a timeframe within which to operate.

Madam Chair, when you look at the Local Governments Act, there is a timeframe which was fixed for the elections of the speaker of a district council. The law says that the speaker has to be elected at the first meeting of the council. So, the same should apply to the executive; they should fix some time. We should give the chairman some time after the first meeting to consult and then ensure that the executive is formed. Otherwise, if we dillydally over this issue, we are going to get a lot of problems, especially under the multi-party dispensation. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the gist of the matter is that in situations where the council fails to approve the executive, it is where the chairperson does not have the majority of councillors. So, I would love the lawyers present to assist us. If, for example, the chairperson is elected and is a DP - God forbid - with one councillor, and the majority of the councillors are Movementists, what should be done? 

I think it should be put in the law because the voters have a right to vote the chairperson. So, if the other councillors, who were also voted for, refuse to approve the executive, then there would be a problem. It should be this Parliament to designate in that matter, whereby the minority has the power. I think the lawyers present can assist. 

MR KAWANGA: Madam Chair, this matter is actually causing a problem in practice, even where you have got political parties having the majority. We had that kind of problem in my own municipality. The reason is very simple. There are no grounds given for refusing somebody to join the executive. The council just says, “No -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We don’t like your face.  

MR KAWANGA: Yes. So, I think it is high time that we prescribed the grounds upon which somebody can be rejected as a member of the executive. Why don’t we state that the name is given and if you have an objection, you give the reasons why you think he or she should not serve on the executive? And if you do that, if, for example, the council does not accept your decision, perhaps there could be room for appeal either to the minister to look into the matter or some other organ in that particular individual case, dealing with that kind of situation. Otherwise, the matter is just handled politically; people just say, “No,” to make life difficult, with no reason whatsoever. 

So, isn’t it possible for the Ministry of Local of Government to evolve two or three grounds upon which somebody can be rejected and not the whole, but as an individual? Each matter should be handled individually. If somebody has been nominated, we reject him or her because of such and such a reason; and if that is given, then a chance of re-submitting the name can be given, or perhaps provide for an appeal to some other authority within a specified period; after which, if nothing happens, the chairman should then be able to form his or her own executive.     

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support hon. Kubeketerya that we give three times; and then we augment it with hon. Kawanga’s submission that we also give grounds for refusing; that would be the best. Because, hon. Nsubuga was saying that this is a multi-party dispensation; but it is also understandable that at those lower levels, fundamentally those people are almost the same.  

Their tasks are assigned by Parliament – Government - and what they remain to decide on are a few things for adjustment. We appropriate all the money and it goes to particular votes. So, they don’t have much to do within the council to change what Government has set out to do. Fundamentally, they are same people and we do not want to create so many conflicts at those lower levels because they are supposed to implement what Government and Parliament has appropriated. 

To go back to the issue of three times: presenting the names, giving grounds, and if you don’t have sufficient grounds, we can maybe describe the grounds as education, criminal and corruption. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what do you think about hon. Kubeketerya’s proposal, because ultimately we are not only watching but also sending money to the local governments?

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Madam Chairperson, this is just a rejoinder, but it is very important and I think the Minister needs to take stock of it before he responds. There are two circumstances, which I witnessed. 

One was in Lubaga Division, where the majority are DP councillors. When the chairperson came in and it was difficult for him to form an executive, it was out of sovereignty that DP councillors volunteered to work with him.  

In Goma sub-county, a DP chairperson was elected, but the majority of the councillors were NRM, and they locked horns. So, it was very difficult for him to form an executive based on party divisions; and it was only after a memorandum of understanding with the party in power now, that he was able to work with the executive.  

So, what I want to put across is that there are circumstances in which the party which forms the majority at the council may refuse or even threaten to sanction councillors working with the majority winner who comes from another party [HON. MEMBER: “Hoima.”] I think even Hoima is there.  

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, my colleague for giving way. It is not only the councillors or the council to refuse to go to the executive. In fact, some of the secretary generals of political parties, even where a government has been formed, go and meet their councillors and force them to abandon local governments and to resign.   

I think if we are to cure this problem, let us take the suggestion of hon. Kubeketerya and marry it with hon. Kawanga’s and then make it criminal for some secretary generals who are criminally minded, to go around dismantling local governments. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what do you think about that proposal?

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Thank you very much for the information. Madam Chairperson, I think there should be a clause to oblige parties with the majority to constitute the manpower to an executive, if at all the majority winner who comes from another party does not have enough counsellors to form a government. We should make it obligatory.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But I find this issue of secretary generals very interesting. You know the committees of this House are across party lines and work very well.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, the chairman for the district local council is FDC. The majority of councillors of Pader District Local Council are NRM. They formed the government at the first sitting and they have been operating and changing leaders. The vice-chairperson has been changed twice; the executives have been reshuffled and we have not had any crisis. In other words, it is actually possible to live together because at the local levels you are really dealing with local problems. If the community has not been too divided or incited on political or group grounds, it works; but if you try to impose conditions in parties, you are going to infringe on their rights, which are provided elsewhere in the law. 

So, there are two options: either we make it a general thing so that the Minister of Local Government has a basis for intervening and saying, “The law says you must form an executive expeditiously and you have not done so”; or we impose administrative pressure on them. Alternatively, you set that line that frees the chair to form his executive through the suggestions that were given. In both cases, we are actually dealing with the problem rather than just setting a deadline that has no effect.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I see the House going in the direction of a hybrid between hon. Kubeketerya and hon. Kawanga’s suggestion. But again, I see a problem when we define the time period within which this should happen. Three months, I think for all intents and purposes, is so limiting in the sense that if the names are brought back three times as is being proposed, the council will have to sit three times within three months. Practically, I don’t know whether this happens anywhere in this country. Most times there is a cost attached to these sittings and this becomes a constraint. 

So, I would like us to think in the direction of not giving a very limited amount of time. Three months, in my view, is so short a time for councils to take a decision on this. In any case, the Minister should tell us where the money is going to come from to finance the frequent council meetings that may occur, remembering that this may not occur in only one district. There is a possibility that it will occur in a number of districts, and so we have got to brace ourselves for the cost. I don’t know whether the Minister would like to think differently from my proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, leadership is also about responsibility, and I think we aligned the local government tenure to run with the tenure of Parliament and that of the President. You know you cannot leave it open ended. I think it is not fair to the population. If you are in leadership, you must have responsibility towards the electorate. They want their hospital, medicine, roads - 

MR AHABWE: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank you for that observation. We have already synchronised the planning period of local governments with that of the central government. You know that within three months, the council must actually do the budgeting and the executive committee must execute those budgets. 

Secondly, I think we shouldn’t worry about the costs. We have provisions in the guidelines where extraordinary council meetings, which are a percentage of the statutory meetings, must be convened, so that is not a very big worry.

We also have a provision in the guidelines that should you want to spend beyond 20 percent, you seek clearance from the minister, and we have always cleared them when they want the money; so the issue of money is not very important.

My view is that we are looking at the council and making it difficult for the chairman to form an executive committee and not the parties. The parties have their own behaviour as the Leader of the Opposition says. But let us make it easy for the chairman to form his executive without a lot of inhibitions from the council. That is why I want to concede to the amendment made by hon. Kubeketerya that should the chairman bring the names to the council three times and they are rejected a third time, then those names forwarded should automatically form the executive. That helps us to not interfere. 

There will be a lot of problems if you tell me that I should now come to the district and mention other things that are outside the law. Let us put it in the law and make it mandatory that within this period of time - in fact I wanted the period reduced to two months; but three months is good enough. So, within those three months and three sittings of the council, should they reject the names, then those other names, which have come the third time, automatically constitute the executive. That is my view and I would like you to –(Interruption)

MS NAMARA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just want to seek clarification from the minister. Just in case the three names are presented and rejected three times and there are sounding or documented reasons as to why those names are rejected, maybe from the councillors, who intervenes to clarify or resolve that problem?

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I see a problem particularly at the district. If we would have a committee to vet the names of the executive, this would be a better way of handling things than imposing. You are going to impose unpopular executives because – I appreciate the proposal brought by hon. Kubeketerya. He is using the procedure that we use here where the President refuses to assent and after the third time, we just go on with the law. Are you seeing those two things as similar? Are they the same? They are not. One is that you are subjected to the mandate of the people who are the representatives – we are the representatives of the people; if he refuses, then we can proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Information from the Attorney-General. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Okay, please. I will take it.

MR RUHUNDI: I think hon. Tinkasiimire has a point and he is trying to avoid a situation from becoming bloody. (Laughter) I think if you want to compare, let us compare apples with apples and not mangoes with oranges and tomatoes. The point that he has is what happens in a situation where the President actually nominates ministers; they appear before our Appointments Committee. What happens when the Appointments Committee – does it have benchmarks against which it can reject a person who is nominated by the President to become a minister, judge or any other public official? 

I thought that the Appointments Committee looks at all the circumstances because there are so many to be considered, and give its verdict, then gets back to the President. So, I think if we are to compare, let us compare that scenario with our Appointments Committee, rather than with the law.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: That is very good information and I thank God that it is coming from the Attorney-General of this country. For sure, you cannot start saying that we should gag the council. If you are a chairperson who cannot convince the entire council - (Interjections)- I would think it is very important that the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Point of order from hon. Kubeketerya.  

MR KUBEKETERYA: Hon. Tinkasiimire just came in a few minutes ago - he went outside although he came earlier; and when this matter came up, he just jumped onto the bandwagon. We said that we are comparing Parliament with Local Government, and indeed, those are not mangoes and jack fruits. Those two go hand-in-hand. 

So, is he in order to come and derail us after we have a solution to this? The point here is that Local Government – I come from Mayuge District and we have been in confusion for almost a year. So, where you say you are gagging the council, we are saying three months - any sober thinking person should have made up his or her mind because we are not on clan issues. We are talking about Government services and money. So, is he really in order to confuse the House when he has just come in?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. He should not confuse the Members, but Members, we need to move on this matter. Way forward? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I think the House is tackling the problem now and all we need to do is to restructure the proposal of the committee. I would suggest that they would have maybe two parts; the first part is demanding of council to form an executive expeditiously –(Interjections)- no, that would be enough. 

Secondly, where a chairperson submits a name twice and it is rejected by council without reasonable ground, the chair has a right to appoint that person to the executive that allows the process to go on through a filtering process, because you go to a council that will agree on a name or two in the first round. When you come back, they agree on another one name or two. Where a particular person is probably not being accepted because many people will want to be in that position, they will have no reasonable ground and where that happens twice, on the third presentation that person becomes a member of the executive. It is up to that side.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kawuma, were you saying something different? Information is becoming a submission. (Laughter)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Chairperson. To me, the purpose of giving the chairperson the authority to select his cabinet is, I think, intended to enable him/her work with the cabinet members amicably. But at the same time, the chairperson should get the consent of the councillors – these councillors should be able to verify whether he/she is not taking only his relatives or being impartial. That means we have to cater for both. 

When the chairperson gives the names of the executive, let the councillors vet and make their opinions based on reasons. And if the reasons are very clear, the chairperson should accept and go on to select another person instead of insisting on sending the name of the same person. 

We should not forget the fact that there are people whom the councillors can trust. But in case the chairperson changes one person twice, the third time, if they again do not want, he should have it because they cannot continue arguing. So, first, let the chairperson change the person whom the council does not want –(Interjections)– yes, because there must be reasons why they might not want him/her – why not give the chairperson leeway to look for another one? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And that concludes the debate; we have to move on.

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think this matter may not end. I would like to buy what hon. Kawanga suggested that when we legislate - for any person or members of a council rejecting a member to be included on the executive, let them give reasons with evidence. Remember the issues that took place in Goma? You heard about what happened in Lubaga and Sembabule. When we do not legislate and guide the constitution of the executive completely, it is going to lead us into sitting in corners and trying to find ways of how one is going to force these members to accept his/her council. If we legislate and get a provision that gives two or three grounds for the rejection of one becoming a member of the council, that works for us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: May I ask whether the minister will issue a statutory instrument, which can contain the grounds upon which a rejection can be based?

MR AHABWE: Madam Chair, I would like to plead with the House to accept to go with the amendment proposed by the hon. Prof. Ogenga-Latigo, but we also add that these reasonable grounds be defined in the regulations by the minister. This will help to curb the emergence of paralysis in the councils. That is all we are looking out for, to cure.

MS OTENGO: Madam Chair, I just want to ask the House to look at the Local Government Act – from sections 16 to 21. And when you do that, you will discover that the formation, composition and censure of the executive committee are all catered for in here. It is only the vice-chairperson who must have a qualification; the rest do not have to be qualified. You can just appoint any of the council members; qualifications are not a requirement. 

However, I would like to point out that when we moved to the different local governments as a committee, we found only three grounds upon which the district chairpersons were getting problems in forming their local governments. 

One relates to the fact that this Parliament reduced the number of members of the executive committee from seven to three. This has created a lot of competition, with everybody wanting to be part of the executive committee. This has extended the ground for the fight.

Secondly, we also discovered that there are some chairpersons who are so rigid that when they decide on a member, they may not want to drop such a person even when the other members of the council have some grounds.

The third one was that the councillors can just decide to sabotage government’s position for no good reason. In there, we also discovered that there are parties that may not have got their chairperson, so they work from outside – and most of them are not the majority in the council, but they may be having very strong wings outside; they can actually be running it outside the leadership, which makes it very difficult for the chairperson to do anything. 

I would, therefore, like to agree with what the Leader of the Opposition, the Minister of Local Government and the Attorney-General have proposed. Thank you.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: I would also like to agree with the Minister on what he has said. However, my other concern is, where the chairperson appoints or submits names to the council and whoever he/she appoints declines to take the offer – and it has happened before – what comes next?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then he/she can get another person.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: How about if they all refuse?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You mean the whole council?

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Yes, haven’t you heard what happened in Sembabule? Whoever the chairperson appointed declined until the man had no choice – because you cannot force somebody to take the offer of appointment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is a unique situation. 

CAPT. OTEKAT: Madam Chair, we seem to have agreed on an amendment and I would like to read it the way it has been formulated by the Leader of the Opposition, the Minister and us on this side. Section 6(a) reads: “Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the district executive committee shall be constituted expeditiously and in any case not later than three months from the date of the first council meeting.” 

And (b) reads: “Where a person nominated to the executive committee is rejected by council three times without reasonable grounds, the nomination of that person to the executive shall hold.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about the one on regulation? What do we say about it; the minister shall make provision for – 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, my own belief is that this provision will cure a lot of the problems that have been going on. The regulation particularly where we have limited experience is the reason we have been grappling with this. We are just beginning to live in a multi-party situation and the things that emerge are the ones that define the challenges that we must address legislatively. 

The minister has time to regulate, after all, he has those powers to improve the functioning of this – without mentioning here, the minister will study the new developments following this amendment and make  regulations accordingly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think there is usually a clause at the end of the law saying that the minister will issue directions to the better carrying out of this and that Act.

MR AHABWE: Madam Chair that is what I wanted to bring to the notice of Parliament that actually Section 175 of the Local Government Act talks about regulations. In sub-section (1), it says that the minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulations for better carrying into effect, the provisions of this Act. This one caters for the other concerns.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that clause 3, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: As part of the discussions that we had with the committee and the Executive, we agreed that it would be important for this House, rather than waiting for the Minister to amend the Schedule, that we as Parliament move an amendment to the Third Schedule to cater for the concerns that we discussed yesterday. This is to bring in what is provided in the Constitution in respect to a person leaving his or her party. 

The proposal is to add sub-rule 3(k) that reads: “If that person leaves the political party for which he/she stood as a candidate for election to council, to join another party or to remain in council as an independent person, this is vacation of a seat on the Local Government Council.”

We are trying to make it consistent with the provisions of the Constitution, after all these amendments were prompted by the rulings of courts. More so, we did not have an explicit provision on the matter, and this was creating confusion in the local councils. We think that once this is in place, then it will allow members to act with a conscience that they are obligated under the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, we had a lengthy debate over this matter yesterday. So, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2009” and has passed it with some amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the House adopts the report of the committee of the whole House. 

Question put and agreed to.

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2009

12.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be read for the third time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A Bill for An Act entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Act, 2010.”

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

12.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, on the 17 March 2010, the Bill entitled, “The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill 2009”, was presented for second reading and debated. During the debate we were requested to go back to raise the principal for the retirement benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, which we did, and I presented this Bill for the first reading to the House. 

We incorporated the enhanced benefits in the first reading, for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, when they cease to hold office. That was the reason for suspending the debate that day. 

I have fulfilled the condition that was given to us to bring a Bill that provides for the benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. I, therefore, beg that the emoluments and benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, continues to be debated this morning. I beg to move.

12.53
MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I want to agree with the hon. Minister. I received an official handover from my predecessor. He told me that the committee properly considered the issues which had been stood over, mainly on the issue of whether the retiring president should benefit, by giving him a house. Following consultations, they all agreed that he can get one. The only thing which was not presented was the amendments, and at an appropriate time I will be able to move these amendments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you are saying that you do not have a supplementary report?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, the issue was an instruction to bring before this House a Bill that also provides for the terminal benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. This is entirely a different Bill. I think after dispensing this Bill, I will be able to present the report concerning the Speaker and his deputy. We are ready with that Bill, and I have it here, but two Bills cannot be read at the same time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you should move that we go for the second reading. (Laughter) Can you move that we go for the second reading? 

12.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): I move that the Bill entitled, “Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister Bill, 2009”, be read for the second time.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, our committee is proposing that we delete clause 17, and the justification is that it is a repetition of clauses 14, 15 and 16, and the 13th schedule. It is a repetition and it does not add any value.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, but just before that, I just wanted some assurance – I want to know about the former vice-presidents. She was a vice-president here for nine years and I want to know whether she is catered for by this Bill. 

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, when this Bill turns into law, she will benefit; her terminal benefits are covered under the vice-presidents’ provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Just show me the clause under which she is covered!

MRS SEZI: Clause 30.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 30! Okay, we have not yet reached it. Now, the chair is proposing that clause 17 be deleted. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think the Minister and the committee have internalised some of these provisions much better and can explain better. But as you may know, the schedule comes into being as a result of a textual provision that gives rise to the schedule. So, if I am told that there is a repetition – I do not see the repetition because the schedule is as a result of clause 17 because they are saying clause 17 is a repetition of clauses 14, 15, 16 and the 13th schedule. Does it mean that clause 17 is not playing a role in the coming into being of the schedule?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, in the wisdom of the committee, retaining clause 17 when we have clauses 14, 15 and 16 and the provision in the 13th schedule remains standing - it does not add much. So, they propose that we delete it and I have no reason to come here and insist that it remains when they said it should be removed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the Attorney-General wanted to know whether the absence of clause 17 does not affect the 13th schedule. If you look at the 13th schedule: “Thirty percent of the gross annual salary of the President …” doesn’t it have any effect?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I think it has no harm on the provisions –

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think there is no harm leaving it there; if it explains the rest of the provisions better, then we can maintain that clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I would encourage the chair to leave it there.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I think if it is the opinion of this House, I concede that it be maintained. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause, 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR KAWUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. When the Attorney-General sought clarification from the chairperson, whether the deletion of the clause has implications or effects to the schedule, the response from the chairperson was not satisfactory to me. Now, he has conceded with no substantial explanation. The procedural issue I want to raise is that the chairperson of the committee who has just assumed this responsibility will not guide this Parliament to deliberate on a very pertinent Bill. Is it procedurally right for the chairperson who is not substantially conversant with the content to guide the House? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, the committee does work on behalf of the whole House and when the Speaker moves to this Chair, the Speaker is permitted to assist the Chair and the House. So, I think it is okay. 

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. On clause 18, the committee wants to propose that we insert the words “while in office” between the words “dies” and “the” appearing in the first line of the Bill. It will then read; “Where the spouse of the President, Vice-President or Prime Minister dies while in office the government shall contribute 30 percent of the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you say: “Where the spouse of a sitting President, Vice-President or Prime Minister dies …? Wouldn’t that solve the problem?

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is not the spouse who dies while in office; it is the husband or wife of the spouse. So, I think it is important that we differentiate the two. That is what we are talking about. So, can you be specific? When you say, “Where a spouse of a President, Vice-President or Prime Minister dies while in office …” it means that the wives or the husbands of those presidents are the ones who die in office. But it is their spouses that are in office. So, can you please correct the English? I am not comfortable with that English. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I had proposed that we should say, “Where the spouse of a sitting President, Vice-President or Prime Minister dies …” and leave out the words “in office.”

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, we shall take your guidance on that grammar as a committee and we also want to insert the word “growth” between the words “day” and “annual” appearing in the second line of the same clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed an amendment to replace the expression “qualify to enjoy the benefits of the President” with “be entitled to the salary and allowance of the President for the period he or she acts as a President.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 19, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, the committee considered clause 29 and proposes to delete it. The justification for the deletion was that the committee contends that in clause 30, the application of this law should cover all former leaders. In clause 30, for avoidance of doubt, sections 2, 3 and 4 of this Act as the case may be apply only to the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister under the Constitution and we intend to move an amendment on clause 30 to adjust the years, such that all former leaders from 1962 be catered for by the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does the minister say?

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, we presented the Certificate of Financial Implications that catered for this Bill. We would like to shelve this section 29 because the retired former President Lukongwa Binaisa and the former Vice-President are paid through this law, which they are saying we should scrap.

Secondly, in law making, and I have the Attorney-General to help so that we do not backdate this law, we are aware that other past leaders were not covered by this law and we have already submitted the issue of the terminal benefits to the President for consideration for these leaders. 

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, I recently followed a case of a similar Bill which was debated in Nigeria and it covered heads of state that served from the time they attained independence but the condition was that the benefits would only be awarded to those leaders who came through democratic means and not through any other undemocratic means. So, in this case I would imagine that the chairperson of the committee should be able to explain why the committee came with the amendment that we should be able to consider past leaders from the time of the birth of the state of Uganda. Otherwise, I tend to agree with his position really.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That would mean Sir Andrew Cohen and the others will be paid – those governors who –(Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: In the opinion of the committee, I think they were looking at all leaders that have occupied these offices since independence in 1962. Some of them have died and others are still surviving. For example, a former first lady of this country is still alive and I am sure she needs to be provided for under this Constitution. The husband died; the late Milton Obote’s wife is still alive. If we make a law that does not provide for such benefits, it would be very unfair. 

I heard the argument the hon. Minister was making; it is this Parliament that is mandated to make laws and to amend them. I do not know where she is getting that idea that we cannot do anything with any law that has come to this House. Thank you very much.

MR OCULA: Thank you. While we are making this law, we should be mindful about our past; we should be mindful about the reconciliation aspects in this country; we should be seen to act in a way which is going to harmonise the institution of the Presidency. 

If we are saying that this law should be applied only within the 1995 Constitution period, it means we are not going to help this country at all. 

Madam Chairperson, we battled in the committee for a long time on this matter. The Minister had appeared to have accepted this position in the committee –(Interjection)- yes, I am talking with facts. Can the Minister go back to the drawing board and present to this House again the additional requirement to pay past presidents? I thank you so much.

MR RUHINDI: I will speak to the extent that I am knowledgeable on this matter without prejudice to what the sector minister will have to say. To the extent that I know - and I am very happy because hon. Odit has ably clarified - if you are to look at past leaders who were democratically in government, then those are already covered. They are already covered under the Parliament Remuneration of Members Act, chapter 259 of the Laws of Uganda. You read that together with the Parliament Remuneration of Members Allowances and Amenities Regulations, statutory instrument 259-1. In particular, if you look at regulation 9, just as an example of what that Schedule provides in the case of say the past vice-president; a fully furnished house, free water and electricity, chauffer driven car of a capacity of not more than 2,000cc, free medical attention for self and family, two government paid domestic servants, three government paid security guards, secretarial services et cetera. 

There is nothing that stops us, because for instance - and let us actually be realistic - it is good the sector minister talks about the Certificate of Financial Implications. For instance, we are sitting Members of Parliament and we have had improvements in our benefits. We have not said that with the improvements in our benefits, it should also apply to former Members of Parliament. We must actually work within the resource envelope that this country has got. If we are saying that we should have a cut off period for these improvements that we are talking about, we are talking in terms of the cut off period being the 1995 Constitution and thereafter, so that those others can still benefit under those other specified laws as I have put them. Thank you.    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, what do you say about the proposal to delete clause 29 because that is what brought the issue? 

MR RUHINDI: In other words I strongly object to the deletion of that clause because that is what I have actually been emphasising. 

MRS OGWAL: While I consider this proposal very reconciliatory and nationalistic, it is very important that we should also apply it with caution, to the manner in which a president came to power. We also need to look at the track record of this president. We have had presidents who have been very corrupt; they have bought property outside the country; they own all sorts of things and yet this country, with its meager resources over and above that wealth, will have to pay them this remuneration. 

I think we need to look much more seriously – I know the law itself - whatever we are doing now is correct. But who are these presidents we are talking about? A person who came into power by the power of the gun? 

Secondly, even the manner in which the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and all these other people who are going to benefit are going to be appointed needs looking into it because we are now going to have people fighting and stumbling over each other, because if I am appointed a vice-president, then I am going to earn even after my death. Even with the position of prime minister, people are now going to stumble over each other because of this. (Interjections) I know it because we are human beings and I know the kind of pressure that people put on the President in order for them to be appointed. 

So, we as a Parliament should rise above that. We should make sure that we make a law that will unite this country; a law that will make this country to be properly administered; and a law that will make sure that our resources are properly managed. But I am not going to be party to remunerating a president who has exploited our resources; a president who has been presiding over a government, which is corrupt; a president who has been responsible for mismanaging the government; I am not going to be party to that kind of law. I thank you.

MR OCULA: I am just reacting to the advice given by the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General is saying that there is another law which caters for past leaders in the period before the 1995 Constitution. What the committee is doing by deleting that clause is actually to make it that all the leaders are handled in the same way, whether before the Constitution came into place or not. In other words, if we could pass this amendment by the committee it would mean that definitely we are now going to use only one law to give the benefits to these people. So, I still go by the committee that let us delete, as the committee has proposed, and then the law will apply uniformly elsewhere.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, are you, by this deletion, also repealing the Parliament Remuneration of Members’ Act? You are not. Just by deleting you are not repealing that Act? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, there is a proposal to repeal Section 3 of that particular Act, Cap. 259. And when it is repealed, the deletion -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What will you do with the rest of the Act if you have removed Section 3? What are you going to do with the rest of the Act?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: It provides for Members not for the President. I think, in the opinion of the committee, they felt they needed to create a uniform law. What was a bother for the committee was the outstanding issue that the proposal of the Minister in the Bill is only saying limiting the leaders to the 1995 Constitution. We have had leaders -(Interjections)- this does not - and there is an amendment which is coming in clause 30. Their justification is that they feel it is important for us to sustain this national unity and address these historical injustices.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you know this section 29 is saying, “For the avoidance of doubt, Section 3 of the Parliament Remuneration of Members’ Act shall continue to apply to a President or Vice-President who ceased to hold that office before the commencement of the 1995 Constitution.” It is dealing with those who were there before the 1995 Constitution.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, we have been guided by the Attorney-General. Secondly, we have also been guided by the minister who said that there is a process of payment ex gratia to the past leaders. So, if we make a law to pay them that will be double payment. She is in the process of paying the former first lady. Please, we would beg our chairman to concede. I thank you.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, in the proceedings of the committee, if we do not remove particularly the limit of the 1995 Constitution, the proceedings of the committee will have a problem. First, they proposed an amendment to clause 30 - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairperson, the committee which you chair is a committee of this House doing a delegated function of the House. You bring what you have digested there to us and then we react to it. You say you cannot say that this is the position of the committee and it is cast in stone. Otherwise, there will be no need for you to come here. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, with your guidance, I have conceded. 

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I should confess that I am not a lawyer but I see stark contradictions in sections 29 and 30. Section 29 is giving the former presidents the benefits. Section 30 is taking away those benefits. They do not apply. They apply only to a president, vice president and prime minister under the 1995 Constitution meaning that clause 29 is actually effectively deleted by clause 30.

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: No.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Yes. Madam Chairperson, I do not think it will be fair for us to be oblivious of our history. We have constitutions before 1995 and those constitutions should be actually recognised because some of these were unanimously passed by the people of Uganda. I do not know whether it would be appropriate for us to be oblivious of those - (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am very happy because the professor has given way. Clause 29 is not deleted by the operation of clause 30. Rather, clause 29 is a saving or transitional provision. That is what we call it; that this is what we are going to do from now. However, what has been going on in this manner is saved as a transitional measure. That is it. So, it is not deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Actually, hon. Members, one of the reasons we have insisted that clause 29 remains is to cater for those who ceased to hold office before the 1995 Constitution. That is why we are insisting that it should be there against the wishes of the chairperson. And now the chairperson has withdrawn so that it should remain there to protect those who were there before 1995.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Madam Chairperson, I respectfully agree with you but at the same time, clause 30 removes Section 3, which is in clause 29.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Member. The Section 3 referred to in 29 is the Section 3 of the Parliament Remuneration of Members’ Act. It is relating to Act 258. Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 30, agreed to.)

Clause 31, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.


The Third Schedule

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, in the Third Schedule, in the column labelled benefits, Members feel we need to delete the expression for mobilisation facility per month appearing under paragraph 4 and the justification is that it is ambiguous and it is likely to be abused.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

Fourth Schedule

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, in the Fourth Schedule, when you read (a), we feel it should be, (a) and (b). We replace the word “driver” with “driven” appearing in paragraph 3. When you read (a), it is well constructed but when you read (b) in the Fourth Schedule, you are just seeing “chauffer-driven car”. We want a uniform wording.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where are you? I am on page 16; am I reading the right Bill?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Part (a) is on page 16, then part (b) is on page 17, when you read paragraph 3; it is a chauffer-driven car. We feel it should be “driven” not just a “chauffer-driver car”, for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Fourth Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Fifth Schedule

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, is it for an active politician or the spouse of a dead president or vice-president or the prime minister? Because I see here, provision of four government-paid security guards, senior personal secretary and all this. I mean all this seems to apply to somebody who is active in the service of the nation. So, I want to know how this is going to apply. I mean how it is going to be workable? Thank you.

MRS SEZI: The spouse of a deceased president is provided with facilities of a secretary to enable thing like typing memoirs, making the contacts because the experience is that after the deceased president, the spouse has a lot of information people will be asking for; so, we provide that facility to enable him or her to do that until she dies.

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, the Minister for Public Service is giving an interesting statement to us when she states that experience has shown that these leaders, when they leave office, move along with a lot of information and they need some staff to assist them and yet this law applies to the 1995 Constitution. How did you derive this experience? Can you clarify to us, really, what experience you are talking about? (Laughter)

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, what we are providing for is for offices not individuals. So, we are looking into the future for providing these retirement benefits. We are looking at the offices in our case and we are not looking at individual job holders.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe just for - if Hillary Clinton were not the Foreign Secretary, as a spouse of a former president, wouldn’t she be able to sit and write memoirs of the White House, the eight years in the state house of the US? I think that is -(Laughter)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want the Minister to throw more light on these benefits because these benefits are to be granted to the serving spouse or spouses. If someone has passed away as a president and he has left behind four spouses - the reason I am saying this, is because it is more likely to happen. We cannot rule it out that this country may have a president with four wives. 

I would like that this scenario be reflected right from one, two up to seven. Like one four wheel chauffer-driven car to each in a scenario where there are four wives. So, this should apply to houses so that it could be very clear and open. In scenarios where a president has four wives, each wife is entitled to one up to six.

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, as I said before, these benefits are for the individual job holder. The administration of spouses or spouse is the responsibility of that office holder and, therefore, if the job holder is deceased, then the administration of the estate will look into that but we make a provision for the one job holder in our law. 

MR KAWANGA: Madam Chairperson, where we have got a specific legislation to handle a situation, the administration of estates would not handle it. Actually, what he is asking is extremely important. If we are making a provision for spouse and spouses, we have to either make it clear that they are going to share or you make it specific that each one will get what is allocated. It is better you make it as clear as possible to avoid unnecessary disputes. There is a situation where somebody has got his three wives, three houses and he has been providing vehicles for them; he dies and you have got legislation like this one. What do you do in a situation like this one with regard to vehicles, chauffeur-driven cars and things like that? So, surely, we must make it very specific. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Chair, to add on to what hon. Kawanga has said, we should be very clear so that we do not go into problems. These scenarios happen. If a president has three wives, when he goes to a function with that wife, that wife is referred to as the First Lady. (Interjections) When he goes to another function with another wife, she is also a First Lady there at that particular time –(Interjections)- yes because these are official wives. So the moment he comes here for State of the Nation Address with wife Z, then that is the First Lady. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, I think you have to make a provision. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I am sure that we are making laws that have to respect our religions. I am sure hon. Sebaggala is arguing because he comes from the Muslim community and they are supposed, by official standards and according to the Sharia law, have four official wives. According to the committee’s opinion, all these respected religions should be provided for -(Interruptions)

MS BINTU: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give the chairperson of the committee is that we might even get a president who is a traditional husband with eight wives. So, how do we cater for all that? Is the state really in position to cater for all those wives? I am looking at a scenario where a president is a lady. How do we treat her spouse? The equation is not clear; we shall suffocate that other side. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, we are going to limit ourselves to things, which are reasonable and protected by the existing laws of this country. I am certain the Sharia law provides for the argument of hon. Sebaggala. The argument hon. Bintu is advancing is a customary one. It is up to you as a country to opt to have a president who chooses to marry 1,000 wives. It is up to you. If you choose to have him, then you should be ready to take up the burden. (Interjections) It is up to you and - (Interruptions) 

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am proposing that as we make this law, let the President declare one official spouse and let us cater for only one official spouse. It is up to you to declare the official because even in the Army, you declare one spouse with very many children. So, let the presidents declare one official spouse –(Interjections)- and let that official spouse be the one to be catered for -(Interjections)- not the whole line of women or men. Thank you. 

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am not comfortable with a situation where the President of the Republic of Uganda has eight wives and then we sit here and imagine that the other wives will be shelved and will not be referred to as wives of the President. In his own wisdom, he thinks he is comfortable with his eight wives; maybe he is a traditionalist like hon. Bintu has just said. We cannot assume that these other wives should not be regarded as wives. We are just being unfair to the women who will be wives to this president. 

What I can possibly say is that as a country, we should look at the head of state so that we give them emoluments and remove the office of the spouse so that as he or she passes on, it will be his responsibility or her responsibility to decide in his will to see which spouse takes what, which child takes what. But as a country, when we think we are going to begin apportioning wealth to a number of spouses, I think we are getting it wrong. Let us plan for the president who will in turn plan for his family in case he passes on. I thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, looking at a scenario where a woman is the head of state and as it always happens; when women are in high positions, they always have problems with their domestic affairs -(Interjections)- that is a fact because we get too engaged in state matters. (Interjections) Those are practical issues you may want to hide but I am senior enough to know what goes on in your homes. (Laughter) So in that kind of scenario, if you have had a woman president who has had a husband for 20 years, they separated; she probably got another husband and probably they got two children and so on and so forth. You will find that by catering for spouses, we are introducing an element in our law, which is not manageable. I think what we need to do is to provide for the heads of state, give them insurance policy whatever it is that can cater for the spouses, for the children just as you do with other Members of Parliament. They are all leaders in their own right and when you are a Member of Parliament, you are supposed to provide for your spouses and children. Let us be responsible. The way we are making this law is going to make it practically difficult to apply.

Madam Chairperson, I am pleading through you, I know the way you have been guiding this meeting; you seem to have more wisdom and more exposure than the people who designed this law. So, I think let this Parliament decide here and now where posterity will judge us right that we made this law selflessly, for today and tomorrow. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Members, can I propose that we stand over this matter and evaluate it? (Interjections) It is a very stingy point. So, I think it is important that we stand over it and get time to reflect on it and possibly do some research on how other countries handle it. We might not be the first country to do it. How do the other countries do it?

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, when we were designing this law, we took into consideration the different communities in Uganda. We looked at the office of the President and provided for a spouse, if he has one spouse, we also looked at our Muslim community that they may have one or two, even four and as Government, we are looking at the head of state and the spouse or spouses of the office holder to ensure that the benefits are divided. 

First of all, part of the benefits will be part of the estate of that person. So, the word, “spouse” or “spouses” was provided for the different communities that we may have. And the experience we have in paying the benefits for the former vice-president and president is that in that law, the word “spouse” or “spouses” is there but when the benefits are given, their administration is left to the retired president or vice-president. 

I want to educate honourable members that “the spouse” caters for the various categories of our community or society and Government will provide for them but the actual administration is left to the job holder. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But in the Fifth Schedule you are saying that benefits should be granted to a surviving spouse or spouses and dependent children of the President who dies while in office. Suppose someone dies without making a will, what will you do? Supposing someone dies intestate, what will you do?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the outturn of the debate on this matter requires that the sector minister consults a little bit more in a few minutes and then we can resume the debate in the afternoon. Without prejudice to that, we may also wish to borrow a leaf from what happens in international agencies and organisations. For instance, if you work with the United Nations organisation, they will say that they can only afford - because we are looking at the national envelope - you cannot say that traditionally – and she is right because customarily, a person can have 1,000 wives. There is nothing to stop a person from having 1,000 legitimate wives. (Laughter) So, you are not going to say that the country’s resources should be expended to looking at that kind of infrastructure. (Laughter) 

I think that the international agencies and organisations normally limit. They say, “We can only support up to four of your natural children.” They state it and when it comes to wives, they also limit. They say, “This is what we can afford; there is nothing we can do about it.” So, as we adjourn on this matter, we may also need to reflect on those proposals. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, this issue continues to run through all the other offices. So, I am proposing that we need time to consult over it. So, can we ask the Minister to report to the House?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole Hose reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice President and Prime Minister, 2009” and stood over the Fifth Schedule regarding the spouse or spouses.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I suspend the House until 3.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 2.05 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.37 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

BILLS 
COMMITEE STAGE

THE EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, when we suspended the House, we asked you to go and check what other jurisdictions do. 

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, we have consulted and we are proposing that we put a section, which reads as follows, “For the avoidance of doubt, the benefits of a spouse or spouses of a person who dies while holding the office of the president, vice-president and prime minister shall be granted to the spouse or spouses collectively until their death”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, where would you place it? It must be in the main law and not in the Schedule.

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, we shall put it where the spouses are mentioned.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe it would be under clause 7, which we had already passed.

MRS SEZI: Not clause 6, benefits of surviving spouse or spouses?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it would have to come at the end of clause 7.

MRS SEZI: And then it would apply to the vice-president and prime minister because the spouse and spouses cut across.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then we shall have to recommit.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, rather than recommitting - because right from clause 2 we are talking about benefits generally and the president, vice-president and prime minister and the benefits for spouses cut across. So, in my opinion, it would do no harm in putting it more or less like a clause before 31. Because in any case, for the avoidance of doubt, we could actually put it as the new 31 and then we renumber 31 and 32 because it cuts across. That is one. 

The other option is to adopt the provision in principle and then the draft persons can find an appropriate place where to insert it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is risky. We can recommit the Bill. Hon. Members, I think let us finish with the Schedule then we recommit and introduce the new 31 because it must be part of the law.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Some of us just came in when the minister was speaking. I do not exactly know the relevant clause we are dealing with because we stood over some of them. Can we follow the report they are giving?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are dealing with the Schedule but she has come with a new proposal to add another section in the law, which will deal with all of the offices and the spouses. So, we shall finish with the Schedule then recommit and reintroduce a new clause 31 and renumber the present 31 to become 32.

MRS OGWAL: That is where I have a problem, Madam Chairperson. I want this law to be practical and I am just begging you as the Deputy Speaker who presides over this prestigious institution. We are the supreme institution in this country. What we should be mindful about is the president, vice-president and prime minister and then of course later on, through some other laws, we should think about the speaker and deputy speaker. 

But concerning what we have been talking about in terms of spouses, we are going beyond the boundaries because spouses do not hold state offices. In any case, the provision which has been given - if you look at the Fifth Schedule, we are giving the spouse or whoever is going to inherit from the former president or vice-president 60 percent in terms of gratuities. I hope 60 percent of the salary that this president has earned is good enough. This to me is very realistic. 

Two other things that I would ask for is that this spouse be catered for in terms of medical insurance and be given one or two guards but to talk about having gratuities, buying a house, giving them four guards, a senior secretary - you are actually creating a state office and are not being realistic. Uganda is a poor country. I know this practice may be happening in America, Germany and other developed countries but let us look at our economy, be realistic and make a law that is practical and applicable. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think these are issues you should have addressed in the general debate but maybe the chairperson will answer and then the minister.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I really sympathise with the concerns raised by hon. Ogwal. She is looking at it from the perspective of how we are going to administer this. We also have to look at addressing the historical stability of this country. We want to sustain what we have currently. We want to encourage, as much as possible a retiring president to feel secure so that even when he is not here, his children and wife whom he will leave, will be secure. That is why we are providing for this law. It is not just that we are mad when we propose that we provide for these spouses. We are trying to provide some kind of security. You are making an argument that why – we are creating a state institution of these spouses but there is also a provision that the children of the president can have some benefits. This spouse is only getting these benefits because of the relation she has with the president, vice-president or the prime minister. It is not my problem or her problem that she is a wife to the vice-president, president or the prime minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members – 

MRS OGWAL: I appreciate that this chairperson has just inherited the office. I appreciate that and it is human. I think that my point goes beyond the argument he is trying to advance. I am talking about the spouse and not about former presidents.

If you are talking about stability for the future, what about somebody who has been a senior minister and even lived in the bush like hon. Kiyonga? What are you going to do with them? Are you going to say that they are useless? You would rather cater for the spouse of a former president, vice-president and prime minister and you forget about a person who sacrificed his life like hon. Kiyonga. So, let us be practical and realistic. 

My argument goes beyond what you are saying. What I am saying is that let us do what is practical; that we are going to cater for the retired leader. We are going to give them their gratuities, give them what is affordable also conscious of the fact that we have other leaders. Please, help us as an institution representing the people of Uganda to make a good law. We have been pleading with you to understand this point and you have stubbornly refused to understand. I am very upset with you-.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I am sorry that our senior colleague is getting upset with us –(Laughter)- but the point we are trying to make and which I think we are selling to the House is to mind about these spouses because it is even within the law. You are saying the president takes precedence over everybody and then you also want to bring hon. Kiyonga. Those do not work. He is the Minister of Defence. His office is not even in the Constitution, that he takes precedence over anybody. The President takes precedence. 

These are very important persons we are talking about; the president, vice-president and the prime minister. We are not talking about the Minister of Defence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the minister give us the rationale behind her proposals.

MRS SEZI: We do provide for the president, vice-president and the prime minister’s benefits – (Interjections)- and if you say the MPs are provided for under the Pensions Act, we are providing for the spouse and spouses because there is a provision in other laws for the survivor’s benefits for different categories and in this case, we are maintaining that the survivor’s benefits of the spouse of a former deceased president, vice-president and prime minister should be provided for. We should not leave it to chance so that when they stay and they have been looked after, the bread winner has gone, they should go begging for support. We are actually helping the State to define these benefits so that they are known and provided. So, it is a social security for the first ladies and first men. 

So, what we are providing for is a social security for a spouse and spouses. The provision is to support the spouse or spouses and our proposal is that the benefit should be collectively shared.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I also want to be realistic. I think we have had instances where people have left public office and really fallen upon hard times. You can imagine coming to look for a former first lady and you go into Kisenyi – you know - I think these people are not many. How many are they? They are not many. Where is Lady Damalie Mutesa? Where is she? 

MR ISHAA OTTO: This debate has been dragging on for so long. I think we should be realistic. Our Constitution puts the head of state as the Fountain of Honour and that is the most important person in the country. Now to make the law and as you said that the President from his family – first of all that would be very inhuman and unnatural - in this century I do not think we can go into that. That should resolve itself even without debate because sensibly we should just understand.

Secondly, it is very embarrassing to have a spouse of a former Ugandan President moving to Kisenyi on foot looking for cabbage. You know these families continue to move on even when the head of the family is dead- the families continue to move on. I think with all fairness, I know as Members of Parliament here, we have always debated and increased our own salaries –(Interjections)- yes. But these are people who are not here and we are also not looking at these individuals but the country Uganda. 

I think we should be fair here and as we are debating we should not debate from the sentimental angle. We should just be human and if we are going to consider the magnitude – how much. But the most important thing is to have the principle so that we make our nation. We should be proud of Uganda. I do not care if I am going to be the next president or somebody else but the whole issue is to be proud of Uganda. We have had presidents and people who suffer – we have been talking about our heads of state dying in exile. Are we proud of that when their families are suffering here? I think we should not go too much into this. We should try to put aside the small emotion and we consider Uganda as a nation and we move forward. I do not think we should dwell too much on this. 

Madam Chairperson, I support the proposal that has been made by the chairperson and the minister.

MS AMUGE: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate that hon. Cecilia Ogwal is well conversant with our history and maybe she is looking at a situation where we have had several presidents from 1962. I am also aware that hon. Cecilia Ogwal has been preaching reconciliation and has been talking about it very much. Even before we started debating this, hon. Ogwal told us to look at our history and decide on reconciliation.

I would like to believe that a spouse contributes at the time when the president is working and we have never cost their contribution. I also would like to believe that the children do not benefit much when their parents are really working because at one point they are disadvantaged in one way or the other in the eyes of the public.

I want this law to be blind. I do not want it to target any one if we are to move on. If the issue is the cost, we can look at it. But to say that we completely put it aside when Cabinet has told us they have a Certificate of financial implications – let us see how we can move to an end.

I would like to agree with you that it is not good to see a person who has been at a certain level even at the level of a Member of Parliament dropping so low because he/she or his/her spouse left office or died. I want to agree with the fact that these people must be catered for though I have a problem with the number. And in that respect, I want to say that as a state, we should only look at one spouse. The rest of the spouses, if you have two, three, or five, is your own responsibility.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Actually the minister’s proposal, which I hope we shall recommit, is that the benefits of the spouse(s) will be handled collectively. We give it to you and if you want to divide it that is your business. Even if they are 20 and the amount is Shs 1 million that is your business. Hon. Members, we stood over the Fifth Schedule.

The Sixth Schedule

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chair, under paragraph 2 of the Bill, the committee is of the view that we insert these words in the Schedule: “An initial allowance of Shs 20 million …” Are you there?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, read the whole sentence.

MR TINKASIMIIRE: It provides for the furniture for the house for the former president and we are saying that it should read as follows: “An initial allowance of Shs 20 million shall be paid for the procurement of furniture and thereafter, Government shall, every five years, pay Shs 10 million.” The justification is that this is for clarity as to whether furniture means cash or physical items.

MR OCULA: Madam Chair, while I agree that the figure provided – Shs 20 million for furniture is adequate, I think it would not be very good for us to indicate the real figure. We rather go with the currency points so that when there are inflations, Cabinet can sit and adjust the currency point values. So, instead of saying Shs 20 million, we put 1,000 currency points and instead of 10 million, we say, 500 currency points.

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I support the improvement taking into consideration the changing rate of the inflation year after year.

MR RUHINDI: Hon. Ocula, I do not want to spoil your suggestion; I only want to improve it because if you use currency points, it must be defined. And currency point is defined at each Shs 20,000. So, even if you say, 20 currency points, when you define a currency point, you will have to come to the same thing. We normally use currency points because we normally give delegated powers either to the Minister or to some other authority, to amend the Schedule where the currency point is defined. Unless we do that, we will not actually be improving on this. Unless you are saying we define currency points in the Schedule and delegate powers to the responsible minister, maybe, in consultation with the Minister of Finance, to amend it.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I am opposed to that amendment. I am also of the view that the purchase of a house be deleted and that is the amendment I want to move –(Interjections)- I will justify it. I also want to move that the number of guards be reduced to two. The way this House seems to be proceeding on this Schedule, it would look we have vice-presidents or leaders in this country, who during the term they serve this nation are not able to even put up a house for their family. I think this is a negative portrayal of our leaders, to begin with. We do not have pauper vice-presidents in the streets who cannot put up a house for their spouses to live in.

Also, while somebody is still serving as the vice-president of a nation, we know the privileges that accrue therein. And they are good enough for somebody in a stable state of mind to plan for the future. 

Finally, who are we loading this burden onto? Are they my taxpayers who have no drugs in hospital? They now have no drugs, but we are thinking they should be taxed further, further and further to pay for a house of a former vice-president who already has a house? I understand Members are saying we should not make these laws, but we cannot pretend that a serving vice-president cannot afford a house yet even the house afforded by such people during their office tenure is usually at the cost of the tax payers of this country.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to beg this House to delete the houses wherever they appear on this Schedule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, supposing you serve only one year and maybe you have just started the foundation of a house, but unfortunately you die. Should your family be condemned to sleep under trees because you were not able to complete your house?

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, the issue of the purchase of a house or providing for it was debated almost for a whole year since we have had this Bill. And we have conceded as a ministry that the provision of a house to the vice-president and the prime minister be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Excuse me, hon. Minister, what did you say?

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, the issue of providing a house for the president, vice president and the prime minister has been discussed in every committee at every point. The committee that reviewed the position saved the house for the president and we agreed to conceal the house for the vice-president and prime minister. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So Minister, you know this is your Bill, can you tell us what to delete?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, we are considering the Sixth Schedule and it concerns the president. We maintained that the president shall have the entitlements in these provisions. I only moved an amendment in this Schedule, which I read out and it was modified to currency points. 

What hon. Alaso is moving is in the Seventh Schedule, which talks about the vice-president and the prime minister. In our committee – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, if I listened to the submission of my colleague, hon. Alaso, very well, she said that these are senior citizens who have held responsible offices.

Secondly, you cannot be a president for two, three or five years and have no shelter for yourself. The benefits that go with the Office of the Presidency are well known to all of us. Even if the President left this country to go to a conference, we know what he goes with as an allowance. But all of us in this House fend for ourselves out of the allowances that go with the responsibilities we carry out here. What will be the rationale for not providing a house for a vice-president and the prime minister and yet provide for the president? He should actually be the first to go off the list of those to be considered for housing because the amount of resources and benefits that go with the Office of Presidency are higher than all the rest.

So, the rational thing to do is to come up with a prevision that the prime minister, vice-president and the president do not qualify for these things at all. [MR KAKOOZA: “He earns only Shs 3.5 million.”] I hear hon. Kakooza talking about Shs 3.5 million. Your salary is Shs 1.5 million after taxes; is that all you go home with? You carry sitting allowances from here. So, do not derail me by making reference to the Shs 3.5 million salary of a president. That is not what a president takes home, there are more allowances. We provide the food and everything that a president needs. So, in all fairness, the issue of the Office of the President being saved for this should not apply; the three should all go without a house. We are putting a lot of burdens on the taxpayer. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I want to put the record straight. It is clear in our laws that an allowance given is not personal income. The salary given to a Member of Parliament is what we count as their income. But allowances given in the course of performing one’s duties is not an income and cannot be referred to as take-home income. The law is clear about that. I am talking about Shs 3.5 million because that is the net income of the individual. We do not take allowances home. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, our view, after consultations, is that the world over, they provide a house to a retiring president. Currently, even the law that handles the benefits of the retired presidents provides for a house. In the practice of Public Service, you do not adjust somebody’s salary and allowances downwards; you can only go up. So, in this matter, to look at a retiring president who already benefits by getting a house – we have Binaisa, he lives in a house provided by the state. Now if you say that you want to remove him from the house, you will cause anarchy in this country. 

Therefore, I would beg this House that we only promote peace and I beg this House that we only look at that normal practice of Public Service that you cannot adjust my benefits downwards; you can only adjust them upwards. The reason we are not providing for the vice-president and the prime minister is because they currently do not have a law that provides for those benefits. 

So, you can say according to the resource envelope, we can in the meantime provide for only this. But to say that the president should also be deprived of what he already has will cause us problems. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, the chairman has dwelt on the civil service experience of not revisiting allowances or salaries downwards and I am happy the hon. Minister has been in that docket as a chief bureaucrat for long and she knows it. That bit, I agree with you. 

But the question I want to ask is: can you come up with an amount pegged to that thing called a house? I believe the house you are talking about may not be the kind of house for you and I. So, let us know how much it would cost to provide such a house.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is here, “A house purchase fund of Shs 400 million”

MR WADRI: Shs 400 million on the taxpayers of Terego –(Laughter)– to a person who has already been in “things”? Honestly, let us not burden our taxpayers. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want you to pick up from what hon. Otengo said. Let us be colour blind, let us legislate for the office and not for the individuals.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I have been listening to the debate, but I want somebody to assist me because I am a little bit confused now. It looks like we are writing a will bequeathing property upon death. This is a not a personal estate of a deceased, that property is allocated to the wife and children. If a person dies after serving a country, what obligation does this nation have to the one that has passed on?

You were working earning a salary, and some of them such as a head of state we look after them 100 per cent. For example, the sitting head state enjoys all these privileges. What we are doing is to burden the taxpayer even in his death.

Everybody earns a salary to look after his family and if he cannot look after his family, it cannot be an obligation of the taxpayer to look after him. This is an abuse of public resources; it is an abuse of office by Members of Parliament. How can you bequeath property that is not yours? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members I think we should be realistic. There have been instances in this country when former prominent Ugandans have returned from abroad and they do not have homes. The first thing they ask for is whether they can be helped to get a house. I think we must take this into account.

MR KATUNTU: We may not legislate about morals, morally we could provide for them but imagine that we are now legalising it. It is wrong for us to start helping people who run away and come back saying that they do not have Houses.

For us we are toiling to build our own houses, look at these small civil servants, they are taking out salary loans to look after their families on retirement and in death. They are earning peanuts; these people we are providing for are earning a lot of money! Are we being fair to these civil servants? One who works everyday and saves his money to look after his family in retirement and in death.

MRS SEZI: I would like to clarify some of the issues raised by hon. Katuntu. It is not true that when public officers die after retirement, their families are left alone. When the person retires, he gets gratuity and when he dies in retirement, the pension is continuously paid for a period of time.

That is the principle that we presenting here. Secondly, it is not true that spouses of retired civil servants are not getting survivors’ benefits. This cuts across the civil service and the UPDF and it is with in the law. We actually pay survivors. The same principle is being carried in this law.

First of all, there is a provision of a house for a retired president, which was saved by the committee and the only provision we are making to have a transitional arrangement for the spouse and the children to shift away from the official retirement house to another house. That is why we have provided for the amount of money given.

MS ALASO: I would like to reflect back on the first, second and third schedules. For instance, look at the provisions that we have made. We have said 40 percent of the salary as gratuity. So, you are not telling us anything new; we are not complaining about 40 percent gratuity for a serving president or prime minister.

We are educating the children of any president whether in or out of the country. It is already in the law and we are also saying that we shall treat them as taxpayers of Uganda. For the minister to try to compare these huge benefits to the peanuts that we give our primary school teachers is really unacceptable.

Our children are our social safety nets; if your children have never been to school, you have no social safety net. Here is a president, vice-president or prime minister this country has educated their children wherever they are and they still cannot find a house for their mother?

I do not want us to reach a point as a country where we cut off the teats of the cow. We are milking the cow to the point that we may get out blood. We are reaching a point where we are cutting off the teats and there will be no udder so we shall not be able to milk anymore.

MS BETTY AMONGI: I am now lost because I do not know whether the principle of the argument is on the house or on all the other things. I want to debate from a point of experience as somebody who knows what happened to a spouse of a former head of state.

There are certain activities that Mama Miria Obote will not engage in because of her status. There are many visitors who will come to her because she is the wife of late Obote.

One four wheel drive car, a security guard, a secretary and utilities are things that are basic and normal. On the issue of the house, many Members of Parliament have borrowed money to buy houses but Shs 400 million will not give a house of a status of a former president. I view that as basic money that someone would have to top up to buy a house befitting a status of a former president. I have declared my interest and I support these benefits. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Chairperson, I want to note that in law school, they do not teach arithmetic. But before you went to law school, you should have learnt some arithmetic including subtraction and addition. When you add up these schedules, you will begin to appreciate what we are talking about. The words of Shakespeare on death are very instructive, he says: “Death comes for us all, even for kings, the readiness is all”. It means we must all be prepared as individuals to face the moment of death; we must begin to plan for ourselves. 

What we are doing here is just a token to enable somebody to move on. We should also appreciate our banana republic, the people from whom the money is going to come. Let me tell you, when I go to the village and I give Shs 1,000 to a person, they want to kneel down and receive it with both hands. This is the level of poverty we are talking about. So, all these schedules we are adding are not in good faith. 

The Constitution says we must provide for these people; that is alright, but let us be mindful of who we are. I will lose sleep if this Bill goes through and my people are going to be responsible for it; that is my concern. Madam Chairperson, please remember your arithmetic and do us a favour so that our people are taken into consideration.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, obviously I did mathematics and arithmetic, but let us learn to treat our senior citizens with dignity. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Sixth Schedule, agreed to.

The Seventh Schedule, agreed to.

The Eighth Schedule, agreed to.

The Ninth Schedule, agreed to.

The Tenth Schedule, agreed to.

The Eleventh Schedule, agreed to.

The Twelfth Schedule, agreed to.

The Thirteenth Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009”, and passed it with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR A DOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I feel very humbled to request that I put on record that this bad law is being passed when there is no quorum. There are certain fundamental matters, which we could have resolved through dialogue and further debates but they have been passed. So I want it to be on record that this law has been passed in the midst of poverty - the majority of our people are wallowing in poverty and we are passing this law when there is no quorum. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Move for recommittal.

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move for the recommittal of the clause 31.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, I beg that we recommit and make an amendment and insert clause 31 as follows: “For the avoidance of doubt, the benefits of the spouse or spouses of a person who dies while holding the office of president, vice-president and prime minister shall be granted to the spouse or spouses collectively until their death.” I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members that was the issue we were discussing before we suspended for lunch. So, it has been resolved that all the benefits would be shared equally and it would be up to them to divide them. So, there will be no excess for 50 women or 100 husbands. So, I put the question that the new clause - 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I am only concerned about the wording. Why don’t we say “for life” instead of “until their death?” It is scary. 

MRS SEZI: Madam Chairperson, death is the route but I accept the proposals. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson wouldn’t it then also consequentially follow from that argument, when you look at the schedules we have passed, to provide medical care for the spouses. I think then it becomes too big if we leave it like that and my argument is that instead of open medical care, why don’t we provide a certain sum for medical insurance? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But we did not recommit that clause.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, I think that is administrative because the principle of health care is already in the law. Administratively, the Ministry of Public Service can deal with that together with the spouses or the children. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that a new clause 31 be introduced as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, agreed to.

MS NAMAGWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to request the House to recommit item 2 of the Fourth Schedule as far as – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Fourth Schedule was passed in the morning.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The emoluments and benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister, 2009” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A Bill for an Act entitled “The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President, and Prime Minister Act, 2010”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Title is settled and the Bill is passed. (Applause)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE WHITE PAPER OF THE VISITATION COMMITTEE ON UNIVERSITIES IN UGANDA

4.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Brian Asiimwe): Madam Speaker, allow me to present the report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services, on the Government White Paper on the Report of the Visitation Committee to Public Universities. 

Introduction 

In March 2006, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, in his capacity as Visitor to all public universities as provided for in Section 26(3) of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, appointed a 12-person visitation committee to public universities, chaired by Professor Gordon P. McGregor.

This visitation committee was tasked with visiting, studying, and making a situational analysis of public universities specifically Makerere University, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Kyambogo University and Gulu University and making recommendations.

The committee completed its work and submitted its report to the Ministry of Education and Sports on 10 August 2007. Government subsequently issued a White Paper whose key recommendations were:

i)	Councils and senates should take urgent and full review of their own responsibilities and those of top administrators to clarify the conflicting powers exercised by the senior administrators.
ii)	Councils should have the full autonomy to charge fees based on unit cost, in consultation with the Ministry of Education and Sports and with the approval of Cabinet.
iii)	Government should continue its affirmative policy of funding science and technology students because these disciplines are key to development, while undertaking rehabilitation, modernisation and expansion of infrastructure in all public universities.
iv)	To enhance access, Government should establish an Open University of Uganda within the medium term while operationalising the Students’ Loan Scheme in the short term.
v)	Government should increase funding to public universities to match surging numbers of students created by UPE and USE policies and universities councils should have the overall responsibility of allocation of all Internally Generated Funds (IGF) in public universities which should be contained in an integrated budget.
vi)	Public universities should strive to establish close working links with the private sector in research and development as well as privatising management of halls of residence and service there-in.
vii)	Makerere University in particular should undergo an overhaul of its administrative structure and style, including financial administration. Management training and retraining are urgently required. In particular, the mismanagement of internally generated funds from fees from private students at Makerere University should be investigated by a respectable firm of auditors or accountants.
viii)	Makerere and Kyambogo should match students and facilities within a consolidation period of five years before embarking on new programmes or admitting more students than those who match available facilities.
ix)	All public universities students’ enrolment should match with facilities according to National Council for Higher Education benchmarks.
x)	Makerere University Business School should develop further as a degree awarding tertiary institution and then move carefully towards a university status through relevant legal structures as per the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001. 

On Thursday, 18 December 2008, the Minister of State for Higher Education, hon. Gabriel Opio, tabled before this House the Government White Paper on the Report of the Visitation Committee to Public Universities in Uganda.

In accordance with rule 29(5) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, this Government White Paper was referred to the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Social Services for scrutiny. The Committee hereby presents its report.

Methodology

In considering the White Paper on the Report of the Visitation Committee to Public Universities, the committee:
a)	Held public hearings that attracted a cross section of heads of public and private universities in Uganda as well as other stakeholders.
b)	The committee further received and reviewed written memoranda from stakeholders.
c)	It also reviewed documents namely:
i)	The Government White Paper on the Report of the Visitation Committee to Public Universities, and 
ii)	The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001
d)	It visited selected local universities, both public and private.
e)	It visited foreign universities and public education institutions and agencies in Kenya, Ghana, South Africa and United States of America. 

Hon. Members can read the details of the institutions and universities visited in those countries. 

Findings and recommendations

University Administration

The committee notes that proper definition and clarity of roles is an effective antidote to conflict between and/or amongst role holders in any organisational set up. The lack of clarity in the conflicting powers exercised by senior university administrators in Kyambogo and Makerere universities, as referred to in the Report of the Visitation Committee to Public Universities is due to duplication of roles by these offices. 

The committee further notes that the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, as amended in 2003 and as amended in 2006, provides for the membership of a public university, officers of a public university and public university organs and further spells out their responsibilities. 

The committee agrees with the Government White Paper’s recommendation that sections 30-37 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 be revised to effectively streamline the roles and responsibilities of the various management organs in universities and other tertiary institutions so as to mitigate administrative conflicts. 

In doing this, the committee recommends that:

i)	A detailed task analysis should be conducted to establish functions of the various offices in public universities. 
ii)	Relevant structures and hierarchies should be streamlined to best handle the established functions.
iii)	Holders of the offices in public universities should be empowered to enable them conduct their functions efficiently and effectively.

The Power of University Councils to Charge Fees

The committee noted that the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 section 41(c) empowers university councils to fix scales of fees and boarding charges. 

The committee further notes that the current unit cost rate applied by the National Council for Higher Education assumes homogeneity across public universities.  As a result, the current fees paid by students in public universities may in some instances be below the minimum required to offset operational costs. In addition, the upward adjustment and re-adjustment of tuition fees in some public universities has compromised the enrolment of some prospective privately sponsored students. 

Madam Speaker, the committee subsequently recommends that:
i)	Respective public universities should conduct a cost analysis and calculate their unit cost per student as a reference point for setting fees.
ii)	Government should take care of long term infrastructural needs and development in public universities to help lower the overall cost of running universities.
iii)	Government should establish fees ceilings in public universities to mitigate erratic fees adjustments and re-adjustments which oftentimes deprives some prospective private students the opportunity to enroll for university education. 
iv)	Given the absence of clear criteria for Government’s allocation of funding to universities, there should be a clearly defined funding criterion for public universities. Government should come up with a sustainable formula for allocating public resources to selected and deserving universities. 
v)	The planning function in public universities should be bolstered to avoid the reactionary approach to management whereby universities seek emergency funding from Government. This will go a long way in stemming any ineptitude in the planning function in public universities. 

Human Resources Management Systems 

The committee generally concurs with the recommendation in the White Paper that the human resource manual be reviewed to peg human resource management systems in public universities to periodic performance reviews so as to sift the poor performers from the good ones. The committee further notes the proliferation of part-time lecturers in some public universities and its implication on the quality of teaching. This, in the committee’s view, is an indicator of the limited capacity of some public universities.

The Committee recommends as follows:

The maintenance of university staff as permanent and pensionable should be pegged to routine performance reviews in order to maintain high service delivery standards. This will mitigate complacency in the teaching ranks and ensure the retention of much needed expertise while at the same time ensuring consistent quality in standards. 

There should be clearly established and respected criteria for performance-based promotion amongst academic staff in all public universities.

Part-time staff should be discouraged because often times such staff are not organically related to the university and do not have a strong feeling of attachment to the university.

No course should be conducted unless the majority of its managers are full-time staff. This is intrinsically linked to the quality of teaching.

The phenomenon of part-time staff should only be tolerated in the case of eminent persons who may be called upon for specific knowledge.

Reformation of the Administrative Structure and Style Including Financial Administration of Makerere University:

The committee notes that Makerere University has already instituted a reforms committee tasked with handling the reforms process at the university.

The committee further recommends that: 

i)	It was proposed that the office of the Chancellor of Makerere University be further strengthened away from the current, largely ceremonial role.
ii)	Students should be involved in all council boards and faculty meetings except if it directly relates to examinations.  
iii)	A comprehensive amendment of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 will go a long way in institutionalising effective administrative structures in public universities in general.

Management of Internally Generated Funds (IGF)

The committee takes cognisance of the need to properly manage internally generated funds from fees paid by private students. 

In this vein, the committee recommends that:

i)	A thorough investigation into the mismanagement of IGF from private fees at Makerere University be instituted and further expanded to other public institutions of higher learning in the country.
ii)	A systems audit of all public institutions of higher learning should be periodically conducted by, or with the approval of, the Auditor-General to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of management systems. 

Funding of the National Council for Higher Education (NCHE)

In the view of the committee, the need to properly regulate the quality of higher education, which is a public good, demands a functional and vibrant NCHE and as such Government should prioritise and adequately fund its operations. 

The committee recommends that:
i)	Government should explore modalities of funding the NCHE from the Consolidated Fund. 
ii)	An accreditation board should be established, independent of the NCHE, to handle the accreditation of courses in the various universities and tertiary institutions. 
iii)	NCHE should be re-organised and re-positioned in law. In the same vein, the NCHE should be insulated from political interference.

The President as the Visitor of all public universities

The committee notes that section 26 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 provides for the President as the Visitor of each public university. The committee is agreeable with the position in the White Paper that upholds sub-section (2) of Section 26 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 empowering the Visitor to perform an overall supervisory role over the affairs of each public university. 

The committee further notes that the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act limits the role of the Visitor to only public universities and yet private universities produce the same products as public universities.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the role of the Visitor as currently provided for in sub-section (2) of section 26 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 be upheld.

The Current Elective System of Top Officials and Top Academicians 

The committee noted that Sections 7, 38, 39, 42, 44, 53, 54, 56 and 81 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 prescribes the election of some officials and top academicians in public universities. Such elections usually breed factionalism and in some instances are hinged largely on vested interests as opposed to the ability of the individuals to offer strategic leadership. 

The committee agrees with the recommendation in the White Paper that combines the search team approach with open competitive selection processes as opposed to elections.  

Public University Infrastructure

The committee noted the appalling state of some physical infrastructure in some public universities. Kyambogo University for instance still has buildings that bear asbestos sheets in total disregard of the inherent health hazards posed by these sheets. 

The committee recommends that:
i)	The management of respective public universities should devote consistent effort towards improving the infrastructure therein. 
ii)	Respective public universities should properly plan for and allocate some fraction of their IGF to infrastructural development.

Provision of more funding for training, research and publication: The committee noted that the level of research remains low in public universities in Uganda majorly due to resource constraints amongst others. This has been compounded by the absence of a well institutionalised framework for co-ordinating research effort across institutions of higher learning and focusing and aligning such effort to national development plans. As a result research activity is haphazard in many cases. 

The committee proposes that:
Government should establish special research grants for the intellectual community both within and beyond the precincts of universities and realigns such research activity to national development concerns.

A well institutionalised framework for managing research should be established. This will prevent the current fragmentation of research across different organisations. The rationale behind this is that much as the National Council for Science and Technology, which was established in 1990 by Act of Parliament (Cap. 209 of the Laws of Uganda) as a semi-autonomous government agency to advise, develop, implement policies and strategies for integrating Science, Technology and Research development in Uganda, is in place. Its limited technical and financial capacity renders it largely ineffective and inefficient in playing this role.

The Allocation of Internally Generated Funds in Public Universities 

The committee noted that there is inequitable distribution of internally generated funds in Makerere and Kyambogo Universities as an indicator that pervasive private sector tendencies have crept into public universities in the management of internally generated funds. To compound matters, the decentralized internally generated funds policy at Makerere where faculties define areas to fund without reference to the centre is a potential recipe for financial mismanagement. 

In addition, in Makerere University, professors, deans and heads of department do not get the same pay and only a few were benefiting from the proceeds of internally generated funds. 

The committee upholds the recommendation in the White Paper that university councils will have the overall responsibility of allocation of all internally generated funds in public universities which should be contained in an integrated budget. 

The committee further recommends that:
i)	Clear standardised guidelines for the management and allocation of privately generated internal revenue in public universities be instituted. 
ii)	All revenue generated from public universities is public money and should be managed accountably and responsibly. Whoever is found to have mismanaged such funds should bear the full brunt of the law. 
iii)	Consolidated pay packages should be avoided and instead well laid salary structures be adopted. Such salary structures should be realistic and motivating irrespective of money accruing to internally generated funds. 

High Levels of Specialisation of Undergraduate Programmes

The committee noted that currently there is an unnecessary high level of specialisation at the eclectic undergraduate stage yet first degrees are supposed to be flexible so as to facilitate greater mobility of graduates.
 
The committee concurs with the recommendation in the White Paper that there should be a comprehensive review of the education curriculum right from ordinary level. 

The committee further recommends that:
i) 	The review of undergraduate programmes should not just be left to individual universities but rather to a central body especially the National Council for Higher Education. This is because university programmes are not just for the universities to own but for the sake of national development.
 
ii) 	In the same vein, such a review process should transcend public universities to private universities and other tertiary institutions as well because their products impinge on national development as well.

iii) 	In the long term, teaching and learning processes and styles in Uganda should be generally reformed to enable the production of more innovative, imaginative and constructive human capital. The practice of encouraging students to cram academic theories for the sake of passing examinations and glorifying certain schools at the expense of others should be discouraged. There is need to foster greater understanding and conceptualisation of knowledge right from primary school level so as to enable the students to ably apply theory to practice instead of the current style which promotes classroom brilliance at the expense of constructive innovation and imagination.

Duplication of Courses

This situation has been precipitated by the revenue-driven high levels of fragmentation of courses which has seen the introduction of courses such as Human Resource Management, Development Economics, International Business, Business Computing and Small Business Management to mention a few. Besides being narrowly focused, such courses are offshoots of the more broad based courses like Bachelor of Business Administration and Bachelor of Arts in Economics and Bachelor of Commerce amongst others.

i) 	The committee recognises the need to strengthen departments running specific courses so that the same course instructors/lecturers teach the same course across different departments. This will cater for the needs of students in various departments as well as check the proliferation, fragmentation and duplication of courses. This demands clear guidelines to regulate the hosting, structure and content of academic programmes.

ii) 	As a more proactive remedy, the accreditation of courses in universities and tertiary institutions should be more rigorous. This relates closely to the committee’s recommendation 6 on page 10 of this report.

iii) 	There is an urgent need for the rationalisation and re-alignment of courses in universities and tertiary institutions to national development plans and demands.

The Proposed Equitable Student Loan Scheme
 
The committee noted that for an efficient, effective and functional students’ loan scheme, there is need for an effective law and a legally established autonomous students’ loan board. This should be complemented by a proper and reliable national identification system that is intertwined with an effective population management information system and data bank to track loan beneficiaries, forecast students’ loan demands and facilitate subsequent planning.

In addition, the process of establishing a students’ loan arrangement should not be an impulsive policy action but rather a product of an elaborate, well thought and participatory consultative and analytical process free of political suffocation and sanitized from corruption and favouritism.  

In this vein, the committee recommends that:

i) 	An independent, credible and responsive loans board be set up and backed by relevant legal and policy regimes.

ii) 	Clear, understandable and equitable criteria for obtaining agreed loan amounts be established and linked to national skills gap. 

iii) 	Repayment period for the students’ loan should be realistic. In doing this, it should be borne in mind that Uganda’s unemployment rate is very high and the associated uncertainty in securing employment by university graduates remains a hitch to contend with.  

iv) 	Continuation of students’ loans should be pegged to students’ performance and universities be made responsible for updating the loans board on students’ performance. This inevitably requires an open, clear, reliable, efficient and effective coordination channel between public universities and the students’ loans board.

Makerere University Business School 

The White Paper recommends that Makerere University Business School should develop further as a degree awarding tertiary institution and then, more carefully, towards a university status through relevant legal structures as per the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act. 

The committee noted that in the recent past the relationship between Makerere University Business School as a constituent college and Makerere University as the main university, has been largely frosty and sometimes turbulent. 

In addition, Makerere University has gone ahead to offer some courses similar to those being taught in MUBS, thus fanning friction. More still, recent attempts by Makerere University to reform the structure and substance of some courses in MUBS seem to have stirred resentment from MUBS.

Furthermore, as much as institutional autonomy is crucial for improving quality, sections 29 and 132 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001 clearly define a constituent college of a public university and the status of MUBS as a public tertiary institution. Subsequently, any changes to the status and functions of MUBS, as defined by law, will have to be through an amendment of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001. 

Against this background, the committee recommends that:

i)	The current relationship between Makerere University and Makerere University Business School should not be hinged on the goodwill of individuals, but rather a viable and sustainable legal and institutional framework.
ii)	Courses offered at Makerere University Business School should not be duplicated at Makerere as this causes unnecessary conflict and division of scarce human resource. 

The committee recommends a comprehensive review the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act of 2001, 2003 and 2006. 

Conclusion 
In conclusion, the committee appreciates Government’s commitment to enhancing formal education in Uganda. It is noteworthy that education, being a public good, deserves utmost attention and as such, Government’s responsiveness to the challenges there-in is crucial.  

As much as the committee generally appreciates the recommendations in the Government White Paper on the Report of the Visitation Committee to Public Universities, it is imperative that the reform process should not be a one-off ritualistic event, but rather an institutionalised, periodic and participatory tool for response to policy challenges in pursuit of sustainable national development. Key to such reforms is the need for comprehensive amendment of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001 and as amended in 2003 and 2006. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see some members of the committee standing but I will start with those who are not members of the committee.

5.20
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am just reminding the House that it is a ritual that the shadow minister responds and I am saying for the record, I am the shadow minister. This is my committee and we worked together to arrive at this report. So I will not be making any substantive contribution. 

But for your information, one of the things that have been intriguing me as the shadow minister is that our committees cannot take mothers with babies to the field. So, when it comes to field reports, I do not know what happened in the field because I was advised by Parliament – they cannot carry a maid, they cannot allow you to use your own vehicle so we, the mothers of this Parliament, do not go for field work. We sit right here until Parliament becomes very gender-sensitive.

Secondly, let me just make this one observation. We raised the matter of the loan scheme and while the recommendations are detailed and I agree with them; I think that because the ministry has already taken steps towards implementation of the loan scheme, it is very important that the minister comes to this House and substantively presents on the loan scheme like we did at the inception of the quota system for our districts. It will help the House appreciate the development further. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First, I do not know why you are avoiding sitting near the Speaker. Actually, I was wondering why you are there when you are the shadow minister. I thought you should be here, very near to the Speaker.

Secondly, I am surprised that the mothers are unable to go into the field. This is the first time I am hearing about it. I think the fact that you have young children should not prevent you from doing your work. I think Parliament should facilitate you to go with the young people to the field. 

5.22
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you hon. Alaso for bringing up this issue. Some of us have perpetually been mothers in this Parliament -(Laughter)– and we have missed the privileges of having to move to the field. 

Recently I was on the Defence Committee and we were supposed to tour northern Uganda to appreciate what the Amnesty Commission is doing there. I expressed very keen interest and pointed out to the committee that I would be able to move with my baby and my sitter in my car. Unfortunately, they could not facilitate me and they could not associate with that. 

I want to confirm that what hon. Alaso is saying is true. The mothers in this Parliament have to forego a lot. Unfortunately, we have to go by that because there are certain things you cannot delegate; you only simply have to because some of us have accepted the role of being both a mother and a leader. You cannot tell your voters that, “Look, I am now a mother of a baby, so I cannot perform my parliamentary duties.” But even when you are willing to do that, Parliament cannot facilitate that. It is really very disappointing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I said before, this is the first time I am hearing this. I will ensure that this does not happen. This House has been legislating for the rights of women in employment and maternity leave. How can it be that we, the legislators, do not allow our own people to go to the field just because they have got young children? We shall resolve that. I will deal with that in the Parliamentary Commission. You can be sure about that.

5.24
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I am very appreciative of the report that was compiled by the Social Services Committee and the recommendations there-in. It is a thorough report, very detailed and it touches many issues.

But I am mainly concerned about recommendations 12 and 13. Twelve talks about the high levels of specialisation of undergraduate programmes and 13 talks about duplication of courses. It is very good that the report talks about some course. Actually, it points out courses like Business Computing and Small Business Management. These courses are undertaken by students at a very high cost. Some of the parents of these children mortgage their houses, their property for the sake of educating their children and the students come out when they cannot be of any practical use. So, you find that the people in communities are very desperate. The education that was supposed to bring happiness to a family is now bringing agony. You know they sell their property for the sake of educating their children and the students comes out when they have done very irrelevant courses at a very high cost.

My worry, Madam Speaker, is that I do not know how these recommendations are going to be implemented in order for our people to benefit from the education system that is being provided. They are very good recommendations but my worry is about their implementation. How sure are we that these very beautiful recommendations are going to be implemented so that people can be happy with the education that we are providing?  

There is something else that I thought that this committee would have touched on but it did not. This is about politics in the universities because we lost a student or so some time back. And when they are trying to elect their leaders, there is a lot of commotion that goes on. So, I would have loved to get some guidance on how politics should be carried out so that we do not lose our children in these universities. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Tashobya but maybe before that, I want to say something. I am glad that the committee has said something about courses, which children cannot use when they finish. One day I talked about it in Makerere and the students were very angry with me. But this is what I was talking about. 

Then, maybe another thing that I did not see in this report is about some diploma courses, which have semesters, but the cost of each semester is so high; they pay over 1.5 million per semester for a diploma course and then they have like six semesters. So you ask yourself how this child ended up in this kind of course at such an expense and what that child is going to do with that course - even certificate courses! It is really very serious.

5.28
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good work presented to us but I have two or three comments I would like to make.

On page 2, part 3 of the White Paper recommends that: “Government should continue with its affirmative policy of funding science and technology students because these disciplines are key to development.” I want to make my presentation against the background of my constituency, which is a rural one, like many of my colleagues constituencies are. 

While we thank Government, for example for the affirmative action in respect of the district quota system to enable disadvantaged children from upcountry to access university education, the problem we have in terms of promoting science is that many of our children or students from upcountry, who come on the district quota system, come on Arts courses. 

When I was trying to inquire about this scenario, I was informed that in admitting students on the district quota system, you do not take into account the weights and the courses to which a student is going to be admitted. You only look at the points which a student has. And by and large, of course science students especially from upcountry score low marks. You find that most of the district quota system admissions are actually Arts students. They are actually not only Arts students but are students admitted for non-professional courses. So, the purpose for which this programme is put up is defeated. 

The quota system students whom we get from upcountry are actually coming for psychology and all these other courses which are not very useful to them once they have left the university.  

Is it possible that the minister can review the district quota system admissions so that the students that are admitted also benefit from professional courses? And for that matter, can they benefit from science courses so that they can be useful to themselves and to the country?

Related to this matter is the policy of government universities which have been set up partly to address admission of more science students. For example, I am aware that Mbarara is supposed to be a university of science and technology; I think Busitema is also supposed to be addressing agriculture technology and Gulu University also operates along similar lines. But what is happening is that the science aspect in these universities has been overtaken by events. You find that most of the admissions are actually taking Arts courses - the commercial courses because all these public universities in addition to Makerere have also become commercial oriented and are taking on students for courses that generate revenue. Is it possible that the ministry can review the admissions in these public universities to cater for more admissions for science students?   

I would also like to add my voice to what hon. Alaso submitted on the question of the loan scheme. Most of us from upcountry constituencies are more affected by this because our students who pass and pass well cannot afford university education.  Government has been talking about the loan scheme. Can we be informed as to when it is going to come into force and how it is going to be managed? This is a common question especially around this time of elections -(Member timed out_)

5.33
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. My concerns are few but one of those that I am interested in is the one that hon. Tashobya has just been alluding to and this is to do with the lists of beneficiaries of the students’ loan schemes. 

Like hon. Alaso stated, it seems some people have begun benefiting from this because according to the information I got in the Busoga region when I went to represent the Government Chief Whip at some function to do with the youth, I got surprised when the youth were pressuring me on how they can access these loans at university level. I looked a fool and out of place because it was them who were demanding to know what to do. How can we benefit from these loan schemes in order for us to help our constituents to pursue their studies? I felt that this is an opportunity where the minister could come up with a clear statement and explanation as to whether they have begun implementing it or not because it is just in the public domain that it is being implemented somehow somewhere. 

The other is to do with internally generated funds from private students. If this money was being put to the right use - I think the strikes that we have been witnessing where lecturers refuse to teach students are because this money is being embezzled and misappropriated by a few managers of these finances. It is my humble appeal that as the committee recommended, the ministry constitutes a team or firm of auditors to ensure that this money is used well. I think it can help for the managers or universities to invest it accordingly so that it can benefit Ugandans. 

The other thing is to review the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act of 2001. This rift between Makerere University and MUBS has been on for long. This reason they are giving that it is because of this law that has not been amended - I feel that the minister should just up in more effort to ensure that she presents the amendments and we do the needful because students are suffering. 

When it comes to time for graduation, students that have studied from MUBS are always missing on graduation lists because they sat from different centres. That is why we feel that this could be an amicable solution to this problem. It is our appeal that the minister does the needful to save these students from suffering.

My final point is to do with harmonisation of business courses or duplication of courses that are being taught at MUBS and at the same time at Makerere University. Since MUBS is always termed as a centre of business excellence, we can advise the ministry to rule that all business courses be earmarked for MUBS such that gender, leadership and the like are switched to Makerere University. This is my opinion that I am selling and marketing to Members. It has been on for long because MUBS has also been complaining that it is being failed by Makerere University. We feel that if they are harmonised, it can be a lasting solution to this problem. I thank you.

5.38
MR JAMES SSERUNJOGI (Independent, Kalungu East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I would like to thank the committee for the excellent analysis of the report of the visitation committee. 

I have got only one comment and that is regarding the funding of sciences in universities. I am very happy with the recommendation from the White Paper recommendation No. 3 regarding the continuation of affirmative policy for funding sciences. I have also observed that recently we had annual reports of the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology where it was pointed out that low funding at all levels of taught sciences in schools, universities and at research institutions have led to very slow development in the areas of science and technology. Is that what is lacking as one of the solutions in this report? 

Also I don’t see much on inter-university collaboration. We could alleviate this problem if we had a plan for inter-university collaboration. For example, we have seen that courses are being duplicated across universities and there are cases where for example a new university comes up and they are teaching some particular subjects yet they may not have laboratories at hand because of low funding at the start.

Take an example of Busitema University where there is a new course in textiles and there are constraints because there may not be adequate funding yet a similar textile course is being conducted at Kyambogo. If there is inter-university collaboration, some of the practicals could be undertaken at a well equipped laboratory so that we don’t fail to do what we want to do.

Another issue is what has come out about the lack of harmonising courses across universities. This requires harmonising the curriculum across universities and this conflict between MUBS and Makerere would not have arisen if there was that sort of harmonisation.

Talking further about inter-university collaboration, I am wondering what it means to think about the good examples and lessons learnt in the past. We are looking at situations where we had the East African University where Makerere was just a college specialising in medicine, I think Nairobi had engineering and Dar-es-Salaam had law. 

In cases where we see shortage of facilities in laboratories, what does the ministry do especially when we are looking at the concept of regional cooperation? Do our universities and other tertiary institutions act in isolation just looking at Uganda as such yet we are forging for regional co-operation? I think these are areas of food for thought, which can be dealt with in depth to strengthen our sciences. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

5.42
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I also want to thank the chairperson for the report. I have a few comments to make. First of all, in the public universities what we need to take seriously is administration and management of these universities and it is a challenge. In these universities, we have courses where lecturers are teaching administration and management but in practice they are not doing it. It is in theory so you cannot see what they are teaching you practically. 

This has led to corruption, mismanagement of resources, conflict - it is all because there is poor management in public universities generally. So I feel we should consider this and see what we can do to put a better structure of administration in these public universities.

Another thing that I want to comment on is professors and retirement age. I feel this is one of the areas that the committee should have considered. For a person to reach a level of being called a professor might be when he is already at the age of 45 or 50 years. Now we are saying that public servants must retire at the age of 50. It was 55 and now we are coming down to 50. Can we make affirmative action so that we consider some of these areas, which are so technical? Otherwise, we shall continue to not have professors in this country because by the age of 50 when he retires, he has to go somewhere and professors are key. By the way how many professors do we have in Uganda? These are some of the issues we should consider.

The chairperson has also stated a recommendation in the report concerning support for science and technology. That is very serious. As a country, unless we believe in our local researchers and believe that as Ugandans we can do something, we shall not see development. The challenge we are facing in the country is that normally we believe what is good is something that is done by a foreigner and this has caused a problem. 

Just here in Makerere these people have even come up and made a car and as a Government, if we had interest, I think by now they would have gone very far but it has only remained on paper. You don’t see Government showing concern about it and we are talking about science and technology. If we do not support these people, what are we saying? 

In IUIU, there is one student who has come up with an innovation of developing an electronic form of voting. All the universities were in South Africa last year for a competition for new innovations in science. A student from IUIU in Uganda was the best but was he recognised in Uganda? What are we looking for as a country – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the Leader of Government Business.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Huda for giving way. It is a fact that Government is interested in locally developed research. As a matter of fact, Government established the Uganda Industrial Research Institute at Nakawa where incubation of research and ideas that have been locally developed is put to test, developed and popularised. You have heard the President talk about research in bananas with a view of producing powdered banana, banana wine, banana drink, beverages and banana bread. This is part of the research that has come up at Makerere churning the banana leaf into paper and cloth. All this is research that has been carried out locally and the product is now on the market in form of cloth and in terms of ebisanjja which many of us are getting here. 

I also wanted to correct the impression that the idea of people retiring at 50 – that is not the Government position. This is not the Government position and what I know is that instructions have been given to try and find out the implications for retirement at various ages. But this has involved investigating retiring at 50, 55, 60 and 70 years because we in NRM believe it is our duty to find employment for anybody who can be productive. So it should not be taken that a position in regard to retirement has been agreed. That is not the NRM position as yet. When we come out with a firm position on this as Government, it will be brought here in Parliament and will be clearly debated.

I also want to draw to your attention that professorship is not in any way associated with age. It is associated with the kind of research that you have been able to carry out, the publications you have been able to generate and contribution to the world of learning irrespective of age. Yes, it is true that some time back in the past at Makerere, you needed to attain a certain age before becoming a professor but I do not think that is still the situation because we have got the current vice-chancellor who is a professor and I do not think he is yet 40 years. Prof. Anokbonggo you could tell us –(Interjections)- I thank you for giving me permission to inform you.  

MS HUDA: Thank you my chief whip for that information. If I could add that in Africa, Uganda in terms of having institutions can be blamed. In fact, we have all the structural institutions. The problem is how we fund those institutions to work which was my point of reference.

I also want to comment on the courses and the admissions in these universities. We have affirmative action and a quota system. But now the challenge in these universities is that those students admitted on quota system are normally not given the best courses even if they perform to the standard. Like somebody maybe from Arua; if he has scored 18 aggregates or points or maybe 21 points, he cannot be given law in the quota system but the one from Arua or Yumbe who got 12 points can be given any course in law or sciences when he applied for private. That is what is there in practice meaning that we are cheating those people. Let these courses be given on merit. If that person were rich, he would directly apply for medicine and become a doctor or engineer. But because he is poor, he will be given a flat course – they call it Social Sciences, Arts – and somebody who got eight or nine points will be given a course of becoming a doctor or lawyer and those other courses. To me that is a problem and I think that must be considered -(Member timed out-_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oleru Huda, about this young person who excelled in South Africa – maybe you should inform the Minister so that he or she is recognised. The young person from IUIU that you mentioned had an innovation so that we can recognise and maybe facilitate her/him.

MS HUDA: Normally there is that competition on sciences among the universities of Africa where students compete to be the best to come up with an innovation –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Bring that person to the Minister of Education so that we can recognise him or her.

MS HUDA: I can do that tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We should not let that child disappear – with cameras and we – hon. Franca Akello and then hon. Amongi. If you want to clarify then you stand up when they are contributing and say you want to clarify.

5.53
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, District Representative, Pader): I thank you. I want to begin on the point on page 2 where the committee reminds us about the recommendations of the White Paper – that Government should continue its affirmative policy of funding science and technology students because these disciplines are key to development. 

Over the years - almost four years now, Uganda is trying to focus on encouraging sciences because they think and I too think that it leads to development. It is very true that we need to put in money to make sure that we develop research and so on in the field of sciences. But we are turning a seriously blind eye to the fact that we need to put a strong foundation if we have to develop these sciences. Where does this foundation begin? 

It begins at school; the primary and secondary schools. I want to give you an example. Madam Speaker, you have been to Atanga Girls S.S in Laguti sub-county – that is where I went for my O’ Level. I never saw anything called a micro – what do they call it –(Interjections)- even a Bunsen burner –(Laughter)- you see! A Bunsen burner – I read it - we read those things from the text books. And the text books were too huge and very few. You would hardly get a text book for sciences and it is the case up to now. Unless we focus on equipping our secondary schools with science equipment - forget about these sciences you are talking about and having students in the universities doing sciences, forget. It may be true for children who are studying in Kampala and other well-to-do urban schools, but for rural schools, which have majority of the students – I am very glad that the minister I respect so much – and I am not saying I do not respect the others, but the thing is, I respect Maama Bitamazire very much because she is a model minister –(Applause)– she attends to us whenever we want her attention. 

I want to put this to you, Madam, and I have always consulted with you on this – that we have to equip our secondary schools with science equipment if we are to motivate the students who go through village schools to do sciences. For example, until recently we had only one A’ Level school, that is St Charles, Kalong.  

Although one has been added, the number still remains small because at the moment, we have only two A’ Level schools in Pader; St Charles, which is a missionary school, and besides that, it does not also have enough laboratory equipment to motivate children that are going through it, to do sciences. So, unless we make this foundation a reality, we may be wasting time talking about science and technology, especially for affirmative policies.

My second issue relates to public universities’ infrastructure as reported by the committee on page 11. I would like to say that public universities are in very dilapidated states, especially on the side of buildings. Go to Makerere University; you will find students still studying in structures that were built by the colonialists, which are also not being renovated. What are we up to when we give them a lot of – I do not know whether the money is enough for renovations or not. 

I have seen a good recommendation by the committee, which says that the management of respective public universities devotes consistent effort towards improving the infrastructure therein; but are we giving them money that is sufficient for these renovations? 

I am saying this because it is not enough for us to shout on top of our voices that we have one of the best universities in Africa called Makerere, yet when one takes a walk through it, the structures therein shame us. We need to give this university enough money to improve on its infrastructure.

My last issue is on the loan scheme, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I am not very happy with this recommendation of the committee compared to the others. Anyway, my biggest concern is on a point where they pegged the loan award to performance of students. I am saying this because given the background I narrated about a student who studies from a rural school and cannot be able to qualify together with the students who sit exams from Kampala schools like Makerere College – and they are supposed to be vetted under the same criteria; how do you expect such a village student to qualify for this loan scheme?

Also on the loan scheme, I would like to request that as we design the criteria; let us focus on the greater Northern Uganda or the post-conflict areas. I am saying this because most of the children in the greater Northern Uganda are orphans. 

As I speak, Members of Parliament from that area are battling with school fees of children to be able to study in universities. I know it is on all of us, but the burden on the Members from Northern Uganda is too much, especially for children in higher institutions. So, when we have an opportunity like this one, we should ensure we focus on children who are disadvantaged, especially those who perform very well.

6.00
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee highlighted different countries and universities that they visited for purposes of analysis, but throughout the report, I have not seen any reference to good practices of the places where they went. They visited more than ten universities in the USA, Kenya and South Africa; but there is no single mention of what they learnt from these visits, which should be brought on board. 

So, I cannot tell whether the committee was merely on a tour, holiday or whatever –(Interjections)– no, it is factual that your report does not mention – I am raising this because if you study the loan system, for example, in the USA, you will realise that it is pegged on to certain modalities – it is also pegged on responding to employment opportunities and how to recover such loans. 

The committee should have said that they, for example, visited Harvard - the committee chairman wants to –(Interruption)

DR ASIIMWE: Thank you very much, hon. Amongi, for giving way. I would like to inform you that having visited all those countries to share experiences on loan schemes, the committee gathered a lot of information. I would like to say that there are recommendations in this report that are partly hinged on the good practices the committee found in the universities that were visited. So, the good practices learned from those universities are incorporated in the report though the references were not made in the report; the practices were integrated.

MS AMONGI: Okay –(Interruption)

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. If you look at page 6 of this report, you realise that most of these recommendations are coming from the observations that the members of the committee made as to what they learnt from their visitations. So, I don’t think it would be necessary for the committee to say this is what we learnt from the Harvard or Kenya – the recommendations are based on those observations. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that is not fair. You know that you are a committee of this House and you do that function on our behalf; we did not go with you; we are entitled to know and compare so that we can take a decision based on various – you cannot just say that you internalised and wrote a report. We should hear and read so that we can make a decision on whether we should take on the Kenyan one or the Japan one or the one of Kamuli is better -(Laughter)– something like that.

MS AMONGI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, if you, for example, look at the question of the loan scheme, you realise that it actually has only a general recommendation. It does not talk about how the committee feels about how Government can recover, they only generalise the question of unemployment, but they would have gone ahead to tell us more.

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you, hon. Betty Amongi. I want to tell you that each delegation, which visited those universities, made reports. It is out of these reports that we got out what we compiled as a final report for this particular submission on the Floor of the House.

The administration of the loan depends on the Government; it is up to the leadership to decide which way to go, but the reports are there.

MS SSINABULYA: There is a comprehensive report of the committee, maybe because the current chairperson is new; but there is a report on all the visits, which were made. The report we are considering now is about the visitation committee on public universities and in response to each point that was raised in the visitation committee report. Maybe what we could do in future is that when delegations move out, they would have time to make a presentation on the report, which was made as a result of the visit, but this one is talking about the visitation committee. What we borrowed from there are the recommendations that have been put in here.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I thought that you had guided the members of the committee very well. My honourable colleagues are very senior Members of this House. If this report was an executive summary of all those reports, you should have had the other ones attached to this such that we are able to compare the best practices and finally agree with the recommendations that you have made here or not. That is how reports are made in this House. You cannot bring this unless you are telling us that each group did not produce a report from all these universities they visited.

We have universities in Africa and US; we should have had a report from each team that went to these universities attached here. At least the Speaker or the chairperson should be having a copy; without which we find it very difficult to take this up.

MS BETTY AMONGI: I raise this issue because this report is true. Makerere University used to be one of the top respected universities. In the White Paper, there is a recommendation that Makerere university administration should undergo an overhaul. This should also include financial administration. I would have expected you, basing on this recommendation, to tell me that for Makerere University to come back, we need to do this or that basing on examples say, from Harvard, for us to understand how they kept their standards. So, if you cannot help us to enhance what is in the White Paper, it becomes difficult to comprehend. 

Now Makerere University is like a market; facilities like lecture rooms and toilets cannot serve the number of students there. These are issues that are raised in the White Paper, and it goes ahead to make a recommendation that the council should manage all the internally generated funds from private students. But in your report you should have gone ahead to give us some of the feasible ways of how this can be done. Your recommendation is generalised more than the one in the White Paper. The White Paper is proposing standardisation, that the council should get one standard of managing the unit cost (Member timed out_) 

6.12
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam South, Oyam): My issues are on page 14, which talks about duplication of courses. I have just completed a course in the Islamic university of Uganda and the course is Bachelor of Procurement and Logistics Management. There are also variations at the degree level, diploma and certificate; relatively the same things; but the naming varies. 

So, I think we need to harmonise our courses in the universities and we should be able to have a well defined education system and structure in these universities. This is what is happening in private schools; private schools are taking on any courses and they pay a lot of money. At the end of it you find out that what they have studied is not relative to what they would have studied in the whole course.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. The information I would like to give is that for quite some time, many of our universities have become very commercialised. Take an example of Makerere University. In the days when we were in that university, a course like Social Work and Social Administration (SWASA) was so broad to the extent that what is now being given as certificates for development studies, community psychology and sociology, were mere course units in the overall course. If you did SWASA, you would come out holistic. You would have knowledge on criminology; you would know about administrative and criminal law, and so forth. But because things have been so commercialised, what used to be a course unit is now a degree. 

Now a person who graduated in Community Psychology or Development Studies has learnt just one paper of the older courses and he or she is not a professional. So, I agree with the honourable member who said that there is a need for the Ministry of Education to get involved in the way universities structure their course units. 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way. I just want to give this information. In the Act that has been quoted many times in the report, we have an organ called the National Council for Higher Education; and when you read its functions, they are exactly what the Member is recommending. 

I would like to say that we have put a lot of money in the budget to make sure that that council does exactly that. The council has been restrained by inadequate funding, because they need to hire specialists and consultants to go through all the university courses and restructure, weed-out, merge and so forth to make sure that what comes out as a university course is concrete and inclusive, in order to stop these variations at university level.

MR ISSHA OTTO: Madam Speaker, if the council is now taking this matter seriously, then I will be comfortable. This should even go to private universities. The private universities are even worse. So, the National Council for Higher Education should be more aggressive and serious. I know they are there, but they are not doing their work. That is why we have reached this level; because some of these courses have been around for more than five years. As the Member put it, we now have a course unit becoming a full course. 

Secondly, I want to talk about management of internally generated funds. The private students are suffering. They are under privileged. Just like those who get Government sponsorship, but they struggle very hard to get money to go to institutions of higher learning. But when they go to these schools, they only pay money – for instance, there are students who go for weekend and evening programmes. They pay all the monies, but what is given to them is not commensurate to the money they pay to these universities. Even our powerful universities like Makerere and Kyambogo, do not have where to sit; they do not access to the libraries. When you come in the evening, you cannot access the library, the laboratory or any other facilities meant for education –(Member timed out_)

6.21
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairperson of this committee for this report. I want to make a few remarks. I would like to start with your recommendation – what the committee recommends on the management of the internally generated funds. 

We know that internally generated funds are very important in enhancing the capacity of these universities in managing their own affairs, and to be able to sustain themselves. But in the recommendations that you make, you seem not to know that all revenue generated in these Government universities is public money and, therefore, the Auditor-General is mandated to audit and make reports on how this money is generated and how it is utilised. So, you were a bit silent there. 

I would have expected the committee to tell us – the impression is that these universities are generating lots of money in this programme and probably it is not marched with how it is being expended. You should have given us an idea on say, how much money is generated in a semester so that when we get to looking at the utilisation of these funds, we are able to know that this kind of money should have gone to such a sector. 

In the same report, you talk about training for research. It is a very important component. But how much of this money that is generated internally actually goes into the other areas? I found the report not informative in that area and would not help Members very much in knowing how much money is generated in universities. We are just on hearsay that money is being misused. Members have raised this issue about education being a public good that should be completely inclusive for all Ugandans, including those upcountry who do not have the privilege of passing very well and going in for the professional courses. 

What is pertaining now is that so many students are left out. I thought that the committee should have addressed that aspect and seen how to help these many students who should have otherwise been able to also enjoy university education.

Then the aspect of discipline and morality in these institutions: I thought this is something that the committee should not have ignored, whether in terms of saying or informing the House that they are actually clear guidelines on the moral and ethical behaviour in most of these institutions. The press is usually awash with reports of the kind of indiscipline that we see in these institutions, and for us to have holistic students who grow up and are able to be useful to this country, we need that background set at the institutions that they are in - in the hostels that they live in and in the classrooms and the lecture theatres. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, is the issue of congestion. The congestion in the lecture theatres and in the hostels is really appalling. I expected the committee to have highlighted this because I was simply saying that if Makerere University, being our national university and the biggest institution of higher learning here, could open up satellite campuses in other regions of the country, it would very significantly reduce on the congestion that we have in the hostels here in Kampala. It would be like taking services and reaching out to the people in Mbarara, in Soroti, in Gulu, and so forth.

I thought that would be the way to go instead of the kind of congestion that we see here in Kampala; because all these institutions are here and this is not doing us any good in as far as trying to make sure that services like university education are actually equitably distributed all over the country, and on a regional basis. For instance, there are students who would have come to Makerere University and could perhaps go for evening classes in Soroti or in Lira and –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just to add to what hon. Ekemu has said, sometime back we went to Cuba and we found that in every province in Cuba, they have a university there. If you are in Terego, you do not need to come to Busoga for education; you can do it in Terego. I think we can look at it in that aspect. 

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Point of clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To whom? 

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am a member of this committee and I am happy with the report, but there are certain clarifications and information I would like to give. Universities are the centres of innovation and discoveries and, therefore, they cannot be homogenous; they are always heterogeneous. A university is unique in itself. 

The second clarification I want to make is in regard to page 11, about elective positions in public universities, because the heading here is a little bit misleading – “the current elective system of top officials and top academicians….” These elective positions are administrative and managerial, and never academic. Academicians are appointed to their academic positions on the basis of their solid research and publications background. So, this should not give the impression that top academicians are elected. No, they are not.

Lastly, the other clarification I want to make is in connection with what the honourable minister said about the National Council for Higher Education streamlining programmes and courses in the university. This will only happen with the input of the National Planning Authority because by itself, the National Council of Higher Education will give academic permission to universities to continue with their programmes. That is the clarification and information I wanted to give. I thank you.

6.31
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I want to start with the matter that Prof. Anokbonggo raised on page 11. I know that the professor is a member of the committee. So, when I heard him disagree with the title, I realised that there is a problem with the report. He is a member of the committee but he says that this heading cannot pass. So, he is disagreeing with the report.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: I am not disagreeing with the report or the title. They may be correct, but it points at only one function of the university. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why we normally do not allow members of the committee to speak about the report. You should have said that in the committee and corrected it there. You have owned the report and you signed it. 

MR OKUPA: I think the right time in which you should have corrected the title or sub-heading was when this draft was made. Members, this is not the first time that the committee of Parliament is making a report on the White Paper. I remember in the Seventh Parliament a report was made to this House on the White Paper of Government regarding the constitutional amendments, but not on education. 

What I remember at the time is that when the committee made the report, it responded to each recommendation of the White Paper. What I had expected from the committee was their response to each of the recommendations of the White Paper. Either they agree with recommendation one or not and move on to recommendation two or recommendation three. That way, we would have moved systematically. 

But I find a problem with the way in which this report has been drafted. It is jumbled up. When I look at the recommendations, I do not know which one has been adopted and which one has been left out from the recommendations of the White Paper. So, we needed that to come out clearly. That is where I find the problem. 

Madam Speaker, there is a very useful recommendation - recommendation eight - which is key if we are to maintain high levels of standards in the university. It says: “All public university students’ enrolment should match with the facilities ….” The same way it has been singled out in Makerere and Kyambogo that the student numbers must match with the facilities. I think if we are to maintain the standards in these universities, that is key. 

When I was trying to look at the report, I did not exactly get a specific thing that addresses or upholds that, that should be a key recommendation if we are to maintain high levels of institutions.

Secondly, I want to find out from the committee about the criteria of setting exams in this university that you visited. Do private students do different exams from the government-sponsored students? Because we find that in Makerere University, and in most cases, exams for the privately sponsored students are made easier than those of the full-time students. 

I want to find out what happens in those other universities, because you visited a number of them. (Interjections) I was at Makerere University and I am giving you a live example. I was also the President of Makerere University Academic Society where I raised these matters. I was there for the Masters’ Degree programme as well. So, I need to find out whether this is what also happens in the other universities or not. I need that clarification from you. 

MRS SSENTONGO: Currently, I am a Masters’ Degree student at Makerere University, but the evening, morning and day students all sit the same exams at the same time, in the same venue with the same invigilators. I have never seen separate exams for the same course because of timing. Never, in Makerere –(Interruption) 

MS AKELLO FRANCA: This is information to confirm what hon. Okupa is saying. When I was in the university doing my Education degree, evening students would do a different paper. They would attend classes in the evening and for us day students – we had both private and government-sponsored students; so, private sponsored day students would sit the same exams with those of us under government sponsorship. The private evening students were doing different exams and yet at the end of the day, all of us would have the same degree. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a very serious allegation.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this was happening in the undergraduate programme and not in the Master’s programme because Master’s programmes did not have both day and evening programmes at that time. It could have improved now if that happened this year or last year, but previously – that is why I was asking for clarification to know what was happening now. Is it only in that faculty where you were or has it improved generally in the whole university? That is the clarification I was seeking. It was a big problem. I remember raising this matter with the Senate when I was a student leader at that time, but if it has improved, well and good; but that was happening.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, we are parents and we want quality education; we want value for money. We have many students both at undergraduate and postgraduate level doing various courses, be it professional or non-professional. But at the same time, we also do know that in these courses, there are those who are privately sponsored, but who, because they could not attain and get the favour of obtaining government sponsorship, are able to sit with those who benefit from government sponsorship; whether it is in medicine, law or any other subject. They are able to sit exams together. 

Then there is the other differentiation of those who are called to go for evening lectures in the same profession and at the end of the day, they are awarded the same degree. 

The issue of concern to me now, over which, Madam Speaker, I would like the hon. Minister of Education to assist us, is as to whether the issue, which has been raised by hon. Okupa, which to me is very serious – it is the heart and soul of education. The reason that we pay money is not that a person who is not on government sponsorship is a lesser student in terms of qualification; he may lose one or two points to get sponsorship, but at the end of the day, many of them end up doing better academically than those who are on government sponsorship. 

So, are these differentiations there? What is the fate of those who are in the university on private sponsorship? If it is at Master’s level – well, today, I hear people sponsor themselves; but those days you would be sponsored by an organisation or by a ministry to pursue a course. And then there would be others who would be unfortunate and do not get sponsored by their ministries or any other sponsorship agencies and they would have to pay tuition themselves. But they would attend the same lectures and sit the same exams and be taught by the same professors or lecturers. 

But now when we begin hearing about these differences, we are then beginning to question ourselves; does it mean that when you are not on government sponsorship and you are privately sponsored, that the education you get is of lesser quality? Those are the questions, Madam Speaker, that we want the minister to assure us because as a person from outside who has been able to sponsor others in the university, we get concerned. 

Madam Speaker, we need this assurance that whether you are on private sponsorship or whether you are sponsored by government – in any case, what fraction of students in the university are sponsored by government? It is a very small fraction. 

We really want the honourable minister to assure us and clarify on these matters because it is creating a lot of misgivings in our minds and a lot of concern.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have taken note of it. Let him conclude and then we shall take a decision, because it is extremely serious.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. We shall wait for the clarification from the Minister on that. 

The other issue is about the courses, which has also been raised here. You remember last time when the sessional committee met your committee; we did raise the matter when the National Council of Higher Education was there, as to why some courses were being scrapped midway when students were already in their first or second year? 

Recently, we also read in the papers that Makerere University was scrapping a number of courses. What is the fate of those students who were already doing these courses? And where is the problem in all this? Is it lack of planning? I think this is where National Council of Higher Education is key. I think there are administrative weaknesses in the National Council of Higher Education, because if it were a well planned thing, these courses would not have been there. I remember in the meeting that we had in the South Committee Room; we found that there was a problem with the National Council of Higher Education. I do not know how far you have gone in addressing those problems or weaknesses.

Lastly, this recommendation on page 9 about management of internally generated funds, in (ii) in your recommendations, you say: “A system audit of public universities of higher education should be periodically conducted by or with the approval of the Auditor-General.”

Madam Speaker, if the person who was writing this report had dared to look at the Audit Act that we passed in 2007; we did say that all public institutions must be audited by the Auditor-General. So, this should not have arisen because it is now in the law under the Audit Act that the Auditor-General must audit them. So, you do not need to say it must be with the approval of the Auditor-General, because we saw this problem when they were fighting with Makerere over money, and we said that now the Auditor-General must audit them. So, this is in the law; you do not have to recommend what is already there. Thank you.

6.43
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start by thanking the committee for the report and maybe use this chance to remind colleagues that some time ago, the Committee on Science and Technology laid a report on the Table, which contained a lot about science and technology in universities. So, maybe there will be a time when we will discuss and look at the recommendations, which may not be covered now. 

On page 7, the committee mentions something about the implications of high tuition fees. They say that it compromises the enrolment of some prospective private students. Although it has been handled here, but lightly, completion rates for privately sponsored students is very low and most of these students reach third year or second year after some of them have sold family land or property. But when they drop out, nothing comes out of this.

This brings me to my second point of awards. I think we should look at the awards system. Through my experience as an educational planner, I know there are many universities that award qualifications to those who have not completed a course. If, for example, you have been doing medicine and you drop out in your fourth year, you are given maybe a diploma of higher education or something – you are given a qualification commensurate to the modules you have covered. That way those people who have spent a lot of money are catered for so that they have something, other than dropping out at the last moment and nothing is awarded to them. 

So I think the committee should have looked at other universities that practice that one, so that people end up with something in their hands for better jobs. This is because someone who has done Engineering and drops out in third year definitely has something. He knows more than the person who completed just A’ Level. So, that is a bit unfair.

Then on page 11, the committee talks about research. The African ministers of science and technology, and even our presidents, agreed that 1 percent of the GDP should be spent on research and development, and the committee should not be shy about making a strong recommendation about funding research and development. Otherwise, we shall be wasting time and we shall have academic tourists in universities come out with no research and no new knowledge added. It is not fair. 

On page 15, something is mentioned about students’ loans. If our people took trouble to research on students’ loans they should know that you might require 1.1 million as administrative costs to recover 1 million. So, there are so many complications in students’ loans other than -(Interjections)- I am talking about facts. These are researched facts only that someone says, “From where?” It is unfair I have not brought out the actual sources, but you can cross-check; it is a fact. That is why the loan system is not easy to implement. We should decide either to assist those people using Government funds so that we do not give the loan, because it is very difficult to recover. There are no jobs; there is nothing. 

And then we need to follow up students for these university loans. We should know that there are so many secondary schools that have a very high intake to the universities. But do those students complete? I am sure many of them do not. That is the only way we can check the quality of students who are going in.

We also need points of excellence. Instead of generalising these things, we should know that Busitema University is, for example, a centre of excellence for research on biological sciences. We should know that at least so that we do not spread so thin. We might spread so thin and we end up not achieving a lot.

Then, for sure, we shall ask the committee to avail us some of that information they got from those various universities. As I mentioned, for example - they said I should come up with examples - in Derby University in the UK; first of all, the UK has an equivalent of the National Council for Higher Education that we have in Uganda. They have higher and further education - is it a council - which looks at the undergraduate modular system to agree on what award to give a person who has completed so many years - let us say in accounting - but has not completed the course; or so many years in medicine, but he has not completed the course.

Then the studies I was talking about that have been worked on as far as completion rates are concerned; some have been done in the USA, and some have been done in France, but only that I do not have a particular reference here. Next time we have a discussion I will share it with the colleagues. 

But I think the Minister of Education should look at higher education with a particular interest given that it is the pull. It is the reason. Most people are now aiming at higher education for the sake of it and not looking at higher education for productivity; higher education for being good citizens; and so forth -(Member timed out_)

6.51
MR PIUS MUJUZI (NRM, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Despite the fact that I appreciate and commend the work done by the committee, I have two areas of reservation.  

The first one is about the loan scheme. I do not agree with that scheme. I do not agree with the government loaning its citizens to acquire education. First of all -(Interjections)- I am sorry, but that is what I believe in. 

First of all, it is not practical to recover those loans; there are no jobs. People are going to be given money and recovery is going to be impossible. And I want this to be on record. There is no way Government is going to recover money from students who have finished university and have no jobs. So, it is easier said than done or put into practice.

I would rather propose that since Government has money - because if you are loaning out money you have money - let Government give that money to students through other means like subsidies, paying school fees for more students at university or sponsoring science students, instead of giving out loans to students. I do not see it as practical.  

Two, who is going to be responsible for paying back the loans? Is it the parent or the student; and after how long, because the duration also matters? But sincerely, I do not see it as practical and I do not see it working. You all know the history of this country as far as political loans are concerned. There was Entandikwa in 1987/88; it never worked. Today, there is NAADS; these people are not returning the funds. So, how do we expect students to return these monies even when they are not working?

My second area of reservation is about the duration of courses at university. Sincerely, I think if we are to reduce the cost of education at the university, some of these courses should have a shorter duration unless it is universally acceptable that degree courses must take three years. 

I am a graduate of Political Science and English Literature and I took three years to complete that course. But I sincerely believe I could have done that course in two years -(Interjections)- yes, that is what I believe. I used to have seven lessons a week at Makerere University -(Interjections)- yes, this is true. So there was a lot of my time that was wasted when I was at university. So, I think the committee could look into that area and see if duration of courses cold be reduced to reduce the cost of these courses at university level. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, there are a few issues. There was a point raised that actually this report was not responding to the Government White Paper. I do not know what the - because I think that the idea even of the Business Committee giving it priority was to help the Government by addressing all those points raised in the White Paper. That is why it came as a priority. So, you have not actually responded to the White Paper. You have done other things which are important, but you have not given us what we sent you to do. I do not know what - 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I want to agree with you. I think it would do good for this Parliament and the country if the committee went back and with all the information that they collected, make recommendations based on the earlier recommendations, one by one; that on the White Paper, recommendation one was this, and this is what we found out. I think that is the best way. 

You go and look at the recommendations in the White Paper and you either agree or disagree based on what you got systematically, such that we help to simplify - but then now, the way you have presented, it is mixed up. You are giving the Minister another job to go and scrutinise; but if you had moved systematically, it would have simplified the work for Government and the ministry. If you are comfortable with that, I think as the Speaker has said, you could go back, we give you two days, you re-draw and come up with these recommendations in that order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You respond item by item to the White Paper, because that is why we actually gave it a priority - because we wanted it done before the Budget.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, on top of that, there are also certain recommendations which they have not responded to. There are some they have responded to and others they have not, like the question of the Open University and the question of facilities and so forth. If actually they had considered them one by one, you would have been able to respond to all the issues.

There are issues you have left out and there are issues, which are raised. If you look at No.7 (vii), you have responded to different pages. So you find it is not coherent. If you can say, on recommendation (vi), Makerere University undergoes an overhaul in administrative structure, style, financial administration and management; then all the issues under that one you respond to them chronologically.

You then go to examine those experiences, which you got from abroad and say, “In respect to this particular matter, in these universities we found these were the experiences; this is how they are managing it and in our considered view, the conclusion, therefore, is that our recommendation would augur well with this”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We would really be assisted if - and also maybe I need to remind committees that you do not choose what you write. You know you have terms of reference. Yesterday we had to send away a report of the ICT committee. It was one sentence. There is a structure for the reports and this White Paper is important. You are supposed to move systematically - point No.1, we say this; point No.2, we agree; and point No.5 we do not agree - so that we can assist the Government on the way forward. (Mr Anokbonggo rose_) you are part of the committee. You should have given that information -(Laughter) So, hon. Minister, you have noted those important issues which have been discussed, you will respond to them later, but we want this White Paper to be addressed then you can pick all of them and respond.

6.59
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Brian Asiimwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance, and I thank all Members for your contributions. The only worry I have is the time we are left with to go through this report again, and to present it to this House before the Budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall give you priority still. That is why we are still sitting here. I could have done other things, but we had agreed that this White Paper must come before the Budget.

DR ASIIMWE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, thank you for the work. The House is adjourned to 10 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 June 2010, at 10.00 a.m.) 
