




Wednesday, 24 June 2020


Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I just have two small issues of communication. One is to congratulate our brothers and neighbours in the Republic of Kenya for ascending to the seat of the non-permanent members of the United Nations Security Council to represent Africa. Kenya is going to represent us for the next two years, starting January 2021. We look forward to working with them and congratulations. 

Secondly, honourable members, we have a very good team at the East Africa Legislative Assembly. As I speak, hon. Rose Okullo and hon. Mary Mugyenyi have both been elected commissioners representing Uganda at the East Africa Legislative Assembly. On behalf of Parliament and my own behalf, I wish them a fruitful and effective tenure. There were just two small matters of national concern. 

2.40
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national concern. In Kibale District, the newly constructed road of Mubende–Kakumiro–Kibaale–Kagadi is a death trap. 

Last week, on Wednesday, we lost a dear member of the community, Aliguma Steven - May his soul rest in peace - due to a fatal accident that happened in Kibale in a junction in Kibale Trading Centre. 

Madam Speaker, this section of the road originally had a roundabout but it was not included in the new design of the tarmac. There is a sharp corner more or less a V-shape. At this very junction, at the corner, another road joins from the district headquarters making a Y-shape. It is very difficult for drivers and cyclists to negotiate it. 

To make matters worse, the road joining from the district headquarters has very poor visibility because of the terrain. The road was cut and there are hanging clips; so, it is very difficult for a driver to see the other road users, when joining the road from the district headquarters. The centre is a busy one because it has the road that connects to DRC via Kagadi; so it is a busy road.

Our prayers are: 
    1. That the Minister of Works and Transport, through UNRA, revisits the design of this road with a view of reintroducing a roundabout; and
    2. Since the road is about to be completed, we pray that the minister comes back to this House and informs us of the steps they are taking to rectify this situation. 

Otherwise, if it is not attended to, it will be a big problem and it is going to claim many more lives of Ugandans, especially visitors. If it can claim the lives of those within the area, then, it is going to be worse for visitors. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Basemera. The Minister of Works and Transport is instructed to go and visit the scene, establish the complaint made by hon. Basemera and other road users about the designs, which are a danger to the population, and give us an update by the end of next week on Thursday.

2.43
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national urgency concerning the lockdown of Gulu due to COVID-19. Gulu residents are under anxiety, as I talk, because on Tuesday when the President was addressing the nation, he referred to Gulu as being a high risk district yet it is not at the border, perhaps due to five COVID-19 cases that were reported in the community. Most of these community members were traced and it was established that their children visited them from Elegu. 

Madam Speaker, Gulu is the hub of the Northern Region, where we have vehicles crossing over. Above all, it is not a border district and so, some of the cases in Gulu come from Kitgum Lamwo, Amuru and Adjumani. The population is wondering how Gulu can be locked down yet the districts like Lamwo and Kitgum that are feeding into the regional referral hospital are left open. 

We also have vehicles or buses going to Kitgum going through Gulu to Adjumani and other regions, including trucks going to South Sudan. However, Gulu has been locked down. This morning, people had boarded buses to come to Kampala but they have been locked; they stopped them from coming to Kampala. 

We also have so many traders that left for Kampala yesterday but have been stopped somewhere; they cannot go back to Gulu. The restrictions they have given are that no private vehicle, no public vehicle and not even a motorcycle should leave Gulu. I am a resident of Gulu and there are so many farmers in Nwoya and other places that reside in Gulu. I really – (Interruption) 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I am informing not only my colleague but the whole country, that the lockdown in Gulu is the same lockdown in districts like Busia. It is as if we are not part of this country because of the life we are going through. The honourable member’s lamentations are true. People in Busia are in a terrible situation. There is no movement to anywhere, not even to referral hospitals. If it is the same situation in Gulu, then they need to be helped. 

Therefore, I suggest that public transport in locked districts is given affirmative action because we have our patients that want to move. We have projects that are being run by Government but such projects have stalled because of the lockdown. The fact is that we are dying because of lack of food. We pray that God does not lock us down totally like they have locked us down.

I would like to inform you that your people are going through the same situation with my people and so, we need food urgently because we are in the lockdown. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS ADONG: Thank you, colleague. Madam Speaker, to make matters worse, Gulu hosts a referral hospital. We have 65 cases in that hospital but all those are people from outside the district plus a few from the region.

I pray that the minister comes up with some clarification otherwise, the anxiety is too much and people do not know what to do. In addition, the district taskforce of Gulu should be backed up and facilitated because the Shs 165 million is over and so, they cannot do anything.

They should also reconsider and put strict measures in place to follow up these cases. We had Ebola and no one was quarantined until Ebola ended. Why lockdown people and yet the contacts of people are known? If the contacts of the people were unknown, then you would close. 

Furthermore, Gulu was not considered for masks distribution. They only distributed them to the border districts but our people have not got masks. We also do not have food. The Government should urgently distribute food and masks to the people of Gulu and put up measures to make sure that if people are locked down, they can cope. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not know who can answer about the total lockdown of Gulu. Are there special measures different from the other parts of the country? How are we going to manage a total lockdown in parts of the country? Does anyone have an answer? Chief Whip -

2.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I suggest that the Minister of Health comes here to give further clarification about what the President declared in his most recent address. I will communicate to her so that she clarifies on these matters. 

People move from Masaka to Kampala; there are districts, which are transit districts and therefore, people need clarification on how to handle the situation. The minister should come and inform us. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the Minister of Health should come to this House and update us. First of all, what are the operating procedures in the areas of total lockdown? What are the special operating procedures in the border areas and how does life continue during that lockdown? It is urgent and very necessary. The minister should come and update us, I think on Tuesday next week. 

2.50
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to a facility within the city; Namatala Health Centre IV, which was even visited by a group of Members from here. 

Madam Speaker, this is a facility that began as a health centre II but is now at health centre IV level. The population of Namatala is about 30,000 people. The population is too high and yet in many cases, one cannot go to a referral hospital unless you began from a lower level facility. 

In a month, this health facility delivers about 120 mothers and many of them undergo an operation. However, this theatre has no oratory bed, no anesthetic machine, no light and lacks an incinerator leading to poor waste disposal. 

This facility has no latrine and no bath shelters. It has no kitchen for the patients and their attendants. Unfortunately, it also lacks a maternity ward. What is there is an improvised maternity ward. Therefore, given the fact that many mothers are delivering from there, it is urgent that we get a maternity ward and other facilities so that this facility can save many people, especially the mothers. 

Furthermore, blood transfusion equipment should be given to this facility, given the fact that it is a health centre IV. This would be of great help to the people of Mbale City and neighbouring places like Kamonkoli and others that surround Namatala. 

Madam Speaker, there is no staff house and yet these people stay long hours at work. They told us that many times they are beaten while going back home or coming to report for work because they move at awkward hours. They have to keep on calling security to save them during late hours. Therefore, I request that this matter is regarded as urgent and staff houses are constructed for the people of Namatala Health Centre IV so that lives are saved by these critical staff. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Health is required to go and examine the situation in Namatala Health Centre IV in view of the fact that Mbale has been upgraded to a city and this could be one of the major health facilities for use. They should go and examine and give us an update by the end of next week.

2.53
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to raise a matter of national concern concerning the border of Mutukula in Kyotera District. Currently, the truck drivers have refused to be tested for COVID-19. They say they are embarrassed and the tests take a lot of time. Since yesterday, all truck drivers have parked in the no man’s land at Mutukula border. They have refused to enter Uganda and in fact, they have refused Ugandan trucks from passing through Mutukula. 

The other issue concerns the traders - because of the total lockdown in Rakai and Kyotera Districts, traders have resorted to going to Tanzania to rent houses and work from there. They say there is no business here because of the total lockdown. They have loans and have not been assisted at the border so they have crossed over to do business in Tanzania. I think Government must intervene to assist our people because they need essential things from the border. 

The Kyotera quarantine centre has been closed because it is not facilitated. As a result, contacts are left to stay in their homes. I think we are going to be finished. I would like to inform the country that discrimination has also started. You remember HIV/AIDS started in Kasensero in Kyotera District. Now people have started discriminating against the people from Kyotera. However, we are not sick. There are over 10 people who have recovered from COVID-19 and returned to the community in Kasensero. 

I think the Government must do something for us; the people from the border districts, especially those from Rakai and Kyotera. Government should see how to help our people who have loans; the boda boda riders, salon operators, DJs, etc. People used to move to the daily markets from Monday to Friday but they have now used up all their capital because they no longer work. What should we do because we are under total lockdown? People are working in Masaka but we are stuck in Rakai and Kyotera. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I am glad a senior member of the national task force is here; hon. minister Karooro. I think we need to pay special attention to the border, especially at Mutukula. We would like to resolve the standoff relating to the truck drivers and also examine the movement of people going to trade in Tanzania while living in Uganda, probably. And then of course Government intervention to support them with the necessities and to address the discrimination. The Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance may have to go and encourage people not to discriminate against colleagues. Thank you. 

I will amend the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Water and Environment to make a statement later. However, let us go to item 3.

BILLS
FIRST READING
THE NATIONAL CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT CENTRE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg that the National Curriculum Development Centre (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by both Members of the Cabinet and the Back Benchers. Does it have a certificate?

MR MUYINGO: Yes, Madam Speaker. The current National Curriculum Development Centre Act has been in force since April 1973. Since then, many legal instructional and global changes have occurred in the country leading to gaps in this law.

THE SPEAKER: Minister that will be the second reading. You don’t have to speak to it. I will send it to the committee together with the certificate. Just lay it.

MR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Education and Sports for perusal and report back. Thank you very much. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here? No.

VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 2030 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister for General Duties?

3.00
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay on the Table the Voluntary National Review Report on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank the Minister for General Duties and Government, for presenting the voluntary national review report to Parliament before they go to report to the United Nations. This is the first time it has happened. I am reallyhappy that the Government is now complying. 

It will be sent to the committee on Presidential Affairs for perusal. Their comments will be sent to the United Nations together with the Report, which the minister is taking there. 

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSION SCHEME BI-ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE PERIOD ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Remigio Achia here? He is not here.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 183 AND 184 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.01
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to designate the following Members and leaders to the different committees in accordance with Rule 15(10) (c) and Rule 157 of our Rules of Procedure. I will begin with the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries:
Hon. Janet Okori-Moe - Chairperson
Hon. Lawrence Akugizibwe – Vice chairperson 
Hon. Terrence Achia 
Hon. Jacqueline Aol 
Hon. Jalia Bintu 
Hon. Carolyn Birungi 
Hon. Everlyn Chemutai 
Hon. Cosmas Elotu 
Hon. Joseph Kakooza 
Hon. Aboud Kitatta 
Hon. Peace Kusasira 
Hon. Catherine Lamwaka 
Hon. Hillary Lokwang 
Hon. Kezekia Mbogo 
Hon. Richard Othieno Okoth 
Hon. Tarsis Rwaburindore Bishanga  
Hon. Aisha Sekindi 
Hon. Vincent Woboya.

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Please proceed.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs: 
Hon. Doreen Amule - Chairperson
Hon. Moses Nagomu - Vice-Chairperson 
Hon. Judith Babirye 
Hon. Herbert Kabafunzaki 
Hon. Margaret Lamwaka 
Hon. Peter Abrahams Lokii
Hon. Lowila C.D Oketayot
Hon. Margaret Mbeiza 
Hon. Kahima Mugambe
Hon. Daniel Muheirwe 
Hon. Muyanja Mbabaali 
Hon. Fred Mwesigye 
Hon. Richard Oseku 
Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo 
Hon. Christine Tubo 
Hon. Florence Nambozo 

I beg to designate, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on East African Community Affairs.
Hon. George Abbot Ouma - Chairperson 
Hon. Agnes Ameede - Vice-Chairperson 
Hon. Gordon Bafaki 
Hon. Christopher Kalemba 
Hon. Peter Mugema 
Hon. Paul Musoke 
Hon. Idah Nabayiga 
Hon. Sofia Nalule Juuko 
Hon. Catherine Ndamira 
Hon. James Niringiyimana 
Hon. Apollo Yeri Ofwono 
I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on Education and Sports
Hon. Jacob Richard Opolot - Chairperson 
Hon. John Twesigye Ntamuhiira – Vice-Chairperson
Hon. Julius Acon 
Hon. Goretti Ajilo Maria 
Hon. Margaret Diri Baba 
Hon. Egunyu Nantume 
Hon. Isaac Etuuka Joakino
Hon. Sheila Kabeija Mwine
Hon. Stephen Kisa 
Hon. Molly Lanyero 
Hon. Geoffrey Macho 
Hon. Stephen Mayende Dede
Hon. Robert Musoke
Hon. Orot Ismael
Hon. Nathan Twesigye Itungo.

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
Hon. Henry Musasizi– Chairperson
Hon. Jane Avur Pacuto Vice-chairperson
Hon. David Abala 
Hon. Remigio Achia 
Hon. Elly Asiku 
Hon. Lawrence Bategeke 
Hon. Syda Bbumba 
Hon. Charles Illukor 
Hon. Hatwib Katoto 
Hon. John Baptist Lokii
Hon. Amos Lugoloobi 
Hon. Robert Migadde 
Hon. Isaac Mulindwa Ssozi
Hon. Jack Odur 
Hon. Patrick Opolot 
Hon. Genensio Tumuramye 
Hon. Walyomu Muwanika

I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, Committee on Foreign Affairs
Hon. Hood Katuramu - Chairperson 
Hon. Violet Akurut Adome Vice-chairperson
Hon. Bildad Adome 
Hon. Angella Fred 
Hon. Rose Ayaka 
Hon. Moses Balyeku 
Hon. Sam Byibesho 
Hon. Sulaiman Hashim 
Hon. Rosette Kajungu
Hon. Loy Katali 
Hon. Apollo Masika
Hon. Connie Nakayenze 
Hon. John Nambeshe
Hon. Bonny Okello
I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development:
Hon. Alex Ndeezi – Chairperson  
Hon. Agnes Kunihira – Vice chairperson.  
Hon. Rwakajara Arinaitwe 
Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi 
Hon. John Kamara
Hon. Grace Kesande
Hon. Henry Kibalya
Hon. Kenneth Lubogo 
Hon. Mariam Naigaga 
Hon. Patrick Okabe
Hon. Mourine Osoru 
Hon. Sylvia Rwabwogo 
The Chairperson is Alex Ndeezi and hon. Agnes Kunihira will deputise him. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on Health:
Hon. Michael Bukenya
Hon. Spellanza Baguma
Hon. Gordon Arinda
Hon. Stella Atyang
Hon. Jastine Ayebazibwe 
Hon. Michael Ayepa
Hon. Josephine Bebona
Hon. Pauline Kemirembe
Hon. Sam Lyomoki 
Hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa 
Hon. Robina Mukisa 
Hon. Sylivia Nayebale 
Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari 
Hon. Joel Ssebikaali
Hon. Edward Ssembatya 
Hon. Juliet Kyinyamatama
Hon. Paula Turyahikayo 
Hon. Pius Wakabi
Hon. Michael Bukenya will be the chairperson and hon. Spellanza Babuma will deputise him. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on ICT
Hon. Paul Amoru
Hon. Lillian Nakate 
Hon. Cuthbert Abigaba
Hon. Christine Achen 
Hon. James Acidri
Hon. Tonny Ayo
Hon. Moses Kahima 
Hon. Eric Musana 
Hon. Sarah Nakawunde 
Hon. Patrick Oshabe
Hon. Oscar Omony
Hon. Alex Ruhunda
Hon. Taban Amin
Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire 
Hon. Paul Amoru is the chairperson and hon. Lillian Nakate is the vice-chairperson. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs:
Hon. Jacob Oboth-Oboth
Hon. Sam Bitangaro 
Hon. Abbas Agaba
Hon. Prossy Akampulira 
Hon. Rose Akello
Hon. Monicah Amoding  
Hon. Hellen Asamo 
Hon. Brenda Asinde 
Hon. Dorothy Azairwe 
Hon. Alex Byarugaba
Hon. Veronica Isala
Hon. Aston Kajara
Hon. Jovah Kamateeka
Hon. Gaster Mugoya 
Hon. Stella Namoe Nyomera 
Hon. Clemet Ongalo-Obote 
Hon. Robina Rwakoojo 
Hon. Solomon Silwany
Hon. Jocob Oboth-Oboth is the chairperson and hon. Sam Bitangaro is the vice-chairperson. I beg to designate.
THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on Natural Resources
Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka 
Hon. Andrew Kaluya
Hon. Fredrick Angura
Hon. Sarah Kityo
Hon. Norah Bigirwa
Hon. John Ikojo
Hon. Ruth Katushabe 
Hon. Anifa Kawooya 
Hon. Noeline Basemera 
Hon. Margaret Komuhangi 
Hon. Samson Lokeris 
Hon. Charles Ngabirano 
Hon. Nsaba Buturo 
Hon. Anthony Okello
Hon. Thomas Tayebwa
Hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu
Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma

Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka is the chairperson and hon. Andrew Kaluya is the vice-chairperson. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on Physical Infrastructure:
Hon. Robert Ssekitoleko
Hon. George Kumama
Hon. Paul Asaba
Hon. James Baba
Hon. Alex Burundo 
Hon. Abraham Byandala
Hon. Guma Gumisiriza 
Hon. Caroline Kamusiime
Hon. Pentagon Kamusiime
Hon. Robert Kasolo 
Hon. Joseph Kasozi
Hon. Albert Lokoru
Hon. Amos Mandera
Hon. Janepher Mbabazi
Hon. Margaret Muhanga
Hon. Rose Mutonyi
Hon. Cissy Namujju 
Hon. Boaz Ninsiima
Hon. Ibanda Rwemulikya
Hon. James Waluswaka
Hon. Rehema Watongola

Hon. Robert Ssekitoleko is the chairperson and hon. George Kumama is the vice-chairperson. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on Presidential Affairs:
Hon. Jesca Ababiku 
Hon. Esther Anyakun
Hon. Tom Alero
Hon. Jacquiline Amongin 
Hon. Rukiya Chekamondo 
Hon. Rose Kabagyenyi 
Hon. Pamela Kamugo
Hon. Stephen Kangwagye
Hon. Patrick Kasumba 
Hon. Naome Kibaaju 
Hon. Henry Makumbi
Hon. Milly Mugeni 
Hon. Noah Mutebi
Hon. Sarah Najjuma 
Hon. Simeo Nsubuga 
Hon. Ashraf Olega
Hon. John Seguya
Hon. Joseph Ssekabiito 
Hon. Rosemary Tumusiime 
Hon. Michael Tusiime 

Hon. Jesca Ababiku is the chairperson and hon. Esther Anyakun is the vice-chairperson. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on Public Service and Local Government:
Hon. Godfrey Onzima 
Hon. Elizabeth Karungi
Hon. Silvia Akello
Hon. Susan Amero
Hon. Betty Awor
Hon. Harriet Businge 
Hon. Reuben Chelimo 
Hon. Richard Gafabusa
Hon. Jovrine Kaliisa 
Hon. Johnson Ssenyonga 
Hon. Anthony Ssemuli 
Hon. Agnes Taaka

Hon. Godfrey Onzima is the chairperson and hon. Elizabeth Karungi is the vice-chairperson. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on Science, Innovation and Technology:
Hon. Fred Bwino
Hon. David Mutebi
Hon. Margret Aleper 
Hon. Lawrence Biyika
Hon. Angel Dulu
Hon. Helen Kahunde 
Hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa 
Hon. Zerubabel Nyiira
Hon. Denis Sabiiti
Hon. Peter Sematimba 

The chairperson is hon. Fred Bwino while the vice-chairperson is hon. David Mutebi. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry
Hon. Robert Kasule
Hon. Lawrence Mangusho
Hon. Faith Alupo 
Hon. Judith Alyek
Hon. Moses Angundru
Hon. Geofrey Dhamuzungu 
Hon. Tophace Kaahwa
Hon. Emmanuel Ssengo
Hon. Justine Khainza
Hon. Joseph Koluo 
Hon. Nelson Lufafa
Hon. Mpaka Mwine
Hon. Grace Namukhula 
Hon. Ali Ogama 
Hon. Felix Okot Ogong
Hon. Michael Timuzigu 

The chairperson is hon. Robert Kasule and the vice-chairperson is hon. Lawrence Mangusho. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Honourable members, as you recall, yesterday the Opposition, the Independents and the UPDF designated their Members. The NRM has designated their Members today. I now put the question that all those Members who have been designated be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, there was a Member who was in Cabinet but ceased being in Cabinet but I did not designate him to any standing committee. I have just designated those to serve on the sectoral committee.

I beg for your permission that I designate two members to standing committees.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed! They will have to belong to a committee.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much. I beg to designate hon. Bakkabulindi Charles, Workers representative, to serve on the Committee of Budget. I beg to designate.

The second member is hon. John Baptist Nambeshe, Manjiya County, who was on the Appointments Committee but requested to move to the Committee on Budget. Madam Speaker, I beg to designate him there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those two members be designated to the standing committees, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON FAILURE BY GOVERNMENT TO PAY UGANDAN TRADERS IN SOUTH SUDAN AS RESOLVED BY PARLIAMENT AND MONEY ACCORDINGLY APPROPRIATED IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE SPEAKER: Is he still not here? Let us have the Minister of Water and Environment. Minister of State for Environment.

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With your permission, allow me to speak without a mask. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to lower it? 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I am here to make a response to the issue raised by hon. Ida Nantaba, the Woman MP Kayunga District, on the alienation and destruction of Kiula Central Forest Reserve in Kayunga District. The matter was raised last week, on 17 June 2020 and you directed me to visit Kayunga District and report to the House. I would like to, therefore, report as follows.

First, I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this issue that enabled me to make a visit to the said forest. While there, I got to realiSe that the issue we are discussing is in court and so, as I report, I will not divulge too many details. 

The Kiula Central Forest Reserve covers an area of 2,147 hectares and is situated in Bbaale County, Kayunga District. This is one of the forests, which Government had earmarked for reforestation by the private sector. Madam Speaker, allow me to remove this mask.

THE SPEAKER: You can lower it if you are having difficulties?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2019, the National Forestry Authority (NFA) picked information that some certificates of titles had been created in respect to land for this forest reserve, with the intention to alienate parts or the whole of it. 

Indeed, a one Badru Ssemugga took tractors to parts of the forest in April 2019 and started clearing it for sugarcane growing. NFA responded by deploying Environmental Police to stop this activity. Further, NFA filed a suit in the High Court of Mukono against the said Badru Ssemugga and two other defendants, challenging their occupation and claims on land for Kiula Central Forest Reserve and so, they sought orders and declarations as follows:
    1. That the certificate of title to the land comprised in the Freehold Register Volume MKO 1573 Folio 19, Block Bugerere 14, Plot 9 at Kirasa, Galiraya, Kayunga District, held by the defendant over the suit land was procured illegally.
    2. That the 1st defendant’s stay, occupation, utilisation and all activities in Kiula Central Forest Reserve, herein called the suit land, by himself, his agents, successors in title or all those claiming under or from him is illegal and amounts to trespass.
    3. That an order for cancellation of the said certificate of title held by the 1st Defendant on the suit land be granted.
    4. That an order of restoration against the 1st Defendant for the suit land forming part of Kiula Central Forest Reserve, which had been damaged and/or degraded by his activities, be granted.
    5. That an order of eviction was issued against the 1st Defendant, his agents, servants, employees, assignees, successors in title or any person, acting on his behalf from the suit land forming part of Kiula Central Forest Reserve; and 
    6. That permanent injunction be issued, restraining the 1st Defendant, his agents, servants, employees, assignees and successors in title or any person acting on his behalf, from entering, remaining, utilising, settling, alienating, dealing or in any way interfering with the suit land, amongst others.

Parallel to the civil suit in the High Court of Uganda held at Mukono, NFA opened a criminal case vide CRB 366/2019 at Kayunga Police Station, formerly CRR 16/2019, Galiraya Police Post, which is still pending investigations and opening the boundaries of Kiula Central Forest Reserve.

On 6 November 2019, Badru Ssemugga, while the case was pending hearing, filed applications for interim and temporary injunctions against NFA. Madam Speaker, NFA objected to the grant of the order but the registrar, on 29 November 2019, proceeded to issue an injunction against NFA, allowing the defendants to occupy part of Kiula Central Forest Reserve. 

On 5 February 2020, the Judge lifted the injunction and maintained the status quo of Kiula Central Forest Reserve, pending the locus visit on the land.

Madam Speaker, the High Court Registrar visited the locus in May 2020 and presented a report to the Judge, indicating that there were no trees on the land to protect and that Badru Ssemugga is in occupation. The judge ordered that Ssemugga continues utilising the land, that the parties expedite the scientific boundary survey of the land and that there be a hearing of the case to finally determine the issue of land ownership.

Madam Speaker, NFA has also learnt that the certificate of title has been transferred to a company known as Modern Agric /Infra Limited, which it has added as a party to the suit of Ssemugga Badru. 

The said Modern Agric Infra Limited further acquired four other land titles in Kiula Central Forest Reserve as follows:
    1. Freehold Register Volume MKO790 Folio 22 Block (Road) Bugerere 153, Plot 31 at Kirasa, Bbale, Kayunga District.
    2. Freehold Register Volume MKO1316 Folio 1 Block (Road) Bugerere 153, Plot 32 at Kirasa, Galiraya, Bbale, Kayunga District.
    3. Freehold Register Volume 1324 Folio 12 Bugerere Block 153, Plot 2 at Nakabale, Nakasonkwe, Kayunga District.
    4. Freehold Register Volume 1258 Folio 4 Bugerere Block 153, Plot 1 at Nakabale, Kasonkwe, Kayunga District.

Madam Speaker, Modern Agric Infra Limited sued NFA for trespass on the above mentioned land seeking for temporary injunction, damages and costs of the suit. The company also obtained a court injunction against NFA restraining NFA and its agents against interfering with the usage of the above mentioned land pending the hearing of the main suit. 

My ministry and NFA are engaging the Resident Judge of Mukono to expedite the scientific boundary opening of the land and hearing of the case to finally determine the issues of land ownership.

Madam Speaker, I made a visit last Monday to the place with hon. Nantaba, the Resident District Commissioner of Kayunga and the Police Commander of Kayunga and the following was observed: 

The Central Forest Reserve is under conversion to agriculture by Modern Agric Infra Limited. We were able to find over 20 tractors of different kinds deployed in the forest reserve doing bush clearing and ploughing at the same time. The ploughed area is being planted with sugarcane and maize. The speed at which the land is being cleared is worrying because by the time the court resolves on ownership, the entire forest will be under sugarcane growing.

Secondly, I also noted that the neighbouring communities are agitated and the situation is very tense. As we were moving there, the residents were all gathering in different corners coming towards where we were. The community feels betrayed that Government land has been taken by individuals under dubious circumstances. 

Madam Speaker, I have videos showing extra findings and at an appropriate time, in future, my colleagues can watch what is on the ground.

Madam Speaker, most forests in the Central Region were gazetted by the Government as catchment forests to protect water bodies from siltation. The current land use change in most parts of the region and country has led to siltation of water bodies and is one of the causes of the current rising water levels and flooding in the country. It is therefore my humble request that:
    1. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should stop issuing titles in gazetted forest reserves, wetlands, river banks, lake shores and lakes. 
    2. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should investigate the sources and creation of the five land titles issued in Kiula Central Forest Reserve. 
    3. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should be part of the joint scientific boundary opening to determine ownership of this land. 
    4. In the medium term, Parliament should appropriate adequate funds to a tune of Shs 20 billion per year for five years so that we are able to re-open and demarcate all boundaries of all protected areas, including wetlands in this country. We have 430 forests and wetlands that we are intending to demarcate and restore. As a ministry, we believe this will go a long way to protect our environment. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I thank the honourable colleague for raising this pertinent issue and for being very passionate about protecting this land. 

As I wind up, it should be noted by my colleagues that this is part of the land that Government wanted for private partners to plant trees and earn a living from. It is part of our effort for people to come out of poverty but there are individuals who are not only greedy but so aggressive that they want to have it all for themselves. 

I thank you, once more, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: I would like to thank the honourable minister. I would also like to thank hon. Nantaba for raising this issue. However, after listening to the minister, I am convinced that under rule 72(3)(c), this is an active matter in the court where proceedings are going on. There has even been an injunction. Therefore, in the circumstances, we are not able to discuss it.

I would like to, however, task the Committee on Budget and the Committee on Natural Resources to follow up on the issue of funding as requested by the minister and also to follow up on the prayers of the minister to ensure that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development stops issuing title deeds in gazetted forests. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should investigate the source and creation of the five titles and it should be part of a joint scientific boundary opening to determine ownership of the land.

I hope that you will carry out more supervision. This is happening because no one is interested. The state is asleep! Honourable minister would like to say something on rule 72 (3) (c); it is an active civil matter. Honourable members Kiula forest matter is subjudice and in court.

3.37
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Sorry, Madam Speaker. The prayers of the minister are that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should investigate the circumstances under which the five land titles were issued.

What we need is to give the time frame such that they present to us a report. I do not know whether that is subjudice. Therefore, we should give them a time frame and report to Parliament the findings for the circumstances under which the five land titles were issued. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: (a) (b) and (c) are urgent. Are the Ministers for Lands, Housing and Urban Development here? They are not here. The Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development is urged to come and give us an interim report on (a) (b) and (c) by Thursday next week on how far she will have gone.

3.38
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I thank you for first of all approving and allowing my request that I made to this Parliament; requesting for the intervention of Parliament in this matter.

Madam Speaker, I am aware that the matter is in court. However, the way court has handled this matter should not be abandoned or neglected. I thank, the minister for coming to Kayunga-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you want us to make a ruling on how the court proceeded? No.

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, I am not requesting you to make a ruling because the matter is still in court and we are waiting for judgement. However, what is bringing all these issues is that the judge assigned the registrar of Mukono High Court to visit the locus and ascertain the -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nantaba, Parliament will not direct the judge from here. Please.

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, can you allow me please-

THE SPEAKER: I have read the ruling of the judge and I am aware of what I am talking about. We cannot direct the judge from here.

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, the tractors and graders on the ground that are putting down a forest reserve- the judge did not order these people to go and reopen more land, no. He did not allow them to degrade the environment. There is that man who is occupying approximately less than 10 acres and that is what the ruling allowed him to continue using where he is.

However, these people went ahead to misuse the court order to open more land and that is how they deployed more than 20 graders last week, that are on the ground now and are putting down the entire forest of 5,000 acres.

Madam Speaker, he is occupying less than 10 acres but he is now taking advantage of that ruling to degrade and destroy a forest of more than 5,000 acres. That is where my issue is and police is not taking action to stop him from going beyond what court allowed him to use. The minister came and did not stop this man from going beyond what he was allowed to use by court and everybody is looking on when graders are putting down the entire area.

Madam Speaker, regarding the floating islands, we have Isimba Dam and all these resources to protect along the Nile and this forest is along River Nile where all these dams are located. When we just look on and police cannot implement the court orders when-

Madam Speaker, what is more worrying is that the tractors are for National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADs), a Government institution or body that is supposed to protect the environment!

Madam Speaker, the ruling is there but it is not allowing these people to degrade the environment. That is why I would like you to intervene because court is not allowing these people to open up more land; it is only allowing them to use what they are using.

The Ministry for Lands, Housing and Urban Development has already written and I would like to lay on Table this letter. The department of surveys and mapping have written indicating that the titles that were issued are in the middle of the forest reserve. They were willing to cancel but because the matter is in court, they are waiting for the judge to pass judgement.

Madam Speaker, it is already indicated here even if you call the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development because the letters are already here indicating that titles were issued in the central forest reserve.

Therefore, with all this evidence - and the ruling does not allow this claimant to destroy the rest of the forest. We are just look on and the police are also looking on and NFA is involved in this saga. National Forestry Authority has a role to play in the forest that we are losing. I have even been contacted by some ministers in this Cabinet and in this Parliament advising me, “Honourable, just talk to them and the matter will be settled.”

THE SPEAKER: Who are those ministers? Name them, we would like to know.

MS NANTABA: One of them is hon. Bagiire. He reached out to me and asked me to go and liaise with GM sugar. The next one involved is a Member of Parliament and is a surveyor who surveyed and issued these titles, hon. Kumama. I have evidence here of all the instructions that he misused and went beyond what he was supposed to survey. I have it and I can lay it on the Table, Madam Speaker.

Therefore, if we are involved in degrading the environment, who is going to protect it?  Madam Speaker, I beg for your intervention because if you do not we will give up on forests. In Kayunga, before they encroached on Kiula they first encroached on Wamale forest.  

As I speak, Wamale forest is already a sugarcane plantation! I fought but I lost it. Now they have embarked on the second one and they have already alerted those in the third one that they are also coming and they will take it.

Therefore, if this Parliament says that I give up as hon. Nantaba and let the forest be taken by these grabbers, we will give up and let the nature take its course. However, I know you have the powers to reign in because the ruling does not allow this claimant to destroy the rest of the forest.

Madam Speaker, I beg for your intervention because if you do not, then we shall give up on the environment. Whenever you intervene, you become a target of these mafias who are - Bugoma forest has gone and you know it very well. Mabira is going just at the watch of this country and Government, and the rest are also going.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nantaba, I have heard your issue. You have brought new information that the encroachers are part of Government; that the National Forestry Authority are involved and that they are using NAADs tractors to degrade the forest. Let me give my ruling tomorrow on how we shall move on that segment.

MS NANTABA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On related matter, I would like to thank the minister and since she is here, I am wondering whether it is procedurally right to give the people of Amuru - especially the people in Opiru whom I reported their issue about a month ago regarding an eviction that was taking place. I am wondering when we are going to have the report from the minister. This is the procedural matter I am raising and I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. When hon. Nantaba raised that issue, you asked the minister to see to it that the graders that were grading and clearing the forest stop there and then.

In the report of the minister, Madam Speaker, she said that she found the graders there. I would like to find out whether when she found them there, she also looked on and left them there grading or she took action in her capacity as a minister? 

The honourable member said they are clearing the land and there are even graders on the land. We entrusted the minister to visit the land. Therefore, can we know from her whether she also looked on like the honourable and left them to continue grading the land?

3.46
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would just like to raise two issues: On page 2 of the statement that the minister read, she stated that:
“…an order of eviction was issued against the first defendant, his agents, servants, employees, assignees, successors, in the title or any person acting on his behalf from the suit and forming part of Kiula Central Forest Reserve.” 

I wish to correct the impression that the minister put. There was no eviction order issued but the statement should have read: 
“…an eviction order be issued against the first defendant, his agents, servants, employees, assignees, successors in the title or any person acting on his behalf from the suit and forming part of Kiula Central Forest Reserve.” 

Madam Speaker, there was no eviction order issued so it should have been given – 

THE SPEAKER: No, she was reporting on the prayers which had been sought by Ssemugga. This is what he had requested for. 

MR NZOGHU: On the prayers, Madam Speaker, it was not supposed to be “was” but was supposed to be “be.”  

Secondly, there is the issue I raised on Semliki Forest. The Committee on Natural Resources was instructed to go and find out why Semliki Forest has been massively destroyed. Madam Speaker, the time you gave them has elapsed and I thought it is better to seek your indulgence because the people of Bundibugyo are asking why the report has not been presented. The entire forest has been put down. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know I have an office on this building. If you want us to follow up on something, do not come and surprise me on the Floor and then I have to find answers. Nevertheless, the Committee on Natural Resources will have to update us on where they are on the petition from Semliki. 

Finally, let us hear from the Leader of the Opposition and then we go back to our business. 

3.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Sometimes, we do things as if we are visitors in Uganda and yet we are Ugandans. We also have to take care of the future. 

The honourable Government Chief Whip has just designated a vice chairperson to the committee on land, which is the person who went and surveyed the land. That means that he is even more empowered to do the worst. What do we say about this designation of the vice chairperson, who is actually doing the worst? Can the Government Chief Whip go and revise that designation of the vice chairperson since it has gone wrong?  Thank you.

3.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition, I was not in the know when I was designating members to the committees. I do not have any report regarding the same. I was designating members of Parliament to serve on committees; he has been serving on this committee. You have never stood up here to make a compliant to the Government Chief Whip. I designated members and little change was done. He has been on the committee. I was not notified so I am very innocent, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we really have to –please, honourable Leader of the Opposition, the matter has just come now; less than 10 minutes ago. You want the Government Chief Whip to respond without even doing investigations and looking at the status. That is not how we work. 

3.52
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you once again for this opportunity. I have always been puzzled by the disjointed linkages I have always observed in Government institutions, especially when dealing with matters of environment. It is absurd that no sooner had the President talked about environmental protection than we heard of such cases, like we have just heard. 

Whereas I am aware of the subjudice rule and that we are not supposed to offend it, I think it would also be good to sound strong displeasure, as representatives of the people; that we are not happy with the issues regarding the environment. We need to send a message to all arms of Government to awaken them that we are going to face serious disaster.

I am a victim of those devastations of the environment. For instance, Madam Speaker, if nothing is done any time now, Mbarara city, which is a big town, might not have water. This is because the only source of water, River Rwizi, is drying up. Some of you have visited it, especially members of the Natural Resources Committee. When we last visited that place, we were virtually getting dirty water from ponds and putting it in the tank -  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter you are raising is important but I think we need a motion where you can bring examples and then we make a strong resolution. 

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much for your guidance, Madam Speaker. I hope we are going to sit together with the concerned members of this august House and sound a very strong warning; that enough is enough. We cannot continue doing what – the President is at least doing his very best but are we supporting him, honourable colleagues, ministers and institutions? 

I think we need to sound this warning very strongly and clearly and send the message to the greedy crooks, who are not prepared to listen. The future demands that we must leave something for them as well. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister, are you still on the Floor? What did you do about the graders? 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, for standing there for the future of this country. 

Madam Speaker, when you directed me to go and visit the central forest reserve, indeed, I found that the case is in court. However, you did not direct that I stop the activities there. By the fact that it was under court, I had to go through a hurdle. They did not even want hon. Nantaba to reach the place. 

Madam Speaker, for the sake of this county, the mafia have ganged up in that district and almost half of the people are compromised. They did not want her to go and show me where this is happening. On arrival I noticed that the tractors had been literally hidden - they started running with them. They wanted to divert me to another place so they could take the tractors away. Most of them were hidden in the banana and sugarcane plantations.

However, I could see the physical planting. Actually the sugarcane, which they were planting, had not yet been covered and a heap was even still there.

Now, Madam Speaker, that being the case - you are more of a lawyer than we are, if it is possible, I beg that you direct us to go and stop those tractors because given the delay already seen in handling that court matter, by the time the case is disposed of, the whole place will be covered with sugarcane.

Secondly, colleagues raised the issue of Amuru and elsewhere and, Madam Speaker, you even directed me to handle that with other assignments, including the Kyankwanzi one. I now would like to say that the report is ready. And so, when I am put on the Order Paper anytime from now, I will be in position to present that report. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Let me think about what to do because there is a Court Order so, we need to move carefully. When I give the ruling on the other issue tomorrow, I will also give you a way forward on that one. Let us go to item seven.

MOTION TO EXPRESS GRATITUDE TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA, YOWERI KAGUTA MUSEVENI, FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE STATE OF THE NATIONAL ADDRESS TO THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA ON THURSDAY 4 JUNE 2020

3.58
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Madam Speaker, allow me to lower my mask a bit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hereby stand to present a Motion to express Gratitude to His Excellency, the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address to the Parliament of Uganda on Thursday 4 June 2020, moved under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The motion reads thus: 

“WHEREAS Article l01 (l) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, requires the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation; 

AND WHEREAS on 4 June, 2020, His Excellency, the President, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in compliance with the constitutional requirements, delivered the State of the Nation Address to this Parliament; 
AWARE THAT the State of the Nation Address gave a broader projection on areas of strategic significance to Uganda, highlighting the achievements registered in the current financial year and plans for the 2020/2021 financial year; in particular concentrating on the basic sectors of agriculture, industry, services, tourism and ICT; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT His Excellency, the President guaranteed that the Ugandan economy continues to be vibrant amidst economic challenges posed by the Covid-19 pandemic; 

COGNISANT THAT, His Excellency, the President reassured the nation that the Government of Uganda will undertake measures to stimulate the economy as a consequence of the negative effects of the Covid-l9 pandemic, including- 
(a) deferring the payment of corporation tax or presumptive tax for small and medium enterprises and companies engaged in the tourism, manufacturing, horticulture and floriculture to defer until September,2020; 
(b) deferring payment of Pay As You Earn (PAYE) tax; 
(c) waiver of interest on tax arrears; 
(d) recapitalisation of Uganda Development Bank to enable Government invest in strategic areas; 
(e) boosting funding to Uganda Industrial Research Institute; and 
(f) provision of additional Shs 300 billion to boost agricultural production and productivity for seedlings, fertilizers, irrigation, storage facilities and value addition;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: 
1. That Parliament of Uganda expresses its gratitude to His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda for his clear and precise exposition of the State of our Nation, Uganda; and 
2. That Parliament commits itself to the promotion of the great ideas, values and qualities cherished by His Excellency, the President of Uganda in the State of the Nation Address.”
I beg to move

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is. Can you speak to your motion?

MR MBABAALI: Madam Speaker, here is the justification for the motion. The 2020 State of the Nation Address, by H.E Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, the Fountain of Honour and the National Chairperson of the National Resistance Movement Political Party, is also constitutionally translated to be the State Opening of the next Session of Parliament. 

The recent address translated into the state opening of the fifth and last session of the Tenth Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, in fulfilling this constitutional obligation and mandate under Article 101 (1), His Excellency, the President highlighted the strategic, tactical, and operational mission of the NRM Government in the next one year. 

These ranged from promoting manufacturing in order to increase employment opportunities to the youth of Uganda, revamping the railway and water transport, supporting scientists and offering an economic stimulus to businesses affected by the Covid-19 lockdown.

The others were: lowering the cost of lending money to SMEs and those investing in manufacturing by borrowing from the Uganda Development Bank, and Uganda Development Corporation in order to spur economic growth, development and the capitalisation of the Uganda Development Bank to enable its customers access low interest loans with focus on the agriculture and manufacturing sectors. 

As a practical economist, I wish to commend H.E, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for his wisdom to categorize the Ugandan economy in two parts: The first one is the real economy, which deals with human basic needs and it’s durable for survival and prosperity. These include food, shelter, medicine, security, industries, infrastructure, ICT, among others. 

Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President and NRM Government promised Ugandans, under the 10-Point Programme, point No. 5, an integrated and self-sustaining economy. I think you can agree with me that during this COVID-l9 pandemic lockdown, this has been achieved.

The second is the vulnerable economy, which deals with leisure, pleasure and it’s optional. These include hotels, night clubs, salons, tourism, gyms and many others.

Madam Speaker, there is no doubt that after the COVID-19 pandemic, the vulnerable economy will continue to blossom. Despite being a developing country, Uganda has been able to withstand the coronavirus, floods, landslides, rising water levels in the lakes, locusts, floating islands, the security of the country, crime and feeding millions of our people and many others. This is because of the great leadership of His Excellency the President and the NRM Government. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, during this COVID-19 pandemic, His Excellency the President made Uganda shine in Africa and the entire world for his exemplary and visionary leadership in the fight against COVID-19 pandemic in Uganda. His wise guidance and educative speeches, which are always awaited with enthusiasm, will always be remembered. Words like okwesyamura, soft parts and social distance have become household terminologies even to the younger generation (the abazzukulu).

His Excellency the President also highlighted a number of NRM Government achievements, which among others include building a strong army and a powerful LC system, surplus electricity, good road networks of tarmac roads totalling to over 5,000kms. There is no doubt that Uganda is in the right direction of achieving these goals.

His Excellency the President highlighted that due to the correct policy on the private sector, despite turbulences, this has attracted a total of 5,200 factories. They are now producing cement, steel bars, soap, mattresses, iron sheets, sugar, cooking oil, rubber tyres, textiles, beverages and many others. That brings in a total of US$ 2.09 billion. As of now, sanitizers and masks are being produced in Uganda for domestic and external markets. (Applause)

His Excellency the President stated that the ICT sector is a growing one employing over 1.2 million persons with 380,896 companies engaged in information technology, telecommunication, broadcasting, postal, courier, and audio visual. The country is moving towards digital migration.

Honourable members, key institutions like Parliament, international conferences, education and online shopping have already embraced ICT.

Madam Speaker, in his address, the President also indicated that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has proposed the following measures to provide liquidity to private firms that have been affected by the COVID-l9 lockdown:

    1. Allow corporations, including Small and Medium sized Enterprises (SMEs), to delay payment of corporation tax or presumptive tax due between April and June 2020 and for tourism, manufacturing, horticulture and floriculture to defer until September 2020. 
    2. Defer payment of Pay As You Earn (PAYE) tax by those sectors, which are most affected until September 2020. 
    3. Waiver of interest on tax arrears. 
    4.  Support to water and electricity utilities in order to ensure continued supply of these essential services to consumers during the period April to June 2020. This is a clear indication that our President is in touch with the realities of the time. Would you imagine if electricity and water, during this lockdown, was disconnected, what a big mess that would be!
    5.  Expedite payment of outstanding VAT refunds.
    6. Payment of domestic arrears for goods and services supplied to Government by the private sector. This will help domestic companies that are currently struggling to pay their workers. It will also enable them meet other obligations thus bringing money into circulation. 
    7. For those unable to pay their loans, Government, through the Bank of Uganda, has already put in the Gazette the measures to support businesses, including extension of repayment periods, postponement of loan repayment for a limited period, relaxing the conditions for non-performing loans, reducing reserve funds commercial banks are required to keep with Bank of Uganda and create a special liquidity facility for businesses that are unable to meet operational costs due to COVID-19 effects. 
    8.  Capitalisation of Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) with Shs 100 billion to enable Government to invest in strategic areas. 
    9.  Boosting funding to Uganda Industrial Research Institute to continue with innovation research and incubation of business start-ups. 
    10. Securing funds for the development of Kampala Industrial Business Park at Namanve and for power transmission and substations of Mbale, Kapeeka, Bweyogerere, Kasese, Soroti, Luzira, Jinja, and Mbarara industrial parks. 
    11. Provision of additional Shs 300 billion immediately to boost agricultural production and productivity for seedlings, fertilisers, irrigation, storage facilities, and value addition on various crops, beef and fish production.

The above interventions by Government are all meant to support the private sector led growth to contribute to the economy, without being distracted by having to survive when it comes to the basics of life.

Madam Speaker, on the future, His Excellency the President envisioned that the future indeed looks bright, stating that Uganda is on the right track since import substitution is almost at its fullest with most of the formerly imported products now being manufactured locally and exported to other countries. As you are well aware, the import Bill for Uganda is about US$ 7 billion per year.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, allow me to end with a famous quote from Fanon F, which says thus: “Each generation ought, out of relative obscurity, to discover its mission, fulfil or betray it.” A mission for Uganda has been discovered. As national leaders, the answer lies in our hands to either fulfil or betray it. However, I strongly believe that this Parliament will do what is within its means to ensure the realisation of the mission, dreams and ideals that have been cherished by H.E the President in his address to the nation. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Mbabaali. I now invite hon. Nauwat to second the motion for five minutes, followed by hon. Basemera for three minutes.

4.16
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, District Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion to express gratitude to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for the State of the Nation Address.

Madam Speaker, the President was spot-on in his address as he pointed out measures that the Government will undertake to stimulate the economy in order to safeguard livelihoods, jobs, businesses and industrial recovery amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic led to a lockdown of some sectors of the economy for some months and a partial lockdown right now in some border districts. Like Ugandans are aware, many non-essential services – big and small alike – were closed which led to the loss of incomes for companies, individuals and families. 

By allowing corporations, including small and medium-sized enterprises, to delay payments for some time, the President relieved Ugandans, because most of them were hit by the lockdown as they remained at home without work and could not afford to pay taxes. This measure has given relief to Ugandans and businesses to offset the effects of COVID-19.

Members of Parliament share the same feelings for Ugandans with the President as evidenced in the motion moved by hon. Mpuuga last Tuesday, where Government was urged to provide a waiver for the payment of water and electricity for a period of six months. This motion was supported by many Members, which showed the importance and need to lighten the burden on Ugandans in terms of payment of utilities as well as taxes because water and electricity are very important in our day-to-day living.

Madam Speaker, the President provided a waiver of interest on tax arrears, with many companies struggling to pay taxes to the Government, including companies that are contributing towards the fight against COVID-19 by producing face masks and sanitisers. This tax waiver will boost their cashflows and ensure business continuity.

Madam Speaker, the other measure that H.E the President put in place is boosting funding to Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI). Uganda Industrial Research Institute offers training and internship to students, researchers, small and medium-sized enterprises, and incubation of start-ups as well as imparting skills in machining to the trainees. Just a few weeks ago, there was a loan request presented here and one of the beneficiaries of that loan was UIRI. 

The Minister of State for Education, hon. Muyingo, did invite Members to go and see what is going on in UIRI – to have a feel of what UIRI is doing for Uganda. The success that UIRI offers enables firms and individuals to build their production capacity, production quality, marketing and packaging capacity, thereby facilitating their market access. In all these, there are job opportunities created for Ugandans.

Right now, Madam Speaker, UIRI is designing and producing three-layered quality face masks which are needed during this COVID-19 pandemic. Many youths have been employed. About two days ago, on NTV they showed the youth very busy making masks at UIRI. Therefore, boosting funding to UIRI is very important and I thank H.E the President for that.

The President promised to provide additional Shs 300 billion to boost agricultural production and productivity. Agriculture is the mainstay of Uganda’s economy. Many families and communities depend on agriculture for their livelihoods. Therefore, Government has a duty to ensure that this sector is supported. Thus, the injection of the Shs 300 billion to the sector will enable the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to address the issues of quality seeds, seedlings, fertilisers, irrigation, storage facilities and value addition.

It is important to note, Madam Speaker, that, right now, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is supporting farmers through the provision of seeds and seedlings, and irrigation is also on in some parts of the country. With additional funding, more seeds and seedlings will be provided and irrigation services will extend to some other parts of Uganda. This will help in ensuring food security in the country and increased income for farmers.

With all these, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank H.E the President for being focused and addressing the challenges that are facing Uganda right now in this period of the COVID-19 pandemic. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nauwat. I invite hon. Basemera. You have four minutes.

4.22
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by my colleague, hon. Mbabaali, expressing gratitude to H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda for the well-presented State of the Nation Address.

Madam Speaker, H.E the President was spot-on on the issue of the economy. He clearly indicated that despite the crises that have hit the country in the recent months – the locust invasion, floods and the COVID-19 pandemic – the economy has continued to grow strong and the crises have just been reawakening us to work even harder. 

The President indicated that despite all these crises that have hit the country, our capacity has improved, for example in manufacturing, and today we are able to manufacture face masks, sanitisers. All this is saving on our hard-earned dollars because we cannot import them. We would like to thank him for his wise leadership that has brought us this far.

Madam Speaker, H.E the President was very articulate on the issue of the real economy as opposed to the vulnerable economy. He clearly indicated the real economy as the key sectors such as agriculture and manufacturing and he indicated that our capacity in agriculture has grown strong. He highlighted 14 crops that we are growing as well as the dairy products. The crops include coffee, beans and maize. All this is employing the majority of Ugandans in this country. As a result of this and his wise leadership, the majority of Ugandans have remained food-secure despite the lockdown and the closed borders. Most of the people in the country have had food security, save for our people who are living in urban areas. 

We would like to commend and thank him for his wise leadership. With the intervention he has proposed in the agricultural sector, it means that our people are going to be more food-secure and employment opportunities will increase.

Madam Speaker, in the area of manufacturing, he has indicated that manufacturing is improving, like I have said. The issue of import substitution, where we are now producing locally the things that we were importing, saves on our dollars that we used to spend on imports.

On the issue of infrastructure, the President was very clear; he indicated that as an economy, we have a lot of road networks. He highlighted 5,111 kilometres of tarmac that the Government has been able to construct. I want to applaud the President because even Kibaale District is included in this figure, with our newly tarmacked road from Mubende to Kagadi. We want to appreciate that. This is aiding agricultural production and access to markets, which improves the household incomes of our people.

Madam Speaker, when it comes to electricity, the speed at which the country is getting connected to electricity is wonderful and commendable. It is actually unprecedented. If this effort continues and this focus is maintained, in a very short time we are going to have our whole country lit. We want to commend the President for his wise leadership.

Madam Speaker, the President highlighted the issue of the women and youth funds. We want to commend him because women and youth are such a valuable human resource that is very important for the country and therefore worthy of Government support.

He also talked about the vulnerable people in the economy - the boda boda riders, the salon men and women who need support and who will get support from these funds. We want to commend him. We think these efforts towards our youth and the women who are the backbone of the economy, especially in agriculture, are commendable.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I want to precisely say that the President was very genuine and realistic. He was down to earth and very inspiring while he was presenting the State of the Nation Address to this country.

I would like to urge colleagues and this House to all support this motion and express gratitude to our President for a job well done. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Basemera. May I now invite the Leader of the Opposition.

4.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, may I remove this? I would like to say that this is a Government face mask and it is very small and uncomfortable, and not of good quality. (Laughter)­ It is small –(Interjections)- We can never say “thank you” when Shs 81 billion of tax payers’ money went into this. I am going to lay in on the Table.

Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The Leader of Government Business, honourable Members of Parliament, countrymen and women. I take this singular honour and privilege to address Parliament today in fulfilment of the statutory obligation under Rule 52 of our Rules of Procedure to make a response to the State of the Nation Address. This is not a ritual but a bird’s-eye view of the state of affairs in the country from the point of reflection of the Opposition government.

Madam Speaker, I will start by mightily thanking and appreciating God, who has held us together through this past Fourth Session; kept death at bay, despite the worldwide attack of the dreaded COVID-19 pandemic; and worked through our frontline medical workers to treat the cases that have been registered here to cause great recoveries. I will be returning to the COVID-19 subject in detail later in this address. Thank you, Lord.

I congratulate you, Rt Hon. Speaker, on the successful hosting of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. 

I also would like to congratulate the Most Rev. Dr Stephen Mugalu Kazimba upon his consecration and enthronement as Archbishop of the Church of the Province of Uganda and Bishop of Kampala Diocese. 

I congratulate His Grace Dr Lambert Beinomugisha on his ecclesiastical possession as Archbishop of Mbarara Archdiocese. We salute you and pray for God’s mercy and blessings upon you, servants of the Most High.

Madam Speaker, with sadness, we remember the deaths of our beloved:
    1. Justice Ntabgoba, the former Principal Judge;

    2. Hon. Meddie Ssozi Kaggwa, Chairman of Uganda Human Rights Commission;

    3. Dr Kanyerezi Masembe, former Head of the Department of Internal Medicine at Makerere University School of Medicine;

    4. Prof. Edward Ddumba, Medical Director of St Francis Hospital Nsambya and former Executive Director of Mulago National Referral Hospital;

    5. Maj. Gen. Wasswa Kasirye Gwanga, Senior UPDF Officer and former Chairman LCV of Greater Mubende;

    6. Maj. Gen. Benon Biraaro, a former senior UPDF officer and former presidential candidate in 2016;

    7. Maj. Akorimo Kanuti, the unsung hero who hoisted the Uganda national flag for the first time on 9 October 1962;

    8. Luwemba William Apuuli, Under Secretary in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;

    9. Mr Jimmy Kirunda, a former footballer who captained the national team at the African Cup of Nations finals in 1978; and

10. The many other Ugandans lost in the year of reporting, not forgetting those who died outside this country due to the COVID-19 pandemic and those who died here at the hands of brutal state functionaries codenamed “LDUs”, under the guise of enforcing curfew and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for controlling the COVID-19 spread.

At a regional level, we mourn with the people of Burundi on the passing of President Pierre Nkurunziza and also with the people of Kenya upon the death of former President, Daniel Arap Moi.

Through you, Madam Speaker, shall we stand and observe a moment of silence in their memory and honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Madam Speaker, Ugandans must get tired of being treated to rhetoric as they clap along. Year in year out, the President has functionally presented to the House an address referred to as the State of the Nation Address but in essence, it spells out no state of the nation. We have continually pointed this out in our responses to no avail. In this year’s address, the President has decided to omit the usual order of segmenting his statement according to sectors and rather, presented an omnibus address that is neither here nor there.

The President, at the start of this term of office, promised to make the Opposition history by the year 2020. Having seen the Opposition grow stronger instead, he chose to “eliminate” it by not recognising the Leader of the Opposition in the protocol line-up at the start of his address. Anyhow, we are still here, stronger and more energised.

Madam Speaker, in the address delivered on 4 June 2020, the President started by enumerating what is contained in the NRM 10 Point Programme, an agenda that his own government first expanded out of inadequacy and later abandoned all together for easier options of plunder, aggrandisement and hereditary rule. Nothing in the 10 points mentioned resonates with the ordinary Ugandan anymore and, therefore, their relevance in this particular address remains an illusion. Within a year where Ugandans have spent more than a quarter of the year in confinement in form of lockdown and many are out of employment, the last thing to expect was a reminder about the content in the 10 Point Programme.

Madam Speaker, the state of Ugandans now is more about biting hunger, escalating poverty, glaring unemployment, no hope of earning as many are out of work, mismanaged food distribution by Government, unfulfilled promises, anxiety and despair. With the President not addressing any of these, what status was he presenting in the State of the Nation Address?

I will, nonetheless, painfully delve into the details of the State of the Nation Address and make responses. I will largely point out where this country has gone wrong in terms of priorities and propose workable policy options to stimulate the recovery process. We owe this country's inheritance to the future generation and our actions and/or inactions now will determine that future. We have also witnessed this with the land issues. 

Madam Speaker, we deem it important that we segment our response according to sectors for ease of flow and following. At the end of it all, we want to present Ugandans with available options and also point out the lost opportunities in the quest for good governance, growth and development. Prosperity is not a nursery rhyme for all to chorus in, but a deliberate process that must be undertaken with the interests of Ugandans at the fore.

The Economy
Madam Speaker, it has been said repeatedly that our economy is growing at an irreversible tangent. The Ugandan economy reported strong growth in 2019, estimated at 6.3 per cent, largely driven by the expansion of services. Services growth averaged 7.6 per cent in 2019, and industrial growth 6.2 per cent, driven by construction and mining. Agriculture grew at just 3.8 per cent. 

Indeed, we have seen a rapid spring in some sectors such as housing, commercial agriculture, tourism, small and medium enterprises, agro processing, light industry and a few other areas. On the outside, these have helped post somewhat impressive economic figures and presented the illusion that we are growing.

However, we continue to wonder who owns this economy and for whose benefit. This is because the growing enterprises are foreign owned, the tax incentives are given to select foreign firms and their tax holidays are endless - Government continues to pay for them their liabilities. Also, there are no protective policies for indigenous entrepreneurs and one actually remains sceptical as to whether the recently passed National Local Content Act, 2019 will benefit Ugandans.

One wonders why more Ugandans are poor with unemployment levels miserably growing high. The answer lies in the skewed ownership of these sectors, the uncontrolled profit repatriations, unregulated employment policies, and unexplainable resource accumulation leading to overnight sprouting of some of these investments.

Madam Speaker, it is strangely true that this country boasts of increased remittances from labour export when we largely export unskilled labour that we cannot even account for. No figures can be presented accurately as to what comes in from Ugandans working in which sector abroad. Ironically, these same Ugandans are never helped to cope with life in those foreign countries; many have been mistreated and others killed without consular or any other help. When COVID-19 hit, the Government started asking them to register, which meant they had no record of who was where, and as such, their return remains clouded in mystery.

The areas that hold the majority of Ugandans like agriculture at 75 per cent and tourism, which contributed 667,600 jobs - that is 6.7 per cent of total employment - in 2018, continue to receive the least attention in terms of resource allocation. Interestingly, the areas that have even been given affirmative action - at least on paper - in terms of development programmes such as northern Uganda, including Karamoja and eastern Uganda, still rank highest in poverty levels. Have these resources been truly invested or the vulnerable state of these areas is being used as a conduit for resource siphoning by state agents and power brokers on behalf of those in charge?

Unfortunately, the poverty rate fell during the past two decades but rebounded in the financial year 2016/2017, reaching 21.4 per cent, meaning that 10 million people were living below the national poverty line. Inequality has changed little. More than two-thirds of the working-age population is into agriculture. Four-fifths of workers are own-account workers or contributing family workers, with one-fifth in paid employment or themselves employers. Youth unemployment is a challenge. 

Madam Speaker, the unstructured and unregulated economic interventions cannot and will not spur inclusive growth for the country. The State House has become a one-stop clearing centre for literally every intervention - youth skilling programmes, Emyooga (whatever that means), Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), SMEs and many others. 

Who regulates the recipients and accounts for the proceedings? Who selects the recipients and determines how much they receive? It is no wonder that the President, in his address, called it “his fund” and said “his girl” Nakyobe will manage it. Whom does Ms Nakyobe report to in this case? Mr Museveni? 

Madam Speaker, the Government interventions for skills development and job creation should and must be done through institutional provisions, according to the laws of the land. This is the only safety net to curb corruption, misuse, stealing and nepotism. Government resources must be channelled through known and auditable agencies that will benefit all as opposed to a select few. 

Madam Speaker, the recapitalisation of Uganda Development Bank, Uganda Development Corporation and reviving of the Cooperative Movement is a tired song. Each year, an amount of money is set aside for this purpose and this House has cautiously approved the figures. This year however, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to the chagrin of the Members, read different figures in the Budget Speech from those passed by the House. We need an audit of the monies passed since this term of the Government and how much of that has actually been released to the respective agencies. We need to know how much of the released monies have been accessed for use by different entrepreneurs and the resultant effect. 

Madam Speaker, the country expects to hear from the President a deliberate process of what has been provided, what has been accessed, what interventions it has gone into, the resultant impact and the challenges therein, if any. That is the state of the nation. The reference of still being in the bush fighting neo-colonial agents when one has been firmly in charge of Government for 35 years is a pedestrian excuse. 

The “real economy”, as the President calls it, of a non-existent railway, food insecurity, a collapsed health system, closed education and rain-fed agriculture has turned out to be the “vulnerable economy” when weighed under the impact of COVID-19 for just two months. 

The hard truth is that the economy is grossly affected and crumbling. The President’s reference to face mask factories, that will inevitably close once COVID-l9 has been contained, and those producing sanitizers, cannot be an example of developments to cushion the economy from collapse. The interventions proposed on tax rescheduling and Government subsidies are abstract and ambiguous. 

Madam Speaker, our call is that the President, through the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should come to this House and lay concrete, time-tested and specific interventions aimed at keeping the economy alive. It is not appropriate for the President to say that a team from Operation Wealth Creation has looked at the budget and proposed adjustments. Operation Wealth Creation is not Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They are not Parliament’s Budget Committee nor are they Parliament to do appropriation. 

Security 
Madam Speaker, security, at 9.90 per cent of the total budget allocation for financial year 2020/2021, takes the second highest sector allocation with Shs 4.5 trillion. The President, however, stated in his address that the country has built a strong army and a powerful local council system despite not being well facilitated financially. We would wish to know how much percentage share of the national budget the Government wants allocated to security for “sufficient financing”. 

Madam Speaker, it is no secret that security funding in this country is a classified channel for siphoning resources from the national budget, the reason there is no trickledown of the huge amounts allocated. We applaud a section of the men and women in uniform who have endured harsh conditions to keep this country safe from external aggression and we are relatively secure internally. 

Sections of the police and Local Defence Units (LDUs) continue to blatantly torture, especially politicians critical of the regime. Hon. Zaake is still nursing broken limbs. The Kireka torture chamber remains active, and the number of torture vans with police colours and plates has increased both in number and brutality. The Internal Security Organisation (ISO) operatives still operate unhampered in glaring disregard of the law. 

Madam Speaker, declaring political ambition is now a crime under the “NRM criminal books”. Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde is testimony to this. Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi was denied an opportunity to consult the electorate on his presidential plans as per the dictates of the law. Col (Rtd) Dr Kizza Besigye cannot hold a meeting or appear on any radio programme, especially upcountry, even before the COVID-l9 restrictions. These are just examples but the bottom of it is, we cannot breathe for your brutal knee is on our necks. 

Madam Speaker, from the past atrocities, inquiries have been conducted - the Kasese massacres, AIGP Kaweesi’s murder, ASP Kirumira’s murder, hon. Ibrahim Abiriga’s murder, women’s murders mainly in Wakiso and Kampala, Muslim clerics murders, boda boda cyclists’ murders and robberies, and the many security failures of the past. Let us have at least half a report on this and see where to start from. No report at all! 

Madam Speaker, before this Government addresses herself to rising levels of unemployment, non-beneficial subsistence agriculture, loan repayment challenges, collapse of the rural economy, cultural and moral decadence, land disputes, skewed education system, income inequality and biased access to state resources, among others, curbing insecurity will remain a dream. 

Madam Speaker, we propose that - 
    • A deliberate effort, with requisite resources, be embarked on to reconstruct the rural economies, so as to allow for meaningful retention of especially the young people in the rural areas. 
    • Economic stimuli should be made available where all Ugandans can competitively access them. 
    • Vocational education should be made a reality with the attendant facilities for learning. 
    • The local council systems should be left to work independent of regime machinations and conscription, so that they can effectively manage elements of crime in the society. 
    • Urban economies should be regulated and structured to favour the less privileged. 
    • Community policing should be prioritised. 
    • Commensurate remuneration should be made for the men and women in uniform, including accommodation and welfare.

Works and Transport
Madam Speaker, year after year, this House has agreed with the Executive to keep works and transport the best allocated sector amongst all. This has been on the premise that improved roads and other transport infrastructure would spring other sectors into development. It is prudent, therefore, that the President should have dignified Ugandans with some details rather than stating that since 2006, the country has either constructed and/or repaired a collective total of 5,111 kilometres of road.

Yes, we also know about the four Bombardier aeroplanes purchased to revive the national airline at abnormal prices, but we acknowledge it as a step in the right direction, the cost notwithstanding.

The country, however, would love to know how many kilometres of roads we have been able to register each year to justify their number one call on the national budget. It is unfortunate that we keep locking money into this sector, whose performance stands at less than 50 per cent, instead of freeing the money for other equally deserving sectors like health, agriculture, ICT and education.

The quality and scope of works in this sector remains a challenge as many newly constructed roads, bridges and related infrastructure collapse in the first year of use. In other areas, one cannot tell whether the road is under construction or repair as there are earth moving equipment on those roads almost permanently. This House should, for example, interest itself in the state of Iganga-Tirinyi-Mbale Road, Tororo-Mbale-Soroti Road, Kampala-Masaka Road, Kampala-Mityana-Mubende Road, and the Kampala City roads, specifically the Northern Bypass among others.

The Standard Gauge Railway is now almost forgotten. Money has been sunk in to no avail, beyond glamorous artistic impression pictures and reports. The country response to containing the spread of COVID-l9 collapsed largely because there was no railway system to substitute the long-distance trucks. This must be checked so that this country gets a railway line working.

The issues of land compensations have become the milking cow for many technocrats and Government officials. It remains one of the biggest calls on budgets for infrastructure projects and the most messed up in implementation, albeit deliberately.

We note that road accidents remain on the increase in this country. This is largely due to unregulated drivers, unregulated vehicles, narrow roads, poorly constructed slippery roads and corruption on the side of law enforcers, among others.

We propose that - 
    • Government comes to this House with a clear and comprehensive report on which road projects have been undertaken each year and at what cost.
    • Government should report on all the progress so far inclusive of expected completion dates for all infrastructure projects.
    • A comprehensive report on land acquisition and compensations for all projects under the sector should be presented to the House.
    • Budget allocations to the sector should take into consideration the absorption capacity of the sector, as determined by performance levels. 
    • Transport regulation must be taken as a priority to ensure that only qualified drivers and roadworthy vehicles are on the roads. 
    • The services of driving permit issuance under Face Technologies should, at the expiry of their contract, be passed on to the ministry responsible for transport rather than engaging another non-tested private company. Face Technologies should be allowed a transition period to help the ministry’s effective takeover.

Land and Agriculture
The land question will make or break this country depending on how it is managed. The land tenure system remains unresolved and land grabbing a pet activity for those with power. The country largely depends on rainfed agriculture and we have remained subsistence in nature. The President, in his address, mentioned that agriculture feeds us at almost 100 per cent, an assumption only debunked easily by looking at the level of importation of basic foods like rice, beans and maize.

Our country has the potential to feed us 100 per cent and export the surplus, if we focused resources to where they are needed most. Over 75 per cent of the population lives off agriculture and here we are allocating the sector 2.91 per cent of the national budget, equivalent to Shs 1.3 tri11ion. 

It is only unfortunate that to the President, agriculture means the Kisozi cows fed and maintained on taxpayers’ money for his personal gain. It is no surprise that having become super rich himself, he wondered how the multimillionaire and writer, Warren Buffet, is wealthy without cows.
 
Madam Speaker, the President has lately taken to a breakdown of basic agricultural produce and what they can be used for especially, as raw material for factory use. An example is cassava in the production of pharmaceutical grade starch used in making tablets. This is good thinking but one wonders whether the few pieces produced by certain families for home consumption will meet the demand. 

There must be deliberate policies aimed at mass production if it is to make any meaning. It is equally sad that after over six terms of office, the President still uses the phrase; “we will” as opposed to “we have” when giving accountability to Ugandans. 

The President further reminded the country about the milk production and processing in this country and how some factory he called a “funny little government company” would mix imported powdered milk with water and stamp it “Made in Uganda”. No wonder he sold it off at a “hefty” $1.

 Madam Speaker, with the interventions as mentioned by the President, the milk farm gate price remains incredibly low and the cost of production abnormally high. This has forced many would-be dairy farmers out of the trade because of the costs involved. 

The increase in milk production is artificial as it arises from a few favoured and facilitated farmers who are in most cases state-connected. 

Madam Speaker, the process of value addition has remained a challenge. Many companies that ventured into Coffee processing have hit dead ends; Tea farmers are stranded and frustrated with the Mombasa Auction and many farmers have their tea leaves rotting away for non-collection; Matooke farmers especially in the Greater Bushenyi area had smiled to the establishment of the Prof. Rev. Muranga Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID) Plant. 

Years down the road, no one has accessed the factory to sell matooke there; and indeed, the President has been forcing Government to fund the project amidst protests and calls for accountability for him alone knows where the funds go, a thing he chooses to call resistance from agents of colonialism. The fruit factories in Luweero and Soroti are no better. 

Madam Speaker, it remains interesting to note that while the President is chasing people from wetlands in Bukedi and Teso and rightly so, he has given out the more strategic Lwera wetland to Chinese for rice growing and sand mining. 

We propose that mechanised agriculture should be implemented starting with regional centres to help farmers to access low cost machinery for large scale farming. 

Ox-ploughs and small tractors should be considered as the preferred option for small scale farmers. 

Further, the distribution of hand hoes should be structured and effectively handled for every rural homestead to benefit. 

Food security must be made a priority and deliberate efforts made to the effect. 

The deployment of extension workers and resumption of extension services should be prioritised. These extension workers should be professional and skilled personnel as opposed to the mockery of soldiers deployed under Operation Wealth Creation. 

Land tenure should be revisited with a view to protect people's land against grabbers. 

The budget allocation to agriculture should be stepped up to at least 10 per cent in conformity with the Maputo Declaration. 

Appropriate irrigation schemes should be developed across the country to stem reliance on rain-fed agriculture. 

An Agricultural Bank should be established to help farmers to access friendly credit facilities for improved production. 

The Zoning programme should be finalised and implemented. 

Regulated breeding and drug centres should be established across the country. 

Food silos should be built at regional levels to mitigate food scarcity and price instabilities. 

Water and Environment
Madam Speaker, with a coverage of 15.3 per cent of the total surface area, Uganda's water resource is more than sufficient for her development needs and human survival. Almost, all this water resource is fresh water favourable for human consumption as well as agriculture and industrial use. 

The level of pollution and encroachment on this abundant water resource makes one wonder as to whether we can still call our water fresh. All the filtering swamps have been mercilessly cleared and as such, all the filth goes direct to the water unfiltered. This applies to industrial waste and fecal matter in equal measure. 

We have, therefore, out of our own unregulated actions, polluted the hitherto fresh water bodies to alarming levels. The President alluded to this but in his veiled style only asked the Chief Administrative Officers to ensure no more factories are built in the wetlands and other catchment areas. 

He gave a green light to those already in to stay as if there were no dry lands to put factories on. There is no factory worth more than our environment. Who cleared these factories for construction? 
Madam Speaker, it is ironical that with this abundance, many parts of this country experience dry spells; piped water remains inaccessible by many both in terms of availability and cost. And general access to safe water remains a miracle to a number of areas. This should never be in a country like Uganda if the Government was committed to the wellbeing and healthy living of her people. 

It should be further noted that the biggest defaulters to the water sector agencies are Government departments. This leaves the water utility corporations crippled of resources for effective service delivery. 

The rising water levels in the recent past have seen many people displaced as a result of unplanned and unregulated developments. For once, the President has applauded nature for reclaiming its territory and punishing those that encroached on its boundaries. The President cannot stand to chest thump and quoting isolated Bible verses when he has presided over the raping of nature.

Madam Speaker, we propose that;

    • all developments done without approval and environmental impact assessment are demolished at the owners’ cost. 
    • A11 factories and other developments in gazetted wetlands should be demolished at the owners’ cost.
    •  Government should immediately pay all dues owed to the water agencies. 
    • All encroachers in wetlands should be evicted without compensation except those involved in approved sustainable use activities.
    • Rainwater harvesting techniques should be developed and extended to the countryside for both domestic and agricultural use. 
    • Water transport should be modernised and regulated for safety.  Fishing should be regulated to control immature fishing as well as cross-border insecurities.

Social Services Sector
Madam Speaker, I will address specifically the health, education and sports sectors under the social services. These two sectors directly affect the living of each and every Ugandan and once they are messed up, the whole livelihood is messed up.

Health
The arrival of COVID-19 has catapulted the health sector into pole position, not only in Uganda but world over. Many countries have reacted to this pandemic with different magnitude and resource allocation levels. In Uganda, COVID-19 found an already decayed health system. It was, therefore, easy, fair and quick to justify additional resource allocation to the sector almost immediately and Parliament did exactly that.

A supplementary budget was passed allocating the Ministry of Health Shs 125 billion, way above what the Executive had asked for. Rather than set to standard, the sector facilities to comparable levels, the Executive took advantage to parcel out chunks of money in the name of fighting COVID-19 and even the allocation to Ministry of Health is being luxuriously spent on inflated costs for testing kits at an astronomical $ 65 more than double the cost in neighbouring countries. 

Payments and selection of quarantine centres remains shrouded in controversies.

Madam Speaker, oversight trips by our office and other committees of Parliament have all confirmed the cries from health workers about poor remuneration, challenging welfare provision and lack of housing facilities. 

Health facilities remain a shell with no or broken down facilities and equipment, staffing levels are very low, doctor patient ratio staggers around 1:15,000 as opposed to the World Health Organisation recommended 1:10,000. Even in the COVID-l9 centres, the frontline workers remain unpaid despite their money having been passed.

Ugandans and well-wishers have come up to contribute material things and money towards the COVID-19 pandemic. However, it is sad seeing this goodwill and gesture draining down the corruption channel. It is time for Parliament to play her real oversight role. As the Opposition, we will hold this Government in check and expose all the filth.

We have noted that because of our poorly built health systems, when the country was taken on by the COVID-l9 pandemic, all attention in the sector switched and the other health challenges went unattended to. Therefore, we thank God for sparing us a COVID-l9 related death to date. We have lost many more Ugandans unattended to ailments, child birth complications, failure to access health facilities in time as a result of the lockdown. It is high time we considered the health of Ugandans a priority. It is in moments like these that we are reminded of the need to equip our own facilities just in case for even the privileged cannot fly out as it has happened before.

For the health sector, we propose that;
    • Sufficient budget allocations are made for the health sector to address the challenges and unforeseen outbreaks. The sector should be allocated a minimum of 15 per cent of the National Budget as per the dictates of the Abuja Declaration. This allocation should be progressively phased over a maximum of three financial years. 
    • Up to 80 per cent of the funds voted for COVID-l9 response should be given to the Ministry of Health and related agencies. COVID-l9 is neither a security nor a Presidential issue.
    • The money donated for COVID-l9 response should not be used to buy more vehicles as proposed by the President as these vehicles are already being misused. The available Government fleet is sufficient for COVID-l9 response. 
    • Health workers should have their remuneration increased, paid regularly and on time. The lowest paid health worker should earn not less than Shs 650,000 and the lowest paid medical doctor should be paid Shs 3,500,000. A11 health workers should be housed at their places of work.
    • The long overdue National Health Insurance Scheme should be rolled out. 
    • The sector should be facilitated to carry out adequate recruitment of health workers.

Education and sports
Madam Speaker, we have previously raised a red flag on the education inequalities as a result of our education systems. Despite universal primary and secondary education being in place, school completion rates have remained as low as 30 to 35 per cent. The factors are many, ranging from poor infrastructure, poor staffing levels, poor pay, teacher absenteeism, sanitation and hygiene challenges, poverty levels, lack of school feeding, long distances travelled to access school facilities, early pregnancies and marriages and early trade practices, among others.

As a measure to curtail the spread of COVID-19 in the country, Government closed all schools and educational institutions indefinitely. The programme for their reopening remains uncertain. In the meantime, Government has opted to supply learning materials to all school-going children across the country. This programme has been a mess to say the least and is as good as not done. Government has gone ahead to arrange for teaching on televisions and radios oblivious of their national coverage. This has further alienated the majority less-privileged and boosted the privileged few. This inequality and skewed access to education is a time bomb.

The policy of establishing seed schools, where at least each sub-county should have a Government secondary school needs to be strengthened. Our oversight visits have revealed a number of private schools willing to be taken over as Government schools, which is a welcome move. 

Madam Speaker, salary enhancement for university professors and lecturers as well as the enhanced pay for science teachers should be evaluated with a view to having it rationalised with the stakeholders. The pending strikes across universities, as reported in the media, are testimony to the agitation.

In sports, Madam Speaker, allow me congratulate you, the Parliamentary Commission, members of Parliament, the Clerk and staff on the successful hosting of the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games here in Kampala in December 2019. The performance from the different Ugandan teams is greatly commendable. We set an example that many, especially the sports administrators in the country, should follow.

In the face of COVID-19, the sports sector is literally shut and nothing much can be done. We should work hard towards containment and elimination of this pandemic and it is after that, that we shall see a resumption of sports activities. In the meantime, Government should use the time to prepare adequately.

In order to mitigate likely obstructions from the above, we propose that:
    • The causes of high school dropout, as identified, should be addressed. The ministry should, for example, start on a school-feeding programme to grow nourished children and stem dropouts.
    • Hard-to-reach areas should be considered for staff housing facilities and commensurate allowances. 
    • Classroom facilities should be improved.
    • Relevant equipment and facilities for ensuring the teaching of the new school curriculum should be immediately provided. 
    • Teachers, regardless of the subjects taught, should be paid equally for equal work. I am a scientist but I prefer that all science and arts teachers be paid the same.
    • Teaching materials should be adequately distributed during this closure due to COVID-19. The channels of distribution should be streamlined and spelt out with the education departments at the districts taking lead because they can be held accountable, not Resident District Commissioners. 
    • Private schools that have offered to be taken over as seed schools should be considered first before new schools are built in the same areas to save the meagre resources. 
    • Stakeholder consultations should be carried out with university lecturers and professors on the best way to enhance their payment.
    • School inspection should be strengthened and improved.
    • The proposal for free distribution of sanitary pads by Government should be actualised. 
    • Vocational education should be prioritised and sufficiently funded.
    • Scholarship systems should be rationalised and put under the Higher School Students’ Financing Scheme, which is audited and regulated as opposed to the hidden State House scheme whose beneficiaries are never known.

Constitutionalism, Justice, Law and Order
Madam Speaker, constitutionalism and rule of law are cornerstones for any country’s development and Uganda is no exception. Whereas the sector-wide approach pioneered by the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) has improved justice delivery, there is still a lot of abuse by the respective players. Some effort has been made towards enhancing and solving case backlog in the courts, increased harmonisation of the different JLOS institutions and improved funding. 

Parliament has equally passed the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 into an Act and this should go a long way in improving the operations of the Judiciary.

We equally congratulate the now former Chief Justice, His Lordship Bart M. Katureebe, for showing all that retirement without pulling strings is possible. We wish him a pleasant retirement.

Constitutionalism and rule of law is still served selectively in this country despite these positive interventions. The Opposition remains at the deprived end of receiving the rule of law with the repressive police and prosecution playing the lead prosecutor role. Even obvious things like securing bail in court come with political colours.

We, therefore, call on the respective players in this sector to:
    • Respect the right of every Ugandan to justice and rule of law regardless of their political colours;
    • With immediate effect, discontinue all politically instigated prosecutions; 
    • Release all political prisoners; 
    • Practice professionalism in all institutions under JLOS;
    • Allow for the constitutional amendments as proposed in a Private Member’s Bill sponsored by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba.

Energy and mineral resources
Madam Speaker, it is as strange as it is scary that the President made the State of the State of the Nation Address to the end without his famous words: “My Oil” One wonders whether it is a way of getting the minds of Ugandans off the oil or those privy have already set their extraction benefits flowing. The secrecy with which the oil exploration processes have been managed and treated leaves a lot to ponder on. Ink has been put on paper, dollars passed on to different accounts and personnel strategically placed but all these out of the eye of the ordinary Ugandan. All we are told is that there are approximately 6.5 billion barrels of oil in the Albertine Region.

Reports that trucks after trucks have been driving to these oil areas in Western Uganda and out towards the border has raised suspicions of secretive export of crude oil, despite the President’s continued talk of refining the oil from here. With Kenya confirming export of crude oil at a respectable profit, it remains mind trickling not to believe that this Government could be doing the same.

Madam Speaker, Government spending continues to increase, underpinned by public infrastructure and capital investments for the nascent oil and gas industry. Expenditures have increased faster than domestic revenues, widening the fiscal deficit in 2019.
The deficit is largely financed through external borrowing, supplemented with domestic securities. Debt reached an estimated 43.6 per cent of GDP in 2019, up from 25 per cent in 2012, raising medium-term concerns. Lending remains within International Monetary Fund limits but risks have increased due to higher costs of debt servicing and infrastructure investments. 

Madam Speaker, besides the oil, Uganda is gifted with huge and numerous mineral deposits but their exploitation is controversy-recreated. From the copper in Kilembe, to the gold in Buhweju and Mubende, the tin and phosphates in Karamoja, iron ore in Tororo, conflict and mystery have followed almost every mineral exploitation point. 

Deaths and skirmishes are the order of the day and it is no wonder that the State Minister of Energy has publicly complained of mafias threatening her life.

Madam Speaker, who are the colonial agents that fought against the building of the gold refinery at Entebbe? Who owns it and how are its operations regulated? Who is parcelling out the gold mines across the country? Who is funding all these activities and who benefits from the proceeds? These are questions likely not to be answered here but worth thinking through.

Whereas we applaud the efforts in increasing power generation in the country, we are cognisant of the astronomic costs at which this power is being generated, compared to other generation projects across the world. 

It does not make economic sense borrowing heavily to develop power generation plants and ultimately, the population cannot afford its use for both domestic and industrial use. Less than 30 per cent of Ugandans have access to electricity to date.

We, therefore, propose that:
    • The Government should make open for scrutiny all the oil exploration contracts and licences; 
    • The National Local Content Act, 2019 should be implemented in the development of the oil industry;
    • A solid regulatory framework for gold and other minerals exploitation should be developed and implemented;
    • Government should invest in alternative energy sources such as solar energy, bio gas and geothermal energy, among others; 
    • Corruption in the energy and minerals sector should be eliminated - maybe I should say reduced;
    • Earnings from the oil and gas sector should be available for both infrastructure development, as well as social service delivery;
    • Mining sites should be properly gazetted and checked for environment management and protection.

Tourism
Madam Speaker, Uganda remains a great tourism destination, despite the unexploited potential. Before the lockdown due to COVID-19, Uganda’s tourism numbers had grown close to 1.5 million guests annually. 

Tourist arrivals grew from Shs 1.42 million in 2017 to 1.505 million in 2018. Foreign exchange earnings grew from $1.45 billion in 2017 to $1.6 billion in 2018. Gross Domestic Product contribution in 2018 stands at Shs 8.4 trillion. That is 7.7 per cent. 
Hotel room occupancy for 2018 stood at 50.9 per cent, with lodged posting up to 75 per cent and as stated earlier, tourism contributed 667,600 jobs, that is 6.7 per cent of total employment.

Madam Speaker, it is incumbent upon Government to supplement the private sector efforts by opening up roads to tourism sites, extend tax incentives to sector players and deter encroachment on national parks, leading to poaching and land grabbing. This will boost the tourism sector and help diversify foreign exchange earnings to improve balance of trade. 

Tourism is a top foreign exchange earner and should be fully exploited. The paltry allocation of Shs 198 billion, representing 0.44 per cent of the current National Budget share is wrong prioritisation. 

We, therefore, propose that:
    • Government takes advantage of the lockdown to improve the road and other infrastructure servicing tourism in the country;
    • Government draws and implements a comprehensive tourism policy that should detail marketing Uganda; 
    • Government should interest our Missions abroad into marketing Uganda’s tourism potential aggressively;
    • Schools and other public concentration areas and events should be used to boost internal tourism through targeted marketing.

International trade
Madam Speaker, every day of this Parliament’s sitting has on the Order Paper one or more loan requests. We have passed motions for borrowing money that not even the members of the Committee on National Economy can trace all these loans passed. 

It is not strange that allocation on the National Budget for interest repayment is Shs 4 trillion representing 8.98 per cent and third priority call. Compared to our National Budget of Shs 45.5 trillion, the stock of Uganda's total public debt grew from $12.55 billion, that is Shs 46.36 trillion at the end June 2019 to $13.33 billion by end of December 2019, which is equivalent to Shs 48.91 trillion, due to increased borrowing by the Government in the recent past. External debt was $8.59 billion, which translates into Shs 31.53 trillion, while domestic debt was $4.73 billion, which is about Shs 17.38 trillion.

The debt burden continues to grow as a result of trade imbalances, overreliance on raw exports that fetch little prices while on the other hand, importing finished goods at high costs. Our products and exports are also ranked inferior on the international market as a consequence of poor methods of production and processing. The collapse of cooperative movements made a bad situation worse.

Madam Speaker, it is our conviction and proposal that all nonessential borrowings should be halted pending evaluation of our current debt burden and repayment schedule. Revive cooperatives so as to enable producers to jointly produce, process and market their products. Diversify foreign exchange earning sources for the country. Make value addition a reality through strategic interventions and resource allocation. Make full advantage of regional integration to create access to markets.

Politics and Governance 
Madam Speaker, all that I have read rotates around the governance question. After 35 years in power, the NRM dictatorship has not much to show and has resorted to suppressing political dissent, arresting opponents on no charges, stealing the national coffers dry, self-aggrandisement and self-preservation.

For the fifth year now, after the Supreme Court pronounced itself in the Amama Mbabazi Presidential Election Petition of 2016, we have talked about the need for electoral reforms and the Government has played a deaf ear. We are going into another election in a few months and we are more disadvantaged than ever before.

The Electoral Commission has, without consultation with legitimate stakeholders, come up with a revised electoral roadmap that is more of a mockery of democracy and is short of known principles of free and fair elections. Not even an element of consultation with respective players nor civic education. It is no surprise that the President was uncharacteristically silent on the subject in his address.

Madam Speaker, on Friday 12 June 2020, a delegation of the Electoral Commission officials held a meeting with President Museveni at State House Entebbe where, among others, they agreed on scientific campaigns that were later announced by the Electoral Commission as COVID-19 containment measures during elections.

Before we even divulge into the abnormality of this proposal, it is also unimaginable that a presumed candidate is the one giving guidance on how an electoral body must run its activities. We have been consistent in telling the nation that Mr Museveni continues occupying the playing field as a referee, coach, linesman, team captain and a player. 

Madam Speaker, we have previously talked about dialogue for a smooth transition, restoration of constitutionalism, constitutional reforms, credible elections, rebuilding institutions, nurturing and growth of multiparty democracy and several other interventions for effective governance. All these remain a cry not listened to by the regime functionaries.

Instead, the President kept referring to every aspect of his speech as war, war, war. Who is the President itching to fight? Why do we have this increased war talk as we draw close to elections? The President should be reminded that to some of us, war reminds us of a lost generation, lost parenthood, lost economies, lost childhood, lost education opportunities, lost limbs and lost lives. It is not a matter that you should casually remind us of every moment. Whereas through war, you got an opportunity to plunder and rule this country, we lost all we had including our future.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, these are extraordinary times and therefore, they call for extraordinary measures. It is high time those in power acknowledged that this country belongs to all of us and should be governed for the benefit of all. It is important to appreciate that where each one of us is seated, someone else once sat and as such, another person will sit after us. Somebody sat and another person will sit after you, anyway, whether you like it or not. We should never act like we are the first and last in anything.

Madam Speaker, this country with its very young population is not a place to play complacency games from. It has the potential to erupt and we will all be swallowed in. I wish to reiterate our continued call for dialogue and preparation for peaceful handover of power. Ugandans must be allowed to witness the first ever peaceful handover of power. The upcoming elections must be one that all players will feel part of and an integral part of.

Madam Speaker, we condemn any attempt at taking advantage of the COVID-19 Pandemic for any personal gain and deprivation of the greater society. Funds allocated for the intervention must be accounted for. It is time this Parliament is seen to stand with the ordinary Ugandan in the fight against graft, poor service delivery and exploitation. I still insist that these concerning these masks, we will have to ask for accountability of Shs 81 billion of taxpayers’ money.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and I beg to submit. I beg to lay the response on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of the Opposition for the response to the State of the Nation Address and thereby fulfilling your statutory obligation under Rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

I would like to inform the Members that there will be an opportunity to speak to the President’s State of the Nation Address and to the Leader of the Opposition’s response. However, because it is almost curfew time, I would like to adjourn the House to tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow afternoon.
 
(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 June 2020 at 2.00 o’clock.)

