Tuesday 22nd June, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS
 
(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair).

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, last week you elected Members of various Sessional Committees and I requested those Committees to proceed to elect their Chairpersons and Deputy Chairpersons.  I wish to inform the House that the following have been elected:

The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries,  the Chairperson is hon. Kanyike Anthony,  and the Deputy Chairperson is hon. Dr. Nkuuhe Johnson.

The Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry,  the Chairperson is hon. Ofory Rugette and the Deputy is hon. Okot Ogong.

The Committee on Social Services,  the Chairperson is hon. Dr. Mutesasira and the Deputy is hon. Hyuha Dorothy.

The Committee on Transport, Works and Communications,  the Chairperson is hon. Ongom. A.A,  and the Deputy is hon. Wanjusi Wasieba.

The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs,  the Chairperson is hon. Ogalo Dan and the Deputy is hon. Wacha Ben.

The Committee on Public Service and Local Government,  the Chairperson is hon. Babihuga Winnie and the Deputy is hon. Nabutala.

The Committee on Natural Resources,  the Chairperson is hon. Kajara Aston and the Deputy is hon. Amongin Apol Christine.

The Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs,  the Chairperson is hon. Karuhanga Elly and the Deputy is hon. Egou Charles.

The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs,  the Chairperson is hon. Kyaligonza Matayo and the Deputy is hon. Mudoola Chris.  
The Committee on Finance and Economic Planning,  the Chairperson is hon. Kiraso Beatrice and the Deputy is hon. Abura Kene Francis.

These will be the spokespersons for the Sessional Committees of the Forth Session of this Parliament.  I wish you the best of luck.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL,1999

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker,  I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Referendum and other Provisions Bill, 1999",  be read the Second Time.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The item due to be discussed is a very important one.  In the history of this country,  we are discussing the Referendum and other Provisions Bill, 1999.  Aware of the importance of this item, is it in order for us to continue when we lack a quorum?
 
THE SPEAKER: I am sorry we have not realised the quorum, so the point of order is well taken.  I shall adjourn the proceedings for 15 minutes.

 (The proceedings were adjourned for 15 minutes)

(The House resumed at 3.08 pm, the Speaker presiding)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have just managed to secure a quorum,  so we can proceed.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL,1999

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The Referendum and other Provisions Bill, 1999",  be read the Second Time.  

THE CHAIRPERSON, LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mr. Wandera Ogalo):  Mr. Speaker, this is the report of the Sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.  

The Referendum and other Provisions Bill, 1999, was read the First Time on the 14th of April, 1999.  It was then referred to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee,  under rule 99 sub rule 5 of the rules of procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.  

The Committee commenced work on the Bill on the 13th of May, 1999,  and was required to complete its work within seven days.  It examined the Bill in detail and made inquiries where it was deemed necessary.  

The Committee invited and received views from the Foundation for Human Rights Initiative,  the Catholic Secretariat,  the Uganda Journalists Association,  the Electoral Commission,  the Uganda Human Rights Commission,  the Electronic Media Interest Group, Uganda Newspaper Editors and Publishers Association and His Lordship Justice Benjamin Odoki.  It also received written memoranda from the Uganda Law Society, the Uganda Episcopal Conference and the Uganda Joint Christian Council.  

Invitations were extended to Democratic Party,  Uganda People's Congress,  the Movement Secretariat,  the Free Movement,  the National Democratic Forum,  Church of Uganda and the Uganda Moslem Supreme Council, but none of them turned up.  The Conservative Party faction,  led by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi,  turned up only to say they were opposed to holding the referendum.  

The Committee set aside two days to receive views from the general public,  but regrets to report that Parliament was unable to raise Shs 360,000 to run adverts in the newspapers.  The Committee was therefore unable to receive views from the general public.

The Committee takes this opportunity to thank those who made contributions to this matter of great national importance.  

1.1  Constitutional Background
The effect of Article 271 (2) of the 1995 Constitution is to empower any person to canvass for public support for a political system of his or her choice beginning 2nd July, 1999.  A referendum will be held between 3rd June and 2nd July in the year 2000 to determine which political system shall be used to govern the country.  It is for this purpose and other referenda that the Executive arm of Government brought this Bill for Parliament to consider and enact into law.

Arising from discussions held and critical examination of the Bill,  the Committee drew conclusions that there are some areas which this House should address when debating this Bill.

1.2  Sides canvassing for support
The Bill anticipates two sides in the referendum,  that is those who will say, 'yes' and those who will say, 'no' to the question asked.  Who constitutes a side and how that side will organise remains a major concern.  

The Electoral Commission raised the issue of how individuals could possibly come together to form a side.  It also raised fears that it would not know who to deal with and how it would organise that side.  For instance, the Bill requires the Electoral Commission to organise voters at a polling station for the purpose of identifying agents for the sides to the referendum.  

Also the Electronic Media Interest Group were afraid they would not be able to identify a bona fide agent of a side.  This is so because there is no official source from which they can verify a claim that one is an agent of a side.  In the process therefore,  malicious adverts and mudslinging could be the result.  

The Committee,  under the circumstances,  is of the question that who the actors are is crucial and that this cannot be answered without a legal framework being put in place.  It is the considered view of the Committee therefore,  that this question cannot be answered without first considering, debating and enacting the Political Organisations Bill.  

If on the other hand political organisations cannot canvass for support for a Political System of their choice,  then the law should say so.  This would,  of course,  have far reaching consequences as registered civic bodies or body corporates would not be able to contribute to this national debate.

1.3  The question
The Bill provides that the question to be voted on at the referendum shall be framed by the Electoral Commission.  The framing of the question is a highly political issue.  The results of the referendum can actually depend on the way the question is framed.  

It is the view of the Committee that care must be taken on not only who frames the question, but also how it is framed.  The Committee recommends that the question should not be framed by the Electoral Commission as this shall in the process politicise the Electoral Commission.  In reaching this conclusion, the Committee was mindful of the fact that a dispute could arise about the question itself.  A party could challenge the validity of the question under Article 61(f) of the Constitution.  It is one of the functions of the Electoral Commission to hear and determine election complaints arising before and during polling.  In this regard,  the Commission would be a judge in its own case.  
Further, another function of the Electoral Commission is to formulate and implement civic education programmes relating to elections.  This will include educating the voters about the question framed by the Commission.  Questions will be raised about the question,  explanations will have to be given by the Electoral Commission.  This will bring the Electoral Commission into the political arena.  The Committee is therefore of the view that the question at the referendum should be arrived at by consensus,  after consultations with the sides to the referendum,  and by an independent body.  

1.4  The Media
The Bill seeks to give special treatment to State owned media as opposed to private media.  The Bill therefore discriminates both in itself and in its effect.  The Committee is of the view that all should be equal before the law.  The restrictions placed on the private electronic media should also apply to State owned communications media.

Further,  the Committee is of the view that harsh sentences on the electronic media for contravention of the referendum law may lead the media to shy away from airing views and therefore contributing to the debate on the referendum.  An example is a proprietor of a private electronic media organisation who allows mudslinging against a side.  He is liable to pay a fine of Shs 3 million or imprisonment for two years, or both:  such a fine and imprisonment.  The Committee is of the view that there is need for a middle ground where debate is not stifled but at the same time the media does not abuse this right. 

1.5  The Power of the Minister to override Parliament
Article 255 of the Constitution gives the right to hold a referendum on any issue. It is proposed in the Bill that the Minister may,  with the approval of Parliament,  direct that a referendum be held on any issue. If,  however,  Parliament refuses to approve the Minister's request,  then the minister would take the matter to Cabinet.  If Cabinet approves, the Minister will go ahead and order for the holding of a referendum.  
It is the view of the Committee that Cabinet should not be allowed to override Parliament.  In the first place,  Parliament is more representative of the people than Cabinet.  If Cabinet was allowed to override Parliament in a matter of this nature,  it would negate the spirit of Article 1 of the Constitution which recognizes that power belongs to the people.  If the people have chosen their representatives and their representatives withhold approval,  the matter should be let to rest.  

Lastly,  it does not make sense in the view of the Committee,  to say in Article 79 of the Constitution that Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda,   and at the same time refuse it power of a statutory instrument.  The statutory instrument in this case is made possible by the Referendum Act passed by Parliament.  If there is no law on referendum passed by this Parliament,  there will be no statutory instrument to talk about.  

1.6  Financing
The Bill also proposes that the Minister shall make regulations to regulate financing of the sides to a referendum.  The question of financing the sides ought to be addressed in the main Statute itself.  The sides should know in advance what kind of financing they are entitled to and how it shall be channelled.  Sides should also be able to raise resources on their own.  It is less than two weeks to go before canvassing for support begins.  It is the view of the Committee that regulations should be in place before then.  Alternatively most of those matters should be provided for in the referendum law.

In conclusion,  the Bill addresses the constitutional requirement of holding a referendum in the fourth year of this Sixth Parliament.  The Committee is satisfied that the provisions in the Bill adequately answers this question.  However, there are some issues which in the view of the Committee ought to be addressed in considering this Bill.  Some of these have been highlighted above.  

In light of the comments made, the Committee will,  at an appropriate stage,  move a number of amendments to the Bill contained in its next report.  The Committee is of the view that the Political Organisations Bill,  whose report it had already concluded,  should precede this Bill.  The Committee recommends that subject to other amendments,  there is need to enact this Bill into law.  It is a further step in our democratisation process.  Mr. Speaker,  I beg to move that the report be adopted.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members,  first of all I would like to thank the Chairman and his Committee very much for a very positive reaction to this Bill.  Perhaps before I make a few comments on what is said,  let me remind hon. Members of the objectives of this Bill. I am going to read out simply the memorandum to the Bill.  

The objective of this Bill is to repeal the existing Referendum Statute No.2 of 1994;  to make provision for the holding of a referenda under Articles 74 and 271 of the Constitution,  for the determination of a political system that the people of Uganda wish to adopt;  and referenda to be held to approve Amendments to the Constitution under Article 259 of the Constitution as well as referenda demanded by citizens of Uganda under Article 255 of the Constitution;  to provide for any other referenda that may be required to determine any other matter to cater for a change in the political system by petition of district councils and resolution of Parliament under clause (2) of Article 74 of the Constitution;  and lastly to provide for other matters connected with incidental or to the following matters. 

Let me make a few comments on this very good report of the Committee.  On page two under 1.1 -(Interruption).

MR. PINTO:  I seek your indulgence, Mr. Speaker.  The Bill has been presented,  the report has also been presented by the Chairman.  Would it not be procedurally correct for the House to debate,  or give its input on the report before the Minister makes his remarks?  I mean we are now being confused with what the Minister would like us to hear,  after all he presented his view in the Bill.  I propose that the Minister holds his position and gives us a chance to react to the report,  then he can come to it later.  I do not see substance in him intervening  -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you should look at your regulations, and those will give you the answer you are seeking.  Hon. Minister.

MR. PINTO:  I am seeking the answer from you,  Mr. Speaker.  Would you give it to me,  kindly?

THE SPEAKER:  It is in order for the Minister to make his presentation.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  On page two of the report,  under 1.1,  the first paragraph,  the report says that a referendum will be held between the 3rd June and the 2nd of July in the year 2,000,  to determine which political system shall be used to govern the country.  I think we should add, "subject to the Constitution," because this statement here makes it sound as if after the referendum in the year 2001,  whatever comes out as a result will be the system to govern Uganda for all time.  And I an saying it is not the constitutional provision.  When I say this will be subject to the Constitution,  what do I mean?  Article 74 of the Constitution provides that any other time after that,  there are ways of changing or revisiting the political system.

Having said that,  there is the issue of sides.  The Committee seems to make much of who is going to identify the sides.  I must say with due respect that I think this is really much ado about nothing.  I am just quoting Shakespeare to tell you why there are sides here,  in this Parliament.  One side is for multi-partyism the other side is for the Movement system,  so there are sides.  That being the case,  we have only to whistle to say, 'get on you marks, get set,' and you see the sides emerging.  So that is a remark I really want to make.  

Secondly, in comes the question of canvassing -(Interruption).

MR. AWORI:  I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister on the matter of sides vis-a-vis the observations and recommendations of the Committee on page 7,  second paragraph.  
MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The Minister holding the Floor was giving an impression that we have sides.  I would like to refer him to Article 70 sub clause (1) of the Constitution of Uganda.  In the course of this present Parliament,  we are all supposed to belong to the Movement. The Movement political system is broad based, inclusive and non- partisan and shall conform to what is prescribed here. So, according to constitutional order vis-a-vis the present Constitution,  we have no sides.

AN HON. MEMBER: Further information.

THE SPEAKER: The rule is this: if the person on the Floor does not give way to your point of information,  you do not proceed and the Speaker will not allow you to proceed. So you watch him.  When he is seated you stand and raise your point of information.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was actually following this report page by page,  so I will come to page 7, hon. Awori,  and I am going to explain that.  But as for hon. Lukyamuzi quoting Article 71,  Article 273 says that there shall be a reference of this matter spelt out under 71,  to the people.  In other words,  the referendum is actually seeking to revise Article 71,  so we cannot stop the referendum.  As you have said, you all belong to the Movement for all time,  yet to be factual some of you do not.  So if you say, 'I want a referendum to attack this clause,'  then I think it is in your interest to do so.  

I was going to talk about the issue of canvassing.   Hon. Members may recall that Article 271 (2) stipulates that when the time is right - and if you pass this Bill this coming July - any person may canvass for a political system of his or her choice.  If you look at Article 257 (10) you will find that person the singular is defined as follows:  "In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires - (a)words in the singular include the plural,  and words in the plural include the singular."  It therefore follows that under the Constitution,  canvassing can also be done  by persons and they have to be natural persons.  

But I would like to also remind hon. Members of Article 270.  Article 270 of the Constitution states,  among other things,  that parties which were in existence at the time the Constitution came into force,  these parties do not actually exist any more.  This Constitution came into being on 8th October, 1995.  What were these parties?  The DP, UPM, UPC and CP?  As a matter of law we have never required political parties in this country - since the Uganda National Congress,  the very first political party in 1952 - to register as corporations.  So in law they are groups of people, as by Article 271,  they are entitled to canvass as groups of people.  Therefore I have no problem with them.  The only important thing is can these groups of people canvass with that hinderance in place?  The answer is if they can and should be able to,  then I say, 'let them go ahead and canvass for a political system of their own choice.'  


MR. ONGOM:  I thank the hon. Minister for allowing me to ask for this clarification.  The Minister has referred to the Article in the Constitution which recognizes the existing parties,  that is quite true.  How does he relate this to Article 269 that actually stops these parties from operating until after a decision is made on the referendum?  How does he relate this?  Will the passing of this Referendum Bill into law automatically abolish or nullify Article 269 of the Constitution which definitely stops the parties from operating?

MR. AWORI:  I am also seeking additional information or clarification from the hon. Minister on clear distinction between the natural person and persons as a legal entity vis-a-vis political parties.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I really do not see why hon. Awori is seeking  this kind of clarification.  He knows the distinction: natural persons have got blood and flesh,  while the political parties not being legal entities,  not being corporations like companies,  they are associations,  they are groups of people;  groups of people with blood and flesh.  The Constitution says those types of people are free to canvass but not the 'its',  the corporations.  So I am saying that as long as the parties are groups of people then they can canvass.  

The last question is this,  hon. Ongom is asking me, 'what is the relationship between what you are saying and Article 269?' I am saying that, we cannot have our cakes and eat them too. The Constitution clearly says that four years after 1995 - when the Constitution came into operation, the people of this country will be asked to choose. The CA made a temporary choice for them in 1995,  and it said, 'for now is going to be under the Movement system.  However four years from now,  people must be asked to choose, and then canvassing will take place.'  Who is going to canvass?   It says it is the natural people.  Having said so,  the Constitution cannot go back on its word and say, 'those people will not canvass.' So if you say to me, 'how do you relate that to Article 269?'  Article 269 refers to the normal functions of political parties.  

This specific function appears to me to be a job that should have been done by the CA,  and it is an unfinished job.  For this specific job the Constitution says,  'go out,  speak and canvass.'  It leaves Article 269 in operation,  but for this purpose these people must be able to canvass because if they do not, the debate will be lopsided,  and the people will not choose with all the information before them.  It will be a tragedy if the people of this country choose a system in ignorance.  

This brings us to the questions:  how about those corporate bodies other than parties?  My answer would be, 'sorry.'   Because Article 271 (2) does not talk about those corporations, it talks about people.  However,  the members of those corporate bodies are persons,  they entitled to go and canvass for the political system which they want. 

Page five of the report correctly points out that it is possible that debate might be stifled through fear,  if the private media has got something hanging over their heads stopping them from speaking out.  I must say that this was actually an oversight on the part of us in Government.  It was already meant to cover across the board,  all media,  public and private.  It was just an oversight.  However the report goes on to say, "The Committee is of the view that there is need for a middle ground where debate is not stifled but at the same time the media does not abuse this right".  I would agree with that,  but the as of now before the Amendments come,  the Committee stops short of helping us in specify this middle ground.  I hope they will do so at some stage.  In the meantime I am saying this, once the Committee recognises possibilities of abusing this right,  then it is necessary to say,  'supposing they do abuse this right?  There has to be some sanction.'  A sanction is necessary,  in most cases,  to be able to compel compliance.  This is why we have suggested this.  The Committee might say that it is a bit too harsh,  but I should wait to hear from them,  at Committee stage,  for the amendments.  

I come to this very difficult issue of power of the Minister to override Parliament, it is on page five.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, first of all if this Cabinet wanted to override Parliament,  we would not be bringing this Bill.  The fact that it is here means that we recognize the power of this Parliament.  Having said so,  there is this problem.  Put the case that tomorrow a Minister will come here and say, 'Uganda and Sudan should form a union',  and then we want to hold a referendum on this;  Parliament says, 'no, no, no, we do not want this.'  As far as I remember,  this particular example neither came up during the campaigns for us being elected here to Parliament, this issue never came up.  The question however is that if an issue of policy comes up and it has to be determined in the interest of good governance, and was not part of the general debates of the campaigns what should be done?  

In countries like Britain,  if the Executive has got a policy to which Parliament does not agree,  the Prime Minister goes to the Queen and says, 'Madam, please prologue this Parliament,  dissolve it,  let us just go to the people to determine their will.'  However, this Constitution was made in such a way that it a cross between the British and the American laws.  Here the President has no authority to seek at the dissolution of Parliament,  under the Constitution.  That being so,  the report says it recognises the power of the people.  It does recognize the power of the people then it stands to reason whether that power lies under the Constitution, Article 1 and 4.  If Cabinet disagrees,  you and Cabinet are agents of the donors of power so outside our respective establishments,  let us go to them and ask them.  

My point is that if the Cabinet - in those circumstances - were to say, 'let us go to those who have got the power,  to decide on these issues,  let us go to the people who have the power, let them decide',  to me that is not flouting Parliament.  In fact if you like, it is a way of putting into execution this Constitution.  Incidently the report quotes Article 79 in support of this argument and says that the Cabinet is to flout Parliament.  Why?  Because that Article says Parliament has power to legislate for good governance and so on.  Incidently I think the words are an oversight on the part of the Committee.  They forgot to read a certain part of that Article,  and that part is 79 (1) which says, "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, - that does not come out in the report - Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace,  order,  development and good governance of Uganda."  It is subject to this Constitution which says in Article 1 that the people have got the last say.  

If therefore there is an issue which was never subject of campaigns during general election - because if it was a subject of campaigns then of course Parliament would have been elected with that view - our mandate is clear,  all this is decided in a prescribed way.  In those circumstances,  I think it would be good and in fact constitutional for the people of this country to be asked.  They should be asked for example,  'what do you think?  Should Uganda and Sudan become a union or not?'  So it is not really a question of ignoring Parliamentarians,  I think it is a necessity to resolve certain things in a certain way, especially where the Executive, the President cannot seek a dissolution of Parliament.

Financing:  I agree with the Committee and at an appropriate time I intend to bring an Amendment to -(Interruption).

MR. GAGAWALA WAMBUZI:  Mr. Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify to me whether it is only the Cabinet and the President who can have overriding power in case of these Bills.  Because it appears whenever you put up a Bill,  if Parliament says no you will override it and go ahead and force what the Cabinet and the Executive wants.  Are there instances when the Parliament can put down its foot and say that we really do not want it and the Executive will be forced to succumb to the Parliament?  I would like clarification on whether actually the Constitution provides for that.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  You, Mr. Speaker one of the things  -(Interruption).

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Sorry hon. Minister,  but I would like to be clarified on a situation where the matter has come to Parliament, is rejected by Parliament, and Cabinet decides to go out to consult the people through a referendum.  Would Members of Parliament,  who would have turned down that approach,  be banned from going to canvass against that issue in the field?  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker,  hon. Members,  once the Cabinet decides to go to the people of this country of whom you form part,  then the Cabinet has asked for it.  It cannot turn around and say, 'do not speak against our position.'  At that moment everybody is entitled to say yes or no to a position.  

To go to the other clarification,  sometimes when you argue from the particular to the general,  there could be difficulties.  If you generalise that this power is being asked for from Parliament - specifically under this issue of referenda,  it may be held on issues national interest.  Right now there is something about the East African Common Market.  Supposing someone was to say, 'we in Parliament do not want the common market.'  I think that bearing in mind the benefits of this East African Common Market, it would be a good thing for the people of this country to be asked whether they do or do not support Uganda being part of the common market.  I am therefore saying that specifically,  not generally,  on issues of a referenda,  if there is some such important issue,  Cabinet should be able to say, 'we do not think you are right,  we are to go to the only arbiters that exist in the Constitution,  namely the people of this country.'  

MR. MUTYABA:  I would seek further clarification on that matter of seeking the approval of Cabinet in case Parliament has refused to approve the Bill for a referendum.  The hon. Minister knows that under Article 91 (5) for example, when you are looking at Bills,  if the President refuses to assent to a Bill twice,  Parliament can,  by two-thirds majority,  override the refusal of the President and pass the Bill. For me that is one clear element that Parliament is sovereign. Would the Minister clarify to me,  vis-a-vis what is being proposed in the Bill,  his interpretation of that Article of the Constitution with regard to the powers of Parliament and the powers of Cabinet?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister,  there is another point being raised so you will answer both at once.

MR. NDEGE:  Mr. Speaker,  thank you,  but it was the same thing.  I was talking about the power of Cabinet overriding Parliament,  when a Bill is rejected. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I am begging hon. Members to be particularly,  should I say attentive,  careful,  about this issue,  because it concerns an area on which the Constitution is silent.  In a way,  the Government is asking you to turn yourselves into a Constituent Assembly,  -(Interjections)-  I mean in inverted commas.  Hon. Mutyaba is asking me that how about Bills which the President refuses to pass and we do?   I say, yes,  you pass them constitutionally,  because the President is subject to this Constitution too,  that is all.  

Now I am asking the question,  here is an issue which is important to the governance of this country, that issue was never debated during a general election for Parliament to be appointed, and the Cabinet thinks there is an important policy issue here which is in the interest of this country.  They come here to you and you say, 'no, we do not think we want a referenda.'  Why is it constitutionally wrong for Cabinet to call into play Article 1 of the Constitution under those circumstances?  Article 1 of  the Constitution says, "All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution."  If we come to a point where Parliament does not agree with Cabinet on an important issue,  and Cabinet,  only for purposes of this and not generally says, 'let us go to those who elected us to decide,'  I think that is a good way -(Interruption).

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  I thank the hon. Minister for having given way.  The point at stake concerns a period when there may be conflict of interest between the Executive and Parliament,  and the question being asked is that when you have such a situation,  who should prevail?   And what we are saying is that,  it is not as easy as that.  For example,  under Article 85 - and I would ask you to listen carefully hon. Members of Parliament - under Article 85 Parliament determines its emoluments.   But under Article 93 of the Constitution,  if a motion or a resolution makes a charge on the consolidated fund or any other public fund,  that motion must only be moved by Government.  In other words, what could happen is that Parliament could determine its emoluments and if the Executive is not satisfied that it can have those emoluments, it may not move the motion.  

The point we are establishing is that we have checks and balances in the Constitution,  and when we have checks and balances in the Constitution,  there are situations when the Executive may not move for example under Article 93,  and this happened when I was a Minister for Public Service. (Mr. Awori rose_).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, he is giving information, now you want to give information too?  Let him give the information then you can give yours.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  I want to give you an example of when we were determining your emoluments.  You made proposals but the Executive was not ready to move the motion,  because it did not have the money in the kitty.  What happened was that over the weekend we were busy bargaining.

Under Article 85 of the Constitution,  Parliament determines its emoluments but under Article 93 of the Constitution,  if a motion or resolution makes a charge on the consolidated fund or any other public fund, that motion must only be moved by the Government. In other words, what could happen is that Parliament could determine its emoluments and if the Executive does not have those emoluments,  it may not move the motion.  That is a case in point to establish that we have checks and balances in the Constitution and when you have them,  there are situations when the Executive may not move the motion. (Interjection). Sometimes one branch prevails,  sometimes another one does not.  What we are saying here is that it is not even a question of the Executive prevailing, it is a question of the Executive managing - (Interruption).

MR. ONGOM:  Mr. Speaker, is it really in order for the Prime Minister to continue to confuse the House when in fact the Constitution is very clear on which is the supreme body in as far as power to make laws is concerned?  That is actually where Article 91 of the Constitution is very clear.  He is bringing us instances of confusion,  conflict here.  We are talking about specific power of Parliament to make laws and if there is conflict between Parliament and Cabinet who prevails,  it is very clear here,  even the President cannot overrule.  Why is he confusing us,  is it in order?

THE SPEAKER:  Can you read it out?

MR. ONGOM:  It is a long Article 91 (6)(b),  but let me read the last part which says, "Where the President refuses to assent to a Bill," -  and let us read the President together with Cabinet here - "which has been reconsidered and passed under paragraph (a) of this clause or under clause (4) of this article,  the Speaker shall,  upon the refusal,  if the bill was so passed with the support of at least two-thirds of all members of Parliament, cause a copy of the bill to be laid before Parliament and the bill shall become law without the assent of the President."  This is very clear.

THE SPEAKER:  You are wondering whether the Right hon. Prime Minister is in order to mislead the House?

MR. ONGOM:  To be confusing people.

THE SPEAKER: I think,  hon. Members,  the Right hon. Prime Minister was developing a point,  but in his presentation he was mindful about this provision you have read.  In fact he was not actually discussing it.  He was discussing a different scenario, a situation where there is what he called a conflict of interest,  that is what he was explaining.  He was not in any way confusing people regarding the power of Parliament vis-a-vis the issue of law making.  For example where Parliament has passed a law and the President declines to assent,  it comes back and Parliament passes the Bill again,  by the very Constitution.  The President is not even required to do anything.  By that alone, the thing becomes law.  I do not think the Prime Minister was disputing that,  he was only discussing another scenario,  of emoluments.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you,  Mr. Speaker, for that ruling. We are saying that from time to time when you have a conflict of interest,  we actually go to the people as arbiters,  we do not even prevail over Parliament, but we go to the people as under Article 1. I want to make it clear that from time to time - (Interjection).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister,  are you giving information?  You are making a presentation instead of giving -

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I will put a full stop at this point.

MR. MWANDHA: First of all the example given by the Right Hon. Prime Minister is not applicable in this case.  I was party to this as a member of the Committee on Business,  and the situation is totally different.  What the Minister for Constitutional Affairs is asking this Parliament is abdicate its responsibility to Cabinet,  because his argument is that because certain matters are not part of the campaign during elections, it is necessary to go to the people.  But there are so many matters in any situation that if we are to go to people for any matter that was not party to the campaign, then we will be holding referenda every day.  I see the argument being advanced by the Minister for Constitutional Affairs as calling upon this Parliament to abdicate this responsibility,  Mr. Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER:  What is the point of clarification?

MR. MWANDHA:   The point of clarification is whether we shall have to go to the public every time there is a matter that may come up,  which was not a subject of the campaigns. 

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I would like to seek clarification from the Minister on why he does not opt for an Amendment of the Constitution,  so that this can be clearly put out.  I see this as a trick to use part of the law to satisfy the whims of the Executive,  because there are instances where the masses have raised up their voices and made objections to various decisions that the Cabinet has made,  and the cabinet have stood their ground, they have not heeded the community's cries.  Why is it that this time they would rather by-pass Parliament and go down to referenda when they could opt for a constitutional Amendment.  Why is he not opting for that, Mr. Speaker?

MRS. MATEMBE:  The information I want to give to this House is that there is division of labour in the three organs of the State and these three organs of the State - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:   Hon. Members, I think you should allow the Member to make her contribution.  You will have your turn,  and you will not wish to find yourself in the same position.

MRS. MATEMBE:  These three organs of the State together implement this Constitution,  and this Constitution was made by the people and for the people of this country.  Each organ sees to it that it discharges its responsibility in implementation of this Constitution.  In this Constitution, there is an Article which says that towards the end of the Fourth Year of Parliament,  a referendum shall be held.  It does not say that it may be held,  but that it shall be held.  

How will it be held?  The organs responsible for ensuring the holding of a referendum will sit and play their part so that the referendum is held.  The Article that has brought this controversy is in a bid to implement the Constitution as required by the people of this land.  The Cabinet brings here the law, seeking the supremacy of the honourable House to pass this law because it is its duty,  and the Parliament declines?  What happens?  This is the crucial question.  But,  Mr. Speaker,  this Constitution has provisions,  one read by hon. Ongom which is Article 91:  "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,  the power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised through bills passed by Parliament..."  The supremacy of this Parliament is put into play subject to this Constitution.  This Constitution says in Article 1 that all power belongs to the people,  and clause (4) says that the people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how.  They shall be governed through regular and fair elections of their representatives.  

In the CA,  through their representatives,  the people chose a referendum to be held.  It is upon the Government to ensure that the peoples' will is put into practice.  If the Government is incapacitated by this House,  Mr. Speaker -(Interruption).

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA:  Mr. Speaker, hon. Matembe has certain provisions in the Constitution that she is quoting that this one shall be done subject to the provisions of the Constitution,  Parliament shall do 1,2,3,4, subject to the provisions of the Constitution,  granted.  But hon. Matembe,  the Minister of Ethics and Integrity has read Article 1,  which herself and I participated in 1994/95 in writing,  that all power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution.  

However,  hon. Matembe did not read the whole sentence so that we get the total picture.  Is it in order for the hon. Minister to read the sentence in part,  in order to suit a point she wanted to make,  thereby distorting it and misleading us?  The Article is very clear,  all power belongs to the people,  who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with whatever is written here in this Bible of our politics.  Is she in order,  Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, the Minister was reading from the Constitution and she was explaining the text of what she read.  I think she needed opportunity to go to the end,  for she was about to delve into what was going to amount to a contribution instead of a point of information. That in itself of course could not make her out of order.  But coming back to the point as to whether reading from a Constitution and explaining a clause as she did was out of order,  I think she was in order. 

CAPT. BABU:  When the hon. Chairman gave us his precise and concise report,  he did mention certain things in the report which were very good.  The Minister is also mentioning certain things which are very good.  However, if you look carefully, the attached amendment to this report of the Chairman gives details of each one of these areas we are now debating.  I would like to propose therefore,  Mr. Speaker,  that why do we not give the Minister a chance to finish giving his submissions and then we can debate these amendments one by one more seriously?  Because if you look at the amendments,  we might be debating something which is very clear in there already.  I would like to propose that let the Minister finish his submission and then we go to the amendments.  You will find that we will be able to debate them even better,  because they are very clearly put out.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think this is the procedure:  I expect it now to be well known to Members that right now we are at the stage of debating the general principles of the Bill,  one of which would be whether it is desirable to have such a law, whether the proposals which are summarised in the memorandum are desirable for this country.  Later the House goes into the Committee stage,  that is when you will analyze each and every Amendment which the Committee has proposed.  So, let us confine ourselves to discussing the general principles.  The time will come when we will go into details.  In other words, hold your fire until you get to the provisions of the Bill.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, this Parliament has power to pass or not pass a Bill,  to allow or not a proposal by Cabinet.  On the other hand,  it is my duty to raise issues,  and I am rising them.  I am saying,  hon. Members, think about this - and I hope you will think about it - and when time comes for you to allow or disallow it, you may do what you want.  But I am raising issues which are my duty to do,  and I said I am dealing with an issue which is not really provided for.  
A point has been made that Article 1 reads as follows:  "All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution."  What does this Constitution provide?  Article 1(4) says that, "The people shall exercise their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed,  through regular,  free and fair elections of their representatives through referenda."  You can see that this Constitution provides for the election of Members of Parliament as a way of getting the peoples' will implemented.  But it also provides for referenda,  which is not elections;  and what does that mean?  The issue I am now raising is a question of when may referenda be called into play?  That is the question I am raising.  Let Parliament decide on when the will of the people may be determined not through elections,  but through referenda.  

My question is,  how or when they may the referenda be held?  The question I am asking hon. Members,  when may referenda be called into play?  I did give an example and cited cases where it is necessary for both of us,  Cabinet and Parliament,  to go to the people and say,  'perhaps this is an issue which you people should decide on,  because the two groups have failed to decide, now it is up to you.'  

Financing:  I have said that, clause 18 -(Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The Minister is touching on an issue which is almost the main stay of the Constitution,  namely Article 69 sub clause (1): "The people of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice through free and fair elections or referenda."  The clarification I am seeking is, what evidence is there on the ground that a properly conducted general election, free and fair,  cannot answer the yells of this specific Article?  
The second clarification I am seeking is with reference to what the Minister said,  and if I may generally quote him,  he said that according to the Uganda laws, political parties are not obliged to be registered as bodies cooperate, that is correct.  With reference to Article 69 clause (2): "The political systems referred to in clause (1) of this Article shall include the movement political system, the multiparty political system and any other democratic and representative political system."  Assuming in the course of this Parliament a new system namely the commonest system emerges,  would it equally participate in the same way the other political systems are participating?  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Let me answer the latter part by referring the hon. Member to Article 69 (2) (c),  "any other democratic and representative political system," may also be brought to the referendum.  If in the circumstances a common system is judged to be democratic,  in accordance with this Article,  then it too will be put to the people.  Am I understood?  

Going back to the other one,  the hon. Member referred to Article 69 (1) which talks about either elections or referenda.  He asked a question, 'why is it that it is not enough to have just elections,  period?'  My first answer is very simple.  I never made this Constitution alone.  The question says, there are two ways of doing the thing.  But if you want to suppress referenda you are actually, by implication, amending this Constitution.  

Secondly, I think last week we argued about this Article, and Parliament decided on it.  So let me now move on to funding.  Incidently,  hon. Mwandha asked me a question that if each time there are issues we have never talked about during an election,  should we go to a referendum?  My simple careful answer is, we should never try to argue matters to absurdity.  You might be saying, people should feed so we should feed every minute of the day!  I am saying that if there is a matter of public interest, for the good governance of the country, let us go to those people and ask them to give us the power.  Parliament is saying, 'no, we must have all the powers!' That is up to you, I am leaving it at that.  I have raised the issue, it is up to you to decide what to do.  

I now go to financing.  Under clause 27 of the Referendum and Other Provisions Bill, if that clause is passed by Parliament in that form,  it says that expenses of the referenda shall be paid for by monies passed or voted by Parliament.  However, Cabinet feels that we should not put an additional specific duty on the Electoral Commission if funded by Parliament, to facilitate equally to some extent, I say some extent because our budget is not that big,  the sides to the question of a referendum.  This is so that each side can be assisted to put forward its views for the people to vote. We are saying we are going to come to Parliament to move an Amendment to that effect.

Page 7, and hon. Awori's query, I know what is in this question so let me just -(An hon. Member rose)- hon. Minister could you take time to reflect on what I am going to say?  The Committee is of the view that the Political Organisations Bill,  whose report it had already concluded, should precede this Bill.  What is clear, very clear, is what has been recommended.  What is not so clear in the circumstances as of today the 22 of June, is because of the time between now and say July the 2nd and 3rd when the Constitution says someone who wants to canvass should start,  do we have the time?  During that time can we debate the other one first and be able to comply with this mandatory provision of the Constitution?  Could we pass the Bill providing for canvassing,  providing for a referenda,  by early July, do we have the time?  My answer is, we do not.  On the other hand the Political Organisations Bill does not have a time limitation provided for in the Constitution.  The referendum is time conditioned,  time is of the essence,  the other one is not.  Therefore this is why I am saying that because of this requirement of the Constitution, let Parliament pass the Referendum Bill before the Political Organisations Bill.  

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister keeps saying, 'we do not have the time, we do not have time.'  Where has he been for the last 36 months since we passed this Constitution?

THE SPEAKER:  You see,  you are making the Minister take too long with his presentation because of some of these unnecessary interruptions.  You will make those points in your contribution, you will have the chance.  Because you are interrupting hon. Awori,  if you say so then you might be foregoing your right to seek another clarification.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Lastly on this,  my answer to hon. Awori as to where I was, of course he knows where I was, in Finance.  And the other thing is that those of you - and I hope all of you have read the report of the Legal Sessional Committee on the Political Organisations Bill - if you have read that report, you will note that apart from clause 1, every clause there has been altered,  from clause 2 to 30.  This is in a way saying to Cabinet, 'go back to the drawing board,' and we have to do this.  How can he go only with  given the time we have to be able to also comply with this requirement of the Constitution that by early July those who want to canvass for sides, for each side must be legally entitled to do so?  So, let us now pass this Bill of the Referendum then the other one will come later.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Clarification.  Hon. Speaker, -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  I have not permitted you,  because the Minister has finished.  From whom are you seeking the clarification?  Or you would like to contribute?

DR. OKULO EPAK: No. Honourable Speaker, I am seeking guidance perhaps from you,  as to what would follow.  According to our rules,  Second Reading,  rule 100 sub rule (2),  the Chairperson presents his report, sub rule (3) says,  "A full debate shall then ensue on the merits and principles of the Bill on the basis of the explanatory memorandum and the report from the Committee."  I am seeking your guidance because as much as I would have wished to seek clarification from the hon. Minister,  you said he has finished and he sat down,  and our rules say he cannot debate the same motion twice.  

But for those of us who have not sought clarifications,  after the full blast debate,  questions may arise for the same hon. Minister to answer.  Is he going to be able to do it,  Mr.Speaker?  Because I believe there could be need for him to come back for a semi full blast debate,  but according to our rules he is barred.  Could you please guide us as to whether the Minister is still available for more debates?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member,  I can see,  even without reference to the rule,  that the hon. Minister is still available.  But going to our rules,  you did not read rule 100(1).  Subject to this rule,  the Vice President, Minister or any other Member in charge of the Bill,  shall move that the Bill be read a second time and may address the House.  I think the Minister is doing that, and he has finished.  The mover of the motion,  according to our rules,  will have an opportunity to also wind up although  I do not know at what stage.  Your worry is that he will not be available,  I am not really sure about that.  That is my position.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I am sorry,  Mr. Speaker,  for involving myself in a debate with you but as I said last time, you have the authority for the final interpretation.  I presume what you read in sub clause (1) meant that the Minister for Constitutional Affairs should have,  soon after moving for the second reading,  made those remarks,  before the Chairman presented his report.  Because talking after the Chairman, he was actually engaging in a full blast debate,  according to sub clause (2).  There was no explanation supporting his move for a second reading.  There is a kind of hop, step and jump over the whole matter.  Mr. Speaker, I am subject to your guidance as I sought it Sir,  thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have so guided.  I think you are happy.  Hon. Okulo,  I would like to make sure that you are happy.  I do not want you to -(Interruption).

MR. KIRENGA EMMANUEL (Mityana North,  Mityana):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would say that I am a member of the Committee and therefore I support the report.  But I would like to make a few observations to emphasize or clarify on what has been said in the report.  

I would like to comment on the debate which has been going on about whether Cabinet can override what Parliament has rejected.  Mr. Speaker,  if you look at the proposed clause (3) sub clause (2) of the Bill,  it says that where Parliament refuses to approve a statutory order proposed by the Minister under paragraph (e),  the Minister may, with the approval of the Cabinet,  make the order directing the holding of the referendum in pursuance of Article 1 of the Constitution.  This assumes that Parliament has got power to give away some of its powers to Cabinet.  In this debate,  if Parliament says that it does not want to give away its powers,  then that will be the end of the matter and Parliament will be supreme.  Parliament would remain supreme under the Constitution unless it decides to give away some of its powers.   And from the mood of the House,  it seems Parliament may not want to be so generous.

Talking about the referenda generally,  I wish to point out that a referendum can be a constitutional referendum for changing some provisions of the Constitution,  or it can be a general referendum for changing anything which is not in the Constitution.  In both instances,  it is assumed that Parliament first passes the law before it is approved by the people,  in the referendum.  So, Parliament first passes what the people are to approve of in a referendum. I cannot see a situation where Parliament refuses to pass a provision and then it is taken to the people in a referendum.  Because eventually after the referendum,  it becomes a law - the result of a referendum is a law.  Therefore, Parliament should first pass it,  then it is taken to the people for approval and then it becomes a law in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. 

A referendum assumes that there are two sides to a question,  one saying 'yes', another saying 'no',  one approving this,  another one disapproving it.  Actually this Bill assumes that there are two sides to the issue.  But, Mr. Speaker, it is possible that there could be three sides, in which case it is not a referendum,  it is called a "triferendum."  But this one is catered for in our amendments. 

Another thing which has bothered me a bit is the procedure to be followed before a referendum is held.  It is assumed that Parliament passes a law,  and then it is ratified by the people in the referendum,  and after that, it becomes the law.  Let us take the example of the coming referendum.  In the coming referendum,  voting will be in the year 2000 - it is called Referendum 2000.  In the year 2000,  the people will choose one system or the other.  They might choose the Movement System or they might choose the Multiparty System.  Let us assume,  God forbid,  that they choose Multiparty System,  that will be the will of the people.  

My interest is to explain the legal position as envisaged by clause 17 of this Bill.  Clause 17 states that if,  for instance, the people choose that there will be a Multiparty system after the end of this Parliament,  that one will take effect at the dissolution of Parliament.  The question which I want to pose here is,  if the results of the referendum are that the people want the Multiparty system,  will it take effect as we take it in clause 17 of the Bill?  What I have seen in other referenda, the result of a referendum becomes law.  There must be a law saying that the result of the referendum is this and this is now the present law,  as a result of that referendum.  For instance, I would expect that Parliament will pass a law saying that if the results of the referendum are for the Multiparty system,  then the law will be like this so that it is passed by Parliament.  This is so that when the results of the referendum are announced, the law becomes as already proposed by Parliament.  

There has to be a law in force saying that from such and such a date,  this is the system which will operate so that in future if people want to change it,  the effect of it will be to change that law.  Anyway this is something that the Minister or the Attorney General may want to consider,  because I have seen it happening in other jurisdictions and I think it is persuasive.

On the drafting of the question,  I think the Minister has not commented on the proposal by the Committee and I assume that he agrees that the drafting of the question should be not by the Electoral Commission,  but by three Judges.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I would agree with this subject on two things:  because the panel of judges may too be criticized,  I however will be prepared for that myself provided 'in consultation with the sides' does not mean 'with the consent of the sides.'  Thank you.

MR. KIRENGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  Here we have said, 'it is the Minister who refers the question to the Chief Justice,  who appoints the Judges for the purpose of framing the question.'  But then there is also a problem,  those Judges competent?  Because the drafting of the question is not a very familiar thing in the law,  it is something new.  Well,  it is administrative,  so maybe they will get the assistance of some people who are experienced,  like myself and a few others.

It is very important because,  let me bring an example.  If a question is badly drafted, it can influence the results of the voting.  For instance in the coming referendum we might say, "do you want the Movement system to continue so that we continue having peace and dignity and freedom?"  Or, "do you want Multi-partyism to come back so that we have detention without trial,  or things like that?"  It is very important that the question should not be biased,  it should be very clear so that the electorate understands it clearly.  So, it requires some experience,  impartiality and fairness.

I would like also to comment on the sides.  You see,  we are going to have two sides in this referendum.  But there is a problem -(Interruptions).

MR. MWANDHA:  Is the Member in a way implying that this question,  after it has been framed,  it should be approved by Parliament to avoid the kind of mischief that can occur in framing the question as pointed out?  I want clarification from him.

MR. KIRENGA: Thank you very much, hon. Member.  In fact when I was in the Committee,  I was of the view that Parliament should be involved in the approval of the question as framed.  But then some other Members thought that Parliament is also partisan.  Parliament can also be biased.  So, it depends on where the majority is.  They can decide to frame it in such a way that it favours one side.  It is possible,  although I do not doubt the integrity of the Members of this House.  

For your information, in some other countries which I visited, the question is approved by Parliament.  There are some countries where Parliament approves the issue to be decided on by the people in the referendum.  But here, I think it might bring problems,  especially of time.  If Parliament is to come back and approve of the question,  it might delay matters.

I would like to comment on the sides.  This Bill assumes that there are two sides and those sides will be known.  But there is a problem of the side which does not have leadership.  Who will speak for it?  I can see some chaos ahead.  Somebody who is a multi-partyist might claim to be a movementist and then spoil the Movement side and vice versa.  I am of the view that we should consider this point and propose a way of organising the sides so that the sides have got leadership rather than leaving it to the individuals to organise themselves into sides.  That could be a problem.  For instance, if somebody is speaking on the radio for one side,  he can spoil his own side intentionally although he claims to be speaking for that side.  But somebody can say,  'no, you are not on our side, so you are not allowed to speak for us.'  That is the sort of thing I would like, but I think Parliament might want to consider this kind of thing.

Choosing the agents.  Who is going to choose the agents of the side which is not organised?  You might have people who claim to be agents when they are not,  we could have rival agents claiming to represent one of those sides.

There is also another problem:  in Ireland,  after the question has been framed,  they choose some eminent lawyers to frame arguments for each side so that when people are campaigning, they are guided by those arguments.  But here we are leaving it to each person to campaign.  He will advance arguments in support of one side which may be false.  

If we do not put it in the law,  I would encourage the Electoral Commission to organise some people to guide the population to say, 'this side should be voted for because of these points,  the other side should be voted for because of these points."  We should not leave it to the people to confuse issues.  We might again have chaos if there is no organised set of arguments for either of the sides.

In the Bill it is stated that each side should have equal opportunities on Government radios,  televisions and so forth, but nothing is said on the private media.  This is because there is freedom of the media.  The question which bothers me is,  if these two sides are given equal opportunities on Government media,  and that provision is not applied with regard to the private media, you will have rich people having more opportunities because they will be able to finance campaigns at the expense of the other side which is poor.  This provision does not make sense,  if the private media is left to be used according to the money the campaigners have.

One hon. Member said, 'well this is freedom.  Those who have money can be heard more and more.'  But there is also the problem that in the private media some radios or some media can refuse to give opportunities to one of the sides.  What would you do if they refused?  For instance,  if one radio is for Multi-partyism, it could refuse to air the views of a Movement supporter,  and there is no provision here to regulate that.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you give me the impression that you are presenting a minority view!  You said you are a Member of the Committee,  and yet you are criticizing things in the report of the Committee?  

MR. KIRENGA: Mr. Speaker, this is not something new.  Some of these things are taken care of in the report,  but they are not emphasized.  I am trying to emphasize them so that we may have to expand some of them.

I have got two more points to make before I sit down.  The funding of the referendum,  which is actually for two purposes:

One is the funding of the Electoral Commission to enable it to run the referendum.  The second funding is of the sides which are campaigning in the referendum.  

In the Bill, it had been stated before that Government funding will not be used for campaigning.  But the Minister has said,  and I thank him for this,  that he is going to amend the law so that each side can be facilitated to the campaigning.  This is good because the results of the referendum might be beneficial to the State.  For instance,  in future - I am not talking about the changing of the political systems - some people might campaign to change a law which is in the Constitution and the result of that change would benefit the population.  So, it is good that those who are campaigning should be facilitated with Government funds.  

Lastly, I want to comment on canvassing by persons as stated in the Bill,  and as clarified by the Minister.  The Constitution says that the four political parties will continue to exist until a law governing them is passed.  So, the four parties namely, Uganda People's Congress, DP, CP and UPM,  will continue to exist until the Political Organisations Bill is passed.  But a question was paused, "are they corporations?  Are they bodies corporate?"  The answer is that they are not bodies corporate,  they are just associations.  But in the Political Organisations Bill,  it is proposed that upon being registered,  they will become corporate.  But before that law is passed, they are just associations.  

For the above reason,  the only way they can campaign is to campaign as individuals.  Yes,  DP cannot campaign as DP because DP is not a person for the time being.  It is not a person, neither is UPC a person,  but the leaders can be described as Members of UPC or DP.  There can be a definition that if a man like Ssemogerere campaigns,  we define him as a person and as a leader of a Party -(Interruption).

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Given that scenario,  and that the Bill provides for sides, how many would be participating in that referendum?  
MR. KIRENGA: In fact the Minister said that a group of persons can campaign.  Ten of them can go out and campaign for one issue, but they can only campaign as individuals.  Although we can describe hon. Kyaligonza as a Munyoro,  and former soldier,  we can say that this man is also a leader of a party.  But essentially we are describing a person.

MRS. ZZIWA NANTONGO:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor.  He mentioned that it should be corporate organisations which could campaign as parties.  I was thinking that Article 270 gives these organisations of parties the legality to continue operating,  until the law is made.  I want to be clarified on whether there is any other law which has legislated that it should be corporate bodies that should be parties?  I am seeking clarification.

MR. MWANDHA:  I want the hon. Member to help this House understand how financing of sides os to be done,  which sides cannot be identified?  If there is any opportunity for sides to get funding to try and sell their programme, who is going to receive the money,  who is going to account for it,  who is going to solicit for this funding?  I want him to comment on whether it would have helped if the Political Organisations Bill had been passed prior to going into the referendum.  Thank you.

MR. MUTYABA:  In view of what the hon. Member earlier said that there is need for the groups to be given some kind of level treatment and in view of what he has just said now that it is only individuals who can campaign,  is the hon. Member in effect saying that in order to give these people the level treatment which he thinks they should be given,  the Political Parties Bill should precede this Bill?

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  I am seeking further clarification, Mr. Speaker.  I am representing Buhaguzi and the Buhaguzi people have been always asking me what a referendum is.  I have always been telling them that the referendum is to choose between the Political Parties and the Movement.  Here we are being told that the choosing between the two will be on individual basis.  I am now confused,  further confused as to what is going to take place.  Are these Political Parties that have been put into abeyance going to be rejuvenated during that time when the campaigns of the referendum start?

MR. KIRENGA:  What I said about the sides is to the effect that they must organise themselves so that we know who should get funding.  Because if everybody comes and claims -(Interjections)- Mr. Speaker,  I am not going to comment on whether Political Organisations Bill should be passed first,  because the Minister has just dealt with that issue.  But before it is passed,  I would recommend that we put in the Bill how the sides are going to be organised.  If we leave it to individuals,  each individual will go on the radio and claim money,  each individual will go and claim for the money,  and campaign without any directive from an organised group,  then people are going to be confused.  

But hon. Zziwa had wanted to find out whether the parties are corporations because they exist.  There are some corporations which can campaign in this referendum,   which are not Political Parties.  For instance a company is a corporate body,  there are some organisations which are corporate but of course,  they are not allowed to do politics,  they do not exist as political parties.  So it will be wrong for them to campaign.  But corporations and individuals are allowed to campaign because the word person includes a corporation.  

What I was saying is that a political party is not a corporation. There is no way DP or UPC can announce that it will have a rally in such and such a place,  that it is going to campaign for multi-partyism.  They cannot do so because they are not persons.  But they are made up of some individuals who are persons.  The leaders,  who might be 16 in number or 20,  those will be able to campaign but not as parties,  but as organised members.  They will organise themselves and campaign.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi):  Mr. Speaker, I stand to support this motion but with a lot of reservations.  I stand to support the motion and the report of the Committee because the Committee has come out clearly in the various sections,  showing what I would consider political sobriety.  They have clearly stated that in some areas we need to be critical and not allow ourselves to go by the wind or sentiments.   Allow me to deal briefly with some of the specific provisions in the various sections.  

When you look at -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member,  I would still like you to be guided this way that:  in the general debate,  we discuss the principles embodied in the Bill.  We are not yet at the stage where we analyze clause by clause.  In order to satisfy ourselves,  it is the general principle.  We shall get to the Committee stage later.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, thank you for the guidance.  I am referring to sections because these are issues which are eventually embodied in the report.  When you look  at the area of sides,  and I go by what the hon. Minister responsible for Justice and Constitutional Affairs stated,  and also what the Chairperson of the Committee stated that it is imperative that the issue of sides in the referendum be clearly defined.  Be clearly defined because whereas Article 70 of the Constitution states clearly that the Movement will be all embracing, all encompassing,  when you bring in the issue of sides,  the sides will definitely contravene the provision of Article 70 of the Constitution.  

Sides are going to be clearly defined that, 'I am on the side of the Movement and the other one is on the side of the other organisation,' - be it a political party or the third side.  This,  Mr. Speaker,  if you may allow me to read Article 70 clause (1),  "The movement political system is broad based inclusive and non-partisan and shall conform to the following principles - (a) participatory democracy;  (b) democracy, accountability, and transparency;  (c) accessibility to all positions of leadership by all citizens;  and my concern here is (d) individual merit as a basis for election to political office."  But here we are not looking for political office,  we are looking for a political system.  

By political system we would assume that a group of individuals have come together,  one mind,  one body,  one soul,  saying they are going to support a certain philosophy, like the movement political system,  based on the philosophy of a dialectical method of work.  The other group may say their philosophy is maybe the centre left of the movement political system.  The other one may say they are the centre right of the movement political system.  This will make it very difficult to campaign during the referendum.  That would bring me to a situation where if the Political Organisations Bill was in place first,  it would give each and every individual an opportunity to evaluate the systems.  

The movement political system which is all embracing and has been in place for the last 13 years,  is it still the same political system which we embraced 13 years ago?   This question would be relevant to evaluate the Movement from the first year to the 13th year,  in case it has deteriorated in certain aspects.  Some people may wish to say,  'well, since the movement political system of today is not the same as what we had at the time we joined it,  we may have second thoughts.'  They would now say,  'well, I would rather go to the centre left of the present movement system and advocate for something else,  but within the same philosophy.'   

Without creating sides,   we are going to have a lot of problems during the time of the referendum because the individual merit system will not work.   The individual merit is good for the purpose of electing individuals,  but individual merit for the purpose of the referendum or a political system,  is going to be dangerous.  I do not know how we shall be able to -(Interruption). 

MISS. BABIHUGA: I have taken notice that the Front Bench is almost empty,  and this side is almost left to our Chairperson who is presenting the report.  In accordance to rule 17(1) and (2) of our rules of procedure which reads, "The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament," - including those Members of Parliament on the Front Bench.  17(2) says, "If at a time of sitting a Member takes notice or objection that the Members present in the House are less than one-third of the number of all the members of Parliament,  the Speaker shall,  on ascertaining it to be true,  suspend the proceedings of the House for an interval of fifteen minutes during which a bell shall be rung."  Mr. Speaker, I beg that we comply to this rule because this motion is of paramount importance to the governance of this country,  and it should not be debated out of order.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  I have been advised that there are only 59 Members in this House, we are far below the quorum.  Since this is the second time we have run into problems of quorum today,  I do not intend to adjourn the House for another 15 minutes only to come back and find no quorum.  I therefore adjourn the House to 2.00 o'clock tomorrow.   
                
 (The House rose at 5.10 pm and adjourned until Wednesday 23rd June, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)
 
