Tuesday, 26 June 2007

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I would like to welcome you back from the short recess and to thank you for facilitating and interacting with the East African Legislative Assembly Members who have been sitting in Kampala for the first time since the inception of the second East African Legislative Assembly.  

Before I go much further I would like to announce on a sad note the death of Ms Sanyu, the daughter of the Minister of State for Mineral Development, hon. Kamanda Bataringaya. She died yesterday and the burial is taking place now in Bundibugyo. So I would like to ask you to stand up for a minute of silence in her honor. 

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Secondly, I would like you to join me in welcoming a delegation from Kenya National Assembly from the Department of Sergeant-at-Arms, who are here on attachment. They are led by Mr Haruna Okalu, Assistant Sergeant-at-Arms; Mr Absolom Woote; George Ottono; Boniface Mbiti; Boniface Mushula; Edith Ngecu; David Mbinda and Jowel Nashima. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda and we hope you will enjoy your attachment here. (Applause) 

Honourable members, as you may recall the mandate of the sessional committees expired and both the government and the Opposition ought to be now in the final stages of composing the new committees. So I would urge both sides to expedite the process. I am now reminding the ministers that the policy statements should be with the Members by the 30th of June, 2007. So under the circumstances, after we have handled the Vote-on-Account, we shall adjourn to the 3rd of July to commence discussion on the State of the Nation Address. In the meantime, if the committees will have been put in place, they will be handling the estimates of revenue and expenditure, followed by the debate on the Budget and later the Committee of Supply. Thank you.

2.49
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise a matter of national concern about what is pertaining in the new Buliisa District, formerly Masindi.

The infant Buliisa District in the mother kingdom of Bunyoro has been suffering an illegal occupation by invaders who came in without a single movement permit. I want to qualify the invasion and say, “without a single movement permit”. They had illegal arms and when Masindi District and the community tried to keep them off, they alleged criminal trespass and that their life was in danger, and they have since deployed the Mobile Patrol Unit from Kampala to protect them against the owners of the land. 

In my maiden speech in this Parliament I did state that Buliisa was under an invasion and I do remember, Madam Speaker, it was you presiding and you did request the Minister of Internal Affairs and Minister of Defence to find out where these guns are coming from and where these people are coming from, and to date we have never got a report.  

The same people are trying to give an impression that Bunyoro, which is not a tribe but a nation, can afford to be tribal. That is not possible! Bunyoro is not a tribe; it is a nation, which is multi-tribal. We have hosted people from Acholi during the war without a single battle; we have so many people from West Nile, we have a whole sub-county in Nyantonzi of Lugbara; I have a sub-county of people from West Nile, the Alurs. 

So the point I want to make here is that it is unfortunate that even in Buliisa where I have more than 300 families of Balaalo who have been co-existing with us, the same Buliisa where Balaalo have been coming to during the dry season, they get water and pasture from us and they go back when they want, some few individuals - about 100 families misled by about ten families with some people who are misguiding them in Kampala - have decided to spoil this good co-existence, which we have had with these people.  

You all know that Buliisa District has what was initially the bigger part of Murchison Falls National Park, and Budongo Forest was part of Buliisa District. When the colonial government gazetted these reserves, we were disenfranchised off our land and we remained sandwiched between the lake, the national park and the forest. So, our ancestors in their own wisdom decided that we graze along the lake and that we were going to cultivate along the park and the forest. 

Unfortunately, unlike the other Balaalo who have been coming and co-existing with us, these particular land grabbers decided to herd their animals in people’s gardens without the consent of the people, without movement permits and for all these years, no district, no sub-county knows who they are because we do not have movement permits. It is only the Mobile Patrol Unit in Kampala which knows them.  

What I want Parliament to request the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is responsible for deploying these Mobile Patrol Police, to keep illegal entrants in our district away from the natives, denying us our livelihood for over two years! –(Interruptions)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, my colleague has insisted on saying that the people in Buliisa are invaders. Where are they from? Which language do they speak? Are they White? (Laughter) Are they Asian? (Laughter) It is frightening when the honourable member says that the invaders even have guns and are being protected by Government. So, who are these people?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what he also wants to know. That is what he is asking; he wants to know who these people are.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your wise guidance. I want the Parliament of Uganda to assist the people of Buliisa and any other place in Uganda that may be a victim of this kind of irresponsible influx; remember we have heard of similar cases in other areas too. We are unable to know where they came from because we do not have the practice of movement permits in Uganda. It is only this practice that would help us know their point of origin -(Interruption)

MR TOLIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Stephen Mukitale, for giving way. The information I want to give to this House is that over the weekend while I was at home I received information to the effect that some unknown group of people were touring the eastern bank of Ayago River with the intention to settle there. When we tried to inquire more about these people, the detach commander said that he had received very strong instructions from higher authorities barring any interference with the movement of these people. The higher authority in this case meant the fourth division commander, Brig. Paul Etiang. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to inform this House that early this year there was another group of people from Jonam County who crossed into Acholi land, settling in the areas of Godafoyo and Kamu, in particular. They came in big numbers because they were being ferried in trucks. As we talk now there is a community of about 2,000 Jonam people living on Acholi land. They have forced themselves onto people’s land without their consent. 

What makes it more interesting is that when recently the Minister for Disaster Preparedness came he brought a letter informing all of us –(Interruption)- I know that the honourable minister is only trying to nurse his anger with Chairman Mao -(Laughter)- but I was saying that what makes the situation more interesting is the action that was taken by the Minister for Disaster Preparedness hon. Prof. Kabwegyere. When he wrote –[Hon. Members: “The Minister of Pangas”]- Yes, the minister of pangas -(Laughter)- to Members of Parliament and all the local leaders that serious action had to be taken regarding that issue, yet nothing had been done. So, the question is, why must you take action on an obvious case? That is the information I wanted to provide. Thank you very much. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I have come to the House because we do not know the true identity of these people. They declined to report to the sub-county; they declined to report to the district; they defied the district resolution from the mother District, Masindi, which I will be laying on the Table. Masindi District Council took this resolution after realising that these people had attempted to declare our communally owned land, public land. Their attempts to get lease offers were also stopped by Masindi District Council. 

Much as these people speak Kinyarwanda, I do not think the problem is of the Rwandese. I do not want us to complicate this problem. Not all Banyarwanda are bad people. We have Banyarwanda in Buliisa who co-exist with us. However, I want to say that this particular group is very arrogant; they have decided to graze in people’s gardens; they have used some few contacts to continue defying all orders. They have, through their influence managed to maneuver a Police Mobile Unit into the area yet for over a year and a half we have never had such a police unit in that area. I wonder who pays the officers at that police unit to protect criminals who are committing crimes against innocent law abiding citizens. The situation is very worrying!

I want to wind up by asking the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us why police authorities have chosen to deploy policemen of the Mobile Patrol Unit against the Buliisa community. I, in the same vein would like to ask the Ministry of Defence to make use of Kyanda’s report. That report can be very helpful because when Kyanda came to Buliisa, these people stopped using guns. Although they stopped that, they are now using officers of the police mobile patrol unit to guard them when grazing their cattle. Our major concern is the connectivity of these undisciplined individuals with the police in violating our rights.

Finally, I want to inform this House that I have come to learn that the lady commander of these Balaaro, who said she cannot be arrested, is a village mate of some big people in the police force; she is also an in-law to some big people in the same force. This could be the reason why she has never been arrested even after a presidential directive was given for that purpose. She is at large and when Government says, “You Balaaro, move,” she tells them, “Do not move.” 

So we are wondering who gives this Grace Baroroza the powers to defy all such orders; the powers to say that if the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) touched her, he would be transferred; the powers to say that if the District Police Commander arrested her, he would lose his job. Madam Speaker, it for this reason that I request your intervention and lay on the Table –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Stephen Mukitale. You know as you were giving your contribution, I felt a little touched. In as far as the laws of this country are concerned, we are all equal before the law and nobody is above the law. 

In your presentation you mentioned that the female commander of these intruders is well connected to senior personnel in Government. You never know, some of these senior personnel in Government may be legislators; they maybe senior bureaucrats -(Laughter)- may we kindly know who these people are so that we can effectively take them on? I am asking this because as I came from West Nile yesterday I also saw some truckloads of long-horned cows crossing the bridge -(Laughter)- you never know those may also be invaders; I want to be protected.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I now want to lay on the Table the documents I talked about. As per the clarification from the Opposition Chief Whip, I want to say that I am here to be assisted by Parliament and I am hopeful that the relevant offices will tell us who these people are. 

There is an earlier report from Kyanda, which is directed to the President. I am sure there is some information to that. There is some information, which is here in the Masindi District report of the findings on the causes of land wrangles in Buliisa sub-county and recommended solutions; it is dated May 2006. I also have minutes of the land disputes in Buliisa County, by then it was a county, for the meeting held on 7 April 2006. This was a meeting, which was initiated by the President when he sent Kyanda down to Buliisa and that is when the illegal guns stopped but when the illegal guns stopped the mobile patrol unit continued to protect the criminals. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing the Buliisa voice to be heard. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, before you speak I would like you to ask you to join me in welcoming here students from Bukooli College in Bukooli North constituency represented by hon. Nakendo and hon. Justine Lumumba.  

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This issue is not in Buliisa alone. As we talk now these people have already reached Kiboga and part of Kyankwanzi was given to them. This is a very serious matter. In fact the Minister for Disaster Preparedness was quoted yesterday to have said that the people of Buganda should allow these people whom we do not know to settle in Kiboga. Sometime back we heard these people were in Teso from where they were chased. They went to Kamuli, they were chased. From there, they were in Lango; they were chased away, just as Acholi. 

Madam Speaker, the some people were in Kasese. We have heard what happened in Buliisa. In fact the hon. Member for Buliisa had to involve himself to go with his people to fight these invaders. We would like to know in this august House who these people are. What do they want? What is their original home? In our Constitution we have schedules of the districts and tribes of Uganda. When you look at the schedule you do not see their home district. What is their original tribe? It even pains me –(Interruption) 

MR GODI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give regards the same aspect. I want to give you the West Nile perspective of how we dealt with such unknown people. 

At one time we had such people around Madi-Okollo area in hon. Arumadri’s constituency and others were settling around Rhino Camp. They would enter into agreements to buy land but after begin herding cattle. When we asked the government about their whereabouts just like the honourable member said, they carried guns in our area. Every attempt we made to evict them was futile until I went on radio and I ordered people to begin eating those animals. (Laughter) So, when we took around eight animals to Rhino Camp and wanainchi ate them the next day we threatened panga action, and you know our words. They actually left and we never know where they went. We are told they came via Nebbi and they might have ended in Buliisa.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –(Interruption) 

MS OBURU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In Tororo it is worse because these ones go and even cut electric wires. I understand they use the wires in Kampala here. They melt and sell them at Shs 19,000. I do not know whether these are the same people or not because they move with guns and use UMEME vehicles to collect these wires. They have killed dogs all along from where these wires are. So, we do not know whether this is going to be a similar trend. The government should take action because this is a security threat to our people in Tororo. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I think we were talking about armed people who move with cattle from one corner of the country to another. Those are the people we are talking about. I know the UMEME issue is important but let us finish with the cattle and gunmen. 

MR NSUBUGA: Let me wind up, Madam Speaker. I was reading the national newspaper, the New Vision and His Excellency the President while addressing a press conference in Munyonyo Resort is quoted to have said that he welcomes these pastoralists. He goes on to say that even the original tribes of Buganda had a section that came with Kintu and another that came with Kimera from Bunyoro. Therefore, he does not see any problem with these wanderers going around. We are talking about times immemorial even before the 1900 Agreement was made or even before boundaries of this country were demarcated. 

In this era there is no way you can tell people to move anyhow and yet they are carrying guns as you have heard from various Members. They are very dangerous. The hon. Minister for Disaster Preparedness said that people of Buganda should not dare to chase away these pastoralists as other tribes have done. What is going to happen? We are leaders representing people and we do not want –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to claim that I said what he is purporting to say when in fact, I said nothing to do with Buganda? (Laughter) The point I made very lightly had to do with the development of consciousness between man and land, which is on the rise now because the economy is changing. Is he in order to pinpoint to me and attach to me words that I never said and probably reading a newspaper, which he has not verified? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately I was not present when you were making those statements. I do not know where you were. I do not know what you said. But can you substantiate whether he is really the one who said Baganda should allow these people to come?

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, in the Bukedde of yesterday the hon. Minister for Disaster Preparedness is quoted to have said that Kiboga and Kyankwanzi are part of Uganda, therefore, these people are free to settle anywhere. We are asking the first question; are these people Ugandans? If they are Ugandans what is their tribe? Where did they come from? (Applause)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I would want the honourable member to quote the exact words in that paper because -(Interjections)- I do not speak Luganda and if what he is talking about is quoted in English, verbatim, then I perhaps could say I said so. But if it is in Luganda as presented in the paper he has referred to, is he in order to attribute those words to Kabwegyere?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. If the words were spoken in Luganda, I am sure the Minister does not speak Luganda.

MR KADUNABBI: Madam Speaker, when hon. Kabwegyere put a point of order, you requested hon. Nsubuga to substantiate. He was still doing so and hon. Kabwegyere stood up and raised another point of order without waiting for you to rule on the first point of order. I would like you to guide us on whether we can have a chain of points of orders before you rule.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if in the course of substantiating you cause another problem, the other Member must raise a point of order. That is what happened in this instance. He said he spoke in Luganda or something like that.

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I was still substantiating for him by even saying in English –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But were you there in that meeting? Did you attend the meeting?

MR NSUBUGA: I have quoted what he exactly said in Luganda translated into English. We would like to know –(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, there is a standard way of reporting and when you are reading a newspaper, once you are quoted in inverted commas it means you are being quoted verbatim. So, this business of – if an Acholi speaks, can’t a Luganda paper write about what he said? (Laughter) I think the Minister should be fair enough to as accept or say no to whatever hon. Nsubuga is talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us find a solution instead of – none of us was in that meeting and nobody attended it. We are just hearing reports. Let us hear from the government. Who are these people and what are they doing with guns and animals? (Applause) That is what we want to hear.

MR NSUBUGA: And lastly, Madam Speaker, we would like to know whose land in Kiboga, because if they are going to be given this land in Kiboga, whose land are they going to be given? They do not just come out and say, “You settle here” as if you have found vacuum. Let the government tell us exactly the origins of these people, their tribe and what they want.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the government? Who are these people? Madam, Minister of State for Defence?

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and honourable members. I had stood up earlier on to inform this august House that hon. Ruhakana Rugunda has been unable to attend this meeting. I was with him in a meeting at 12.30 p.m. today and the state minister has just arrived from Sheraton where he was attending a workshop of the Justice, Law and Order Sector. He had also told me to inform this House that he would come late because he was in Sheraton. But he has arrived.

I was going to propose that this House be given a report about this kind of people who are moving around, by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. From what has come up on the Floor, you could see that some people are talking from an uninformed background. One Member of Parliament says that these people are in Buliisa terrorising the wanainchi there. Then another Member says that as we speak now, they are already in Kiboga. Another one says that yesterday they were in Kasese -(Interjections)- then another one, then they quote Tororo. (Interruptions) I have been the area Woman MP for Kiboga District since 1995. I want to inform this House that Kiboga District hosts almost all the tribes of Uganda. We have two sub-counties of people from Mayuge, Kamuli, Iganga, Kisoro and many other districts. We even elected them in leadership –(Mr Okello-Okello rose_) Hold on, please. I will give you time. We have people from Kisoro, and Paidha in Nebbi. We have everybody and yet the people of Kiboga themselves need land. 

We have been negotiating with Government to make sure that the people in Kiboga in the areas where they are going to be evicted from especially the forest reserves be given this land in Kyankwanzi, which belongs to Government so that they settle those people who are getting evicted from the forest reserves. We are informing Government to do this. And you are not going to see the people of Kiboga demonstrating on the streets because they are pursuing this issue with Government. I just wanted to give you this information so that you know that we are not keeping quiet. My humble proposal is that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should inform everybody who these people are and where they are originating from; and the Ministry of Lands also comes to see –(Interruption)

MR NYEKO: Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure are very clear about what takes precedence. Hon. Ekanya is raising a point of procedure and yet the honourable member is continuing to debate on the Floor. Is she really in order to continue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe she did not hear. (Laughter)  What is the point of procedure?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am raising on a point of procedure according to our rules. Your guidance was very specific. You asked: can Government tell us a, b, c, d? The hon. Minister of State for Defence stood up and started that route but instead she diverted and went to Kiboga. That was very dangerous because - it is clear that these people have not just emerged today in Buliisa. These people have been in Teso for the last three years. The President, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Defence are aware. Papa Emorimor, the Paramount Chief of Teso even had a meeting with the President on this matter and the President assured us that there is communication that Government is going to address this issue. 

Therefore, your directive that the minister responsible gives us detailed information is very pertinent and we need Government to give us a time frame of what they are going to do in order to create sanity and peace in the country, instead of diverting them to Kiboga and telling us about forests.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, let me inform hon. Geoffrey Ekanya that I am the Member of Parliament for Kiboga District. When I talk about my constituency, it is not diverting you, Sir. I am both the Woman Member of Parliament representing Kiboga and the Minister of State for Defence for seven years now. The report, which was laid on the Table by the Member of Parliament from Buliisa was produced by Col. Kyanda, who falls under my ministry. Therefore, when I stand here to speak, I speak with authority. (Laughter)

I have interest in this because I had to find out whether the territorial integrity of this country is threatened. That is why we had to make our own report, which the honourable member referred to. So, I thought I should stand up and inform my colleagues that we welcome those of you who are crying for the people of Kiboga, but we are also pursuing the issue with Government. Thank you very much.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I would want the Member holding the Floor -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has gone.

MR WACHA: Yes, she is holding the Floor. She sat down because I asked for clarification; she is that decent. (Laughter) I want the Member holding the Floor in her other capacity as the Minister of State for Defence to inform this House where the guns these people are moving with come from. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, for us we have our unique problem and we are handling it. But our biggest problem is that some people from her constituency, Buliisa, Nakasongola and Kamwenge are taking advantage of our problem. There is one Maj. Twine from your department who is right now demarcating Queen Elizabeth National Park; the only resource that we have. He is the one inciting our people against authority and yet we are trying to find a solution. We are the only people who can settle with these wandering pastoralists while we look for a solution. So, could you investigate some of these army officers and the current movement of pastoralists from as far as Kiruhura, where I expected people to have already settled? 

You may think this is a joking matter but for a country that has existed for the last 44 years to have wandering citizens without a home is serious. What sort of a country is that one? Could you please save the country and settle the people? Otherwise what is the essence of Government? That is the information I wanted to give you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, this matter was raised at the beginning of the session. We have run one full session without receiving an answer. Who are these people? Where do they get the guns from? Where are they going and why is it that nobody has been arrested for illegal possession of firearms in this county? Why are they guarded? That is what we want to know.   

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, as you know, I prefer to stand on the Floor here with something I have written down. This matter is squarely in the premises of the Ministry of Internal Affairs as I speak now. We are carrying out investigations –(Interruptions)- all I am begging this House is to allow me a period of one week. I will come back here with information because I hate to talk from rumours.

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for having attempted to say something. Last week, we were in Kasese with a team of ministers with whom he can team up to get information which he can submit to this House even tomorrow. Why can’t he sit with the team of ministers who went to Kasese to get a brief and then submit to this House tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But why do you confine him to a few people? Let him do his consultations.

MR ABURA: Madam Speaker and fellow colleagues, I stand as a sympathiser of those unknown people who have been trekking half of the country with no destiny. Through you, Madam Speaker, I would like to welcome those people to Karamoja -(Laughter)- could you relocate them? Karamoja is 27,000 square kilometres. But the population is low; we have only 300,000 voters. The population is about 500,000. Please, instead of chasing them from the country, there is a lot of land there; it is only water that we lack. So, I welcome them. (Laughter)This is the last and the best solution for this.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter; it touches on our nationality, and it also touches on our national security. Therefore, it must be given all the seriousness it deserves. I stand again to request – and I will come back before this House, with a written statement, which is thoroughly researched, including all the information that has been raised here on the floor, so that I can give a satisfactory answer and answer all the supplementary questions with facts in figures.

3.34
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first day when we entered a new session is in my view significant. It is unfortunate that I was not able to catch your eye, because I wanted to do something that I consider to be important, that is welcoming back the Members on behalf of the Opposition. But we jumped into a very hot matter, and this is like reversing a very long drive.

Nevertheless, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome Members back from recess and hope that we will build on the spirit of the First Session, so that we can serve the country in the best interest of all our people.

The starting discussion certainly shows us that we are very enthusiastic and committed. But since you said that we would come back on the 3rd June - I am supposed to make a statement on that day in reply to the State of the Nation Address. Before that address was made, I made a formal request to the Clerk that if possible, the President formally sends an advance copy or an immediate copy of that statement so that I can prepare my response. 

This has not been possible, the Rt. hon. Speaker actually suggested that in the intervening period, we would get transcribed copies of the President’s State of the Nation Address. So, it would be important that the Office of the President be contacted so that the full transcribed statement, as normally published for Members, be delivered early enough so that we do not debate without focusing on what was said. Thank you. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/2008

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Omwony-Ojwok): Thank you, Madam Speaker:

“WHEREAS, clause 4 of Article 154 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year, or the coming into operation of the appropriation act, whichever is earlier;

AND WHEREAS, the government financial year will end on 30 June 2007, and it is the belief of the President that by that date, this House will not have approved the estimates of revenue and expenditure of government for the financial year 2007/2008;

AND WHEREAS, it is necessary that the President authorises the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of meeting expenditures necessary to carry on the services of government; 

AND WHEREAS, clause 5(a) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorisation of the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of clause 4 has to be approved by a resolution of Parliament;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament approves vote-on-account allocated to the various votes attached to this resolution.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded. You may go on.

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: Madam Speaker, I speak in favour of this motion, which is relatively straight forward, on the basis of particularly two issues.

First, this House is aware of the fact that the vote for FY 2006/2007 is coming to an end on the 30 June 2007. Under the Constitution – I wish to draw your attention to Article 154, which I have referred to. It reads,” Withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund.
1) No monies should be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except- 
a) to meet expenditure charged on the fund by this Constitution or by an act of Parliament-”. To avoid wasting our time, I am leaving out clause (b), but it gives information regarding the authorisation through an Appropriation Act or through a Supplementary Act as provided for in clause 4, and it is clause 4, it reads: “If the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not or has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President may, subject to the provisions of this article, authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year, or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is earlier.

Madam Speaker, I have already indicated in the resolution that in the estimation of the President, we would require something like four months to enable us to pass this Act.  Therefore, it is the justification of this resolution that I have to come and present before you this motion for the passing of the Vote on Account.

On the substance of this vote on account, I would like to draw your attention to a series of statistics that I will leave before this august House. In summary, what this vote on account actually contains. First of all, there is recurrent expenditure. The recurrent expenditure being asked for constitutes of, one, the Wage Bill. The Wage Bill is proposed to be Shs331,231,536,000. This constitutes 29 percent of the total vote that is being requested from this House.  

Secondly, we have the Non-Wage Bill. It amounts to Shs430,672,840,000. This constitutes 38 percent of the total. Out of all of this, the central government recurrent expenditure is proposed to be Shs472,592,692,000 and that constitutes 42 percent of the total recurrent expenditure proposed in this motion.  

The Local Government recurrent expenditure is proposed to be Shs289,239,36,000 constituting 26 percent of the total recurrent expenditure. I want to specifically mention that the total proposed recurrent expenditure is Shs761,831,728,000 and that constitutes 67 percent of the total recurrent and development expenditure that is being proposed in this motion. 

I come to category number two, which is the Development Budget. The total Development Budget is proposed to be Shs370,796,878,000 and it is 33 percent of the total.  When we divide this up between central government and local government, central government takes 27 percent and the 27 percent amounts to Shs310,395,153,000. 

The Local Government proposed development expenditure is Shs60,401,726 that is 5 percent of the total proposed expenditure during the operation of the vote on account. I would, therefore, summarise that the grand total of the proposed recurrent expenditure and the development expenditure is Shs1,132,628,660,000. In summary, this broadly amounts to a third of the total proposed budget for the financial year 2007/2008. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that this House do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply to consider and approve the vote-on-account. 

3.49
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as this House is always honoured to approve vote-on-account, I am worried that we are doing it so that the operations of government can continue as this honourable House debates the policy statements and approves the budget. However, the problem we have is that for almost the whole of July most of the ministries almost come to a standstill. Money does not flow as it would have flowed. Services are almost stuck because there are certain procedures that must be undertaken by the Ministry of Finance. 

We would want this House to be assured that as soon as we approve vote on account things will move smoothly. That services continue flowing, that there are drugs in health centres, that roads are worked on, and schools continue operating. Even the salaries; people really suffer; some of these honourable ministers do not have fuel for July and it is more or less like there is a problem and yet we are called upon to approve vote on account. So, my due regard is that, this time the Minister of Finance should please pull up his socks a bit and ensure that there is nothing like a stalemate in the positions of government so that we can move consistently. I thank you, Madam Speaker.   

3.50
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been requested by my colleague as a member of the accountability committee, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that whereas we are going to approve this vote-on-account, he has difficulties in regard to some institutions like Makerere University Business School.  According to him, the law under which that institution operates, the head of that institution is supposed to be at the rank of a Principal. That Principal according to the Public Finance and Accountability Act is supposed to be appointed by the Secretary to the Treasury with prior knowledge of the minister. 

He states that from several years, Parliament cannot even examine the Auditor-General’s report on MUBS because there is no accounting officer to respond to the query as per the law established. So, he asked me to notify this House that whereas we are going to send there money, our action and expenditure of this money will be illegal and he wants Government to ensure that before this money is released to this institution, the right accounting officer is in place. I really want to convey that message and ask Government to appreciate it. 

3.52
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, as a person who normally scrutinises the figures with a lot of interest, I have, despite the short time we were given this morning when we received this document, I have looked at it and I have got a series of questions to ask. I think it is also not going to be possible for my Committee on Budget to scrutinise this, as we normally do. So, it is important that some of the concerns, which I think should be addressed by the Minister, are really addressed after I have made my comments. 

The first point is that when you look at the recurrent expenditure and at the wage table, there are some institutions indicated, which do not have wages. We want to know how these institutions will pay their wages over the next three months. There are many institutions in that column, the very obvious ones being on page 4. You will see Uganda Management Institute, Uganda Revenue Authority, National Agricultural Research Organisation, National Advisory Services, Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets, Cotton Development Organisation, Law Development Centre, Uganda Industrial Research Institute and so forth. It would have been most appropriate if we actually had indication of their wage bill over the next few months.  

Secondly, we realise that there are also donor contributions. When you look at the development budget, actually the total stated is $663,million. This is stated in dollars and the total on vote on account is stated in Uganda Shillings and we do not know whether that amount from the donors has been converted into Uganda Shillings and at what rate. Because we know very well that there is a declining dollar rate in this case and the Uganda Shilling is appreciating very much. Is the minister able to tell us whether that amount is included in the total vote on account? 

Taxes, tax payments: From what I have seen, this is payment of tax by Government to itself. Tax payments in total are Shs278 billion, which actually means it is a third of the taxes Government will pay. It is important that this is indicated in all cases, and when you look at the development budget, there are so many institutions, which do not have equivalent taxes indicated. The Judicial Service Commission, the Local Government Finance Commission, the Uganda Land Commission and so many others do not have tax equivalents. Does it mean they are not going to pay taxes over that period? 

The next issue is the fact that to me, this presentation is very simplistic. We would wish to know what actually constitutes each of these payments and therefore it would be appropriate if the expenditures should have been itemised since in some votes, we do not even see the tax elements. When we talk about itemising, we are also aware that statutory expenditure is not indicated normally in this. But I think somehow they should be provided so that we are able to know exactly how much we shall be spending in those respects, or how much they are going to draw from the consolidated fund in that case. So, with these few remarks, I would actually expect that the Ministry of Finance gives us some clarifications on those issues. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

3.58
MR MABIKKE MICHAEL (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to Vote No. 2: State House. When you critically look at the provision for the State House, you realise that the Wage Bill is 2,651,582,000. Non-wage Bill is 33,852,240,000. Total recurrent is 36,503,822,000 and vote on account is 12, 167,941,000. 

I would like the House to juxtapose this provision with a total provision for vote 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172 and 173. That is the sub total for the regional referral hospitals. When you critically look at the total of the regional referral hospitals’ subtotal, the Wage Bill is 17,802,600,000, Non-wage is 11,431,719,000, total recurrent is 29,234,055,000 and vote on account is 9,744,685,000. 

Madam Speaker, I find this as a very serious anomaly. That this country is going to spend so much on one man, his wife and a few children, while the majority of our people who badly need medical services and in referral hospitals where drugs are badly needed, we are spending so little. I would like this House to revise this vote. We would like to spend more on the national referral hospitals than we should be spending on State House. I would like the Minister to clarify on this particular issue.  Thank you. 

4.01
MS RUTH TUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to welcome all of my colleagues from this short recess.  I am glad to see most of you back.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the minister to the first page of the summary of recurrent expenditure vote on account.  The people of Eastern Uganda are very anxious about Busitema University but when I look at this page, and I look at the universities that have been considered for this vote, Busitema University is not on the list.  Perhaps the minister can let us know why, because we are very anxious.  Thank you.

4.02
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  It is the same issue that my colleague from Jinja has raised that I wanted to raise.  We have told our people that Government has granted the University in the Eastern Region and they are all warming up for it.  I am surprised that even when our economy is improving, as the honourable minister has indicated, and even after this august House has passed that the University starts in Eastern Uganda, there is no provision for funding and there is no reason given.  I would like to know from the honourable minister, why.  

4.03
MR PETER MUTUULUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise, to not really hon. Mabikke, but to comment on what he has said. I just want to compare the vote given to Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Madam Speaker, this country’s economy depends on agriculture and there is no way we can develop without developing this sector. However, when you look at the allocations, I really feel this ministry is under-funded.  
Madam Speaker, I also seek your guidance. I do not see the Parliamentary Commission under the recurrent expenditure.  I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Omwony-Ojwok): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  First of all, I would like to really thank the colleagues who have given their comments, their criticisms, and their proposals.  I take it that every one has done it in a positive spirit and my answers will be based on the same. 

There is reassurance that the funds will continue to flow in the normal manner without interference so as to ensure that service delivery is continued normally.  In fact towards the end of the financial year and at the very beginning of the financial year, there are usually technical problems that occur. These technical problems- I would like to reassure this House that Government and particularly the Ministry of Finance is doing its utmost to ensure that we overcome them.   For example, at the moment, Government is moving towards what is called, E-governance or electronic governance.  This requires a lot of work at technical level. It requires ensuring that computers are adequately supplied to all the institutions, and it also requires that training be done for the people who are to use these computers so that their skills and competences are enhanced. It is an on-going process.  What I can assure you is that we are trying everything possible to speed up that process. In fact in the budget for this financial year, over all, under ICT, we are going to further enhance our financial management system including the budgeting process; the process of putting figures together and ensuring that funds are flowing.  So, unfortunately I cannot say that the performance will be 100 percent, but I can assure you that it will be far better than the situation in past years.  So, I am giving that assurance. (Interruption)

4.08
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Madam Speaker, the Minister is talking about conversion to IT, but there are small administrative matters that make moving from one financial year to another one cumbersome.  Take for example, the appointment of accounting officers.  This should be automatic, but you see that from May up to August, these accounting officers have not been appointed and the signatories to cheques have not yet been posted and yet people suffer in the process.  Why can’t the appointment of the accounting officers become an obvious matter?  Why can’t it be automatic?  After all these permanent secretaries are still the accounting officers anyway.  

MS SSENTONGO: I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister. I am not quite comfortable, hon. Minister, because when I read through, I do not see any vote for the Industrial Court and yet this august House passed that the Industrial Court should get some vote from the Consolidated Fund.  When I read through all these items, I do not see any indicator of the Industrial Court.

Secondly, just recently we heard that the Equal Opportunity Commission is to be established yet under the commissions I have not seen any vote for the Equal Opportunity Commission.  Can I get clarification from you, hon. Minister?  Thank you.

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: Madam Speaker, the second issue, which was raised, was regarding Makerere University Business School, that is the issue of appointing the Principal as the Accounting Officer.  This is something which we are seriously discussing in the Ministry of Finance. I can assure you that we are going to resolve this matter in such a manner so as to ensure that the Makerere University Business School and its operations will not be hampered in any way, while at the same time ensuring that the use of funds will be properly accounted for.  This is supposed to be done and the Ministry of Finance is handling it.

Now, number three -(Interjection) 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we have an audited report of Makerere University Business School but it cannot be examined because there is no accounting officer. What has been happening for the last three years is illegality. Even if somebody embezzled Shs 1 billion from Makerere Business School, there would be nobody to be taken to court and to be sued, according to the law of this country. So, you are trying to tell us to perpetuate that illegality here? I do not understand you. Madam Speaker, I do not understand the Minister and, if you could allow, we are really in pain, when there is a code for Busitema University in this book and there is no money. 

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Regarding Makerere University Business School specifically, I would like to remind this House that during the last financial year, there was quite a bit of controversy about the business school. Investigations were carried out and you are aware of this. We have only just come to a situation where we know what needs to be done, namely, to have the positions especially at the top, fully filled and Government is working to advertise, very quickly, these positions. This is because an accounting officer is appointed in a personal capacity. It is necessary that -(Interjection)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the difficult situation in which my senior brother, hon. Omwony Ojwok, whom I always refer to as the gang of four, is. I make that reference in my own personal relationship with you, and nobody else. (Laughter)

The point of clarification that I seek is that the appointment of an accounting officer is the prerogative of the Secretary to the Treasury. You can be appointed accounting officer and that appointment can even be revoked within a day. It has happened before; some of us have seen this in civil service. Now, the difficulty that I say my senior brother is caught in, is that if this illegality has been there for years, and they have said that they have carried out some investigations and they are about to come, why doesn’t the body that carried out the inquiry, propose and make a strong recommendation to the Secretary to Treasury that as an interim measure, whoever is there is appointed as an accounting officer? That way, the financial transactions in that institution will be in tandem with the existing law. I find it very difficult because we are supposed to be custodians of the law of this country and if we are going to close our eyes to the realities and continue acting in utter violation of our responsibilities as an institution that is supposed to uphold and protect the laws of this country, I think it is a little absurd. Can you come up with an interim arrangement whereby the person who is currently holding the post is given an interim position as an accounting officer so that we can be able to streamline?

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: Madam Speaker, I have already mentioned to you the intricacies involved in the particular case of Makerere University Business School. However, in order to give you a more concrete indication of what the current situation is, of what the relevant law provides and what the current practice and the intention is, I am requesting my colleague, the Minister of State in charge of Higher Education, hon. Gabriel Opio, to come in and provide these details. 

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, hon. Omwony Ojwok. Section 83 of the University and other Tertiary Institutions states that the Principal and Deputy Principal of a tertiary institution shall be appointed by the Education Service Commission. It also states that the principal is the accounting officer of a tertiary institution. This is the law. Before we found out exactly about the law, we had recommended to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to appoint the MUBS secretary. A letter was written but we were told by the Solicitor General to rescind the letter and that in no way can there be an accounting officer, except according to the law. So, that one had been done as we prepared to advertise but the letter had been rescinded on the advice of the Solicitor General. So, we are now moving very fast to advertise the job because that is the law. Until we revisit the law, that is what we were advised to do. 

On the issue of Busitema University -(Interjection)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Actually, the hon. minister Gabriel Opio has made it even worse -(Interruption)- Yes, he has made it worse. Why do I say he has made it worse? It is because, to get ourselves out of that thicket, I am going to propose that Parliament withholds that amount of money which is supposed to go to MUBS until a substantive accounting officer is appointed -(Applause)- and that way the ministry will walk very fast. Otherwise, we cannot continue with such illegality. We will not continue with such illegality. I think that either you give us a succinct date by which you will be through or we withhold the release of this money. 

MR OPIO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I have not made the matters worse. I only said what the law says and there is nothing wrong with stating what the law says. I have also stated the efforts we made in order to solve the situation and we were advised against. So, there is nothing making it worse by telling you the situation. 

However, I would like to beg this Parliament to give us one month within which to process and appoint the principal for the institution so that our people do not suffer. Otherwise that is the law and we cannot get out of it. You give us time and within one month we can advertise and appoint the Principal for the MUBS.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, under the Constitution we are supposed to protect the law of this country. So, I wanted to seek your guidance, that if this particular vote is stood over until the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice comes to this House, perhaps in two days, with the legal position on the way forward, so that we do what is right within the law. I am sure the Attorney-General and the Minister of Finance can come up with a way forward and then we approve this particular vote thereafter. It would be better. I am seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, we are not going to sit tomorrow. We are going to come back on 3rd July and therefore the process you are asking for cannot be facilitated during this week.

MR WADRI: The information I wanted to share with the House is that presently all these universities have broken off and they are on holiday. So, even if we say that we withhold this up to 3 July, there will be no injury that we would have caused to the students. (Interruption) Yeah, the students are on holiday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, the contest of this is mainly wage and other- what will we do with the teachers and lecturers? Should they also be punished?

4.21
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Dorothy Hyuha): Madam Speaker, I want to concur with the guidance you are giving us on this Floor that an institution like MUBS does not only have students; there is the teaching staff and non-teaching staff, and what we are trying to approve is wage and non-wage vote-on-account. 

By the time we sort out what hon. Ekanya is proposing, what will happen to the staff? This is an arrangement for a few months; and it is true the Minister has already read to us the legal requirement, and the ministry has gone ahead to advise the Education Service Commission to advertise for this position. I would suggest strongly, that we approve this vote-on-account as the Ministry of Education sorts itself out as advised by the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs.  

MR WACHA: Just a small clarification, Madam Speaker - assuming that we pass this vote-on-account, who is going to administer the money? Under the law, there is no person who is qualified to administer the money. That is our problem. Who is going to administer the money? Do not talk about the status quo because the status quo was not brought to our attention, but now we know that we have been handling an illegality. Should we continue with an illegality with our knowledge?

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, this issue of MUBS is not a new issue; it has been outstanding for such a long time. I am extremely unhappy that the Ministry of Education, even at this very late hour, is trying to stampede this honourable House into continuing with an illegality. I think it is high time my colleagues, especially those in Government, started being a little bit more active. This issue has been long outstanding and I think it is high time some order is put where it is supposed to be. 

I also know for sure that in the civil service there is an element of acting. Doesn’t the Education Service Commission have the authority to appoint whoever is there currently in an acting capacity until further notice, so that these funds are voted correctly? I thank you.

MR OPIO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I stated, the appointment of a principal and deputy is the responsibility of the Education Service Commission. We can give the instruction to the chairman of the Education Service Commission to appoint an acting position immediately, as the process of advertising takes place. That is what I can state now. We are going to instruct the chairman of the Education Service Commission to appoint an acting position as the process of advertising and short-listing goes on. One month is what I had stated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is proposing that he will now move the Education Service Commission to effect an acting appointment pending the advertisement and interview. 

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, Article 168 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda reads as follows: “(2)In the exercise of its functions, the Commission shall be independent and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority; except that it shall take into account Government policy relating to education.” 

The Executive is undertaking to request the Education Service Commission to expedite this matter in order to overcome this problem. I just did not want the record of Parliament to bear a statement saying that they are going to be “directed” because they will not be directed. They will be requested, and we hope they will expeditiously handle this matter. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you allowing us to pass the money so that the work can continue? (Interruption) Honourable members, I think the Minister has undertaken that at the earliest opportunity he will request the Education Service Commission to effect an acting appointment in the interest of the policy in that institution - (Interjection) No; they are going to appoint an acting person. If they can appoint an acting person then it is not illegal. 

MR WADRI: I have very attentively listened to the section of the Constitution that the Secretary General of NRM has cited and I do respect that constitutional provision. In so respecting that provision, we are saying that we want to give Education Service Commission that authority, that liberty, to take their time without being directed to appoint the head for MUBS. While we give that liberty, we are also saying that as a check and balance, we are withholding that money. If they find that that money is requested, then they expedite the process and we would be able to – (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, I think we are talking about positions. We have been informed that the substantive position will take slightly longer. However, we have come to a conclusion that if we can appoint somebody in the interim, he can handle the interim pending the finalisation of the substantive appointment. (Interjection) Yes, we are talking about the interim and not the substantive.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, hon. Wadri, for giving way. I thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a fact that even with these others that we are approving, there are no accounting officers in place yet. According to the law, they are not yet appointed and yet we are approving this vote-on-account. Doesn’t it really also call for the same case? There is nothing abnormal, I think.

MR ATUBO: The vote-on-account is legally passed once, as a package. So, the point raised by my colleague, that we withhold this and then possibly pass it later, does not legally and constitutionally hold. Because we are coming to pass the vote-on-account as a package, we cannot say “hold this back”. The importance of the vote-on-account is to enable Government to operate within four months. 

More importantly, the fear of my colleagues, that since we do not have a substantive principal, this money is going to be misused, is a misconception. Government money is not just released like that. This vote-on-account, which we are going to pass, is going to be retained and controlled by the Ministry of Finance. It is not going into the account of the university so that somebody who is not an accounting officer can just go, write a cheque and withdraw it. That is not the way we operate Government accounts and Government money. You have been an accounting officer so you know what I am talking about. 

By passing this money, we are not putting it in the pockets of anybody in MUBS immediately to misuse. It can only be operated when there is an authorised person in the form of a substantive accounting officer, or a principal or an acting principal to be an accounting officer controlled by the Ministry of Finance. The money is safe. There is no way this money is going to be misused by somebody in MUBS because the position of the principal is vacant. That cannot happen. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, none of us is oblivious of the fact that a vote-on-account is passed in a lump sum. We know that a vote-on-account is one third of the annual budget of Government in as far as service delivery through its ministries is concerned. However, the point we are making is that even if we pronounced ourselves, as Parliament it is our responsibility so we can say that this money is approved but it cannot be used. For you to say that after all it is not going to an individual’s pocket or somebody responsible is going to account for it; we have a case already on record. The Auditor-General has already raised queries in the last two or three financial years that we have been sending money to MUBS where there is no accounting officer approved and appointed by the Secretary to the Treasury. That is the point we are making. So, even then, for the honourable Member of Parliament from Buhweju – (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I would not like to interrupt the honourable shadow minister – (Interjection)- chief whip, I apologise. The point I am trying to raise is that, is the honourable Chief Whip in order –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. He is the Opposition Chief Whip.

MR WAMBUZI: Is he really in order to stand in front of you and try to flog a dead sheep - (Laughter) - when it is clear that the lock he has put on MUBS is really a lock? The statement he has made is enough. He does not have to get another spear to kill something, which is already dead. (Laughter) Is he in order to start emphasising something that is clear? He has already raised the point, and you have accepted and ruled, that we allow the honourable minister raise a simple request so that we do not hurt the other members of society who might get a wrong signal, both from this side and the other side, about the future of this institution, which is already wounded. Is he really in order to kill something, which has already -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The dead body was part of the agenda, that is why he is also discussing it. (Laughter) Honourable members, I have received information that accounting officers have been appointed. At least the Clerk of this Parliament has written to me that they are in place. However, honourable members, four months of uncertainty is a long time for the people in MUBS. Now that we know that there was an illegality, I think we should just keep our eyes open. If the Government fails at the end of these four months to appoint a substantive person, we get the rest of the budget, and that one we reject. Let us do that. Let us help MUBS to move on and also keep our eyes open. By October if there is nothing substantive, we arrest the money for MUBS. Is that okay? One month?

MR EKANYA: The Minister has said one month but I want to give this House information. The Auditor-General may not give a release warrant for this money because there are two reports. We met him and told him that we are not going to continue allowing illegality. Therefore, it is only one month.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the Auditor-General will impound the money, it is okay. Let us do our work and let him impound it. If they do not move, that is their problem.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give this House is that appointment of an accounting officer is not necessarily the appointment of the head of the institution. You can be a permanent secretary or a chief administrative officer but not necessarily the accounting officer. Therefore, while Education Services Commission is still taking its time to fish around for the right person to head MUBS, the Secretary to the Treasury can still appoint somebody from MUBS as an interim measure to manage the resources that are allocated to that institution. That is the provision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what we are saying, honourable members, is that we should approve this money with a caveat and the Government must respond within one month. It is in your interest, anyway, to act quickly. It is in the interest of the Government.

MR WACHA: Madam, I think under our Rules of Procedure we cannot attach a caveat on the passage of a vote-on-account. (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but they must be aware of it.

MR WACHA: All we can say is that we task the Minister that we are not going to operate under an illegality again. As you said, if they do not act, we can still withhold the other money which is coming before us. But it is very wrong for the minister to come here and accept an illegality and do nothing about it. It is really insulting.

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: One of the important functions of having a debate on a vote-on-account is to enable Government to take note of genuine concerns of Members of Parliament. Colleagues from both sides of the House have indeed expressed their genuine concern that we must have an accounting officer for Makerere University Business School at the earliest opportunity. This House, on behalf of the Ministry of Finance and Government, has even indicated some timeframe. We are really going to expedite this process and we do not wish to see any further problem on this matter. This is for the committee on Government Assurances of this Parliament. 

Another issue, which was raised, was the question of those institutions where there is no indication or provision for a wage bill in this vote-on-account. The explanation is that, you will find that most of them - in fact all of them - are institutions which are autonomous and to which Government only gives subventions. So, the idea here is that the subventions are going to come as part and parcel of the process of the negotiations that usually take place in this regard. So, they are not being ignored. They usually have got their own funds, and Government is interacting with them to ensure that provisions are made in form of subventions at the appropriate time.

I go to the issue of convertibility between the US dollar and the Uganda shilling in the development budget. Of course, I fully agree with the opinion expressed - which is actually not an opinion but rather an observation - that the exchange rate between the Uganda shilling and the dollar is continually changing, on a daily basis. That is beyond us. However, for purposes of accounting and planning, and to make sure that Parliament is aware of what we have done, we have used the exchange rate of Shs 1,805 to the dollar. However, you know that these are things, which you cannot freeze. You cannot freeze the exchange rate. As time goes on, we have to be ready to adjust our figures in relation to the realities on the ground. I am just giving this information so that we can adjust our thinking as we move along.

Concerning the question of tax payments, which was another important point, I would like to state that taxes are usually allocated on the basis of submissions that have been made by the various institutions in the course of budgeting. We are saying here that where no submission took place or where in the process of allocation of resources it is found that it is not a priority, it would mean that taxes have not been provided for. However, in reality it is mostly to do with institutions that have not submitted provisions for taxes.

There is also the issue of Busitema University. I would like to inform this House that there is provision for Busitema University in the budget. The only thing is that Busitema University was only officially recognised recently and the process of coding was required. The coding is being done and there is Shs 2.4 billion for Busitema University this financial year. As soon as the coding is done, we will do the necessary.

There was also the issue of Agriculture and State House. I have put them together for a reason. The other institutions that were brought out were referral hospitals and so on. Madam Speaker, if you look at the budget for agriculture this year, it has been significantly enhanced. The figures are available with you so I do not want to waste the time of this House on this. It is not easy to prioritise, but what is important for us is to take into account the fact that State House is a cross-cutting institution. It supports every single sector. State House and the activities of the President support all sectors, not only of the economy but even of society. It is for this reason that adequate provision needs to be made. 

We are going to have additional time to address this matter when we are discussing the whole budget and the State of the Nation Address. This should not detain us as far as the provision for the vote-on-account is concerned. I think those are the issues that have been raised – (Interruption)

PROF OGENGA LATIGO: I am not going to seek clarification on State House but you did mention that the dollar rate that is being used in the budgeting process is Shs 1,805. I know that in past years, the dollar rate was set based on trends from the previous one or two years, but it is obvious to everybody that this trend has been substantially reversed. In fact, last week on a particular day the dollar was going for less than Shs 1600 and that is a huge amount. The challenge that we face, therefore, is that if you use the dollar rate and calculate the inflows into the budget, which were dollar inflows, you will have a huge deficit. 

We have been having problems of Government coming with deficits. Why doesn’t Ministry of Finance take cognisance of the fact that these dollar inflows are for real? The markets in Sudan and Congo will be there. Also, as peace comes, the inflows from Ugandans in the Diaspora will remain high because they will feel confident to bring in their money. We have also talked about oil and so there is a real prospect of getting dollars here. Why doesn’t the Ministry of Finance go back and really look at a more realistic dollar rate to use in the budget, to avoid a situation where we will have to pass a supplementary and cause unnecessary problems?

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: Madam Speaker, this point is noted. We are going to proceed on the basis of a more careful look at the trends. It is true that some of the factors that are leading to the dollar inflows are going to continue. It is also true that some other factors are not going to actually be there. So, I am taking the point that the honourable Leader of the Opposition has brought up and we are going to work on these factors. However, it was necessary for me to give this information concerning what dollar rate we have used so that members of this House can take note and also for the general public to take note. We shall be adjusting as we go along. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of the Vote-on-Account for the 2007/2008 financial year. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.50
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that those who had queries about figures and provisions have been responded to. I am therefore proposing that we vote on them block by block.

Vote 001-162: Central Government

Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 452,319,885,000 under Vote 001-162, Central Government, be provided for as vote-on-account for recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2007/08.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 163-173: Regional Referral Hospitals

Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 9,744,685,000 under Vote 163-173, Regional Referral Hospitals, be provided for as vote-on-account for recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2007/08.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 201-229: Missions Abroad

Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 10,528,122,000 under Vote 201-229, Missions Abroad, be provided for as vote-on-account for recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2007/08.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 501-764: Local Authorities

Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 289,239,036,000 under Vote 501-764, Local Authorities, be provided for as vote-on-account for recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2007/08.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 001-225: Central Government Ministries, 
Institutions and Missions Abroad

Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 310,395,153,000 under Vote 001-225, Central Government Ministries, Institutions and Missions Abroad, be provided for as vote-on-account for development expenditure for the financial year 2007/08.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 501-764: Districts and Municipalities
 
Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Ugshs 60,401,726,000 under Vote 501-764, Districts and Municipalities, be provided for as vote-on-account for development expenditure for the financial year 2007/08.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Omwony-Ojwok): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

     (Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Omwony-Ojwok): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Vote-on-Account for the financial year 2007/08 and passed it. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Omwony-Ojwok): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. This has been slightly better than last year when it was a very lengthy process. The House is adjourned up to Tuesday, 3rd July at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 July 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)


