Wednesday, 30 June 2010

Parliament met at 3.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you to today’s meeting. First, I would want you to join me in welcoming pupils of All Saints Primary School in Lweza. They are up there. You are welcome. (Applause) They are smartly dressed in some good colours. (Laughter)

Secondly, I would like to apologise for the late start of today’s sitting. Consequent upon our discussions last week, we had a meeting with the Inspector-General of Police together with the Parliamentary Commission on the need to upgrade our police post to a police station and many other issues, so that we can improve on the security of members and the staff in this general environment. The meeting overflowed into the afternoon but I am sure that we shall be able to catch up.

Talking about the Police, on Saturday I met some parents of those children who were burnt in Buddo. They were asking me where their report is. I do not know when it will come out but I said I will inform the Minister of Internal Affairs that they are still waiting for the report. Thank you very much.

STATEMENT ON THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMON MARKET

15.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr John Bosco Lubyayi): Madam Speaker, as the Chairman of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, I thought it wise and useful to inform members that tomorrow, or even beginning today at midnight, we will have commenced the East African Common Market. (Applause)

Briefly, I have something here regarding what the Common Market is. The 1st of July 2010 -(Interruption) 

MR LUKWAGO: I am rising on a matter of procedure, Madam Speaker. It would appear our colleague is making a statement on such a big issue -(Interjection)- it could be an issue or it could be an event, but I thought when he rose up here he was going to raise a matter of national importance but it would appear he is making a statement. As a matter of procedure, we know how statements are made. I do not know whether it is procedurally correct for the chairperson of the committee to raise that matter in such a fashion when it is supposed to be a statement. I do not know whether it is procedurally okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, really an event such as the coming into operation of the East Africa Common Market is a matter of great concern to all the people of East Africa. I think you should be happy that the chair has really volunteered to give you that information. I have used my discretion to allow him make the statement so that you can be informed. (Applause)

MR LUBYAYI: Madam Speaker, thank you for the wonderful guidance.

The day 1st July 2010 marks the commencement of the operationalisation of the East African Community Common Market. Following the completion of the ratification of the Protocol on the Common Market, the complex and long march towards transforming the East African region into a common or single market begins with a lot of determination and enthusiasm.

Unlike the operationalisation of the customs union, which had a big bang start-up with a common external tariff and zero rating of customs duty in respect of the intra-regional trade in goods (except for goods destined to Tanzania and Uganda from Kenya) taking effect from day one, the Common Market process will take some time. Indeed, the process itself is complex in terms of what is required to be undertaken at the level of the partner states and in certain respects at the level of East Africa itself.

A common market is a single economic space in which business and factors of production: labour, capital, services and information freely move and operate so as to stimulate greater productive efficiency, higher levels of domestic and foreign investment, increased employment and growth of intra regional and extra regional trade of the concerned countries.

Elements of the Common Market Protocol

The East African Common Market shall be guided by the fundamental and operational principles and elements of the East African Community. These are categorised into the following freedoms; and two rights:
•	Freedom of movement of goods.
•	Freedom of movement of persons.
•	Free movement of labour. 
•	Free movement of services.

The two rights are:
•	Rights of establishment; and 
•	Rights of residence -(Interjections)- copies are on the way to your hands. They have been laid on the Table and they will be coming soon.

The East African Common Market is going to provide enormous opportunities to those ready to take advantage of it. This includes but is not limited to the following:

•	Uganda shall enjoy equal cross-border rights and facilities.
•	All East Africans will be able to freely visit or cross into other East African countries for social, academic and business related purposes.
•	The competitive environment is going to bring to consumers cheaper products and services, more efficient service providers and also increased choice and quality of products and services.
•	Ugandans, together with all East Africans, shall be able to get employment, settle and establish across borders hence alleviating poverty and improving their standards of living.
•	Investment in the region is going to be boosted through benefits to be gained from the larger market of about 120 million people.
•	A very competitive environment that is going to be created by opening up all the markets of the five states into one market is going to make the existence of monopolies more difficult.  
•	Efficient firms are going to benefit from economies of scale, increased competitiveness and lower costs, which will result into higher profitability. 
•	With full freedom of movement between partner states, factors of production are going to become more efficiently allocated which will increase productivity. 

Below are the challenges of the Common Market -(Interjection)– the copies are coming; it is only a 3-page statement so you will get them very soon. 

•	The freedoms of capital to move outside the purview of a single state have other harmful effects such as tax avoidance and money laundering. 
•	States might find it challenging when it comes to implementing –(Interruption)  

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need protection. By the fact that I was not in the House, I was watching what was going on and as you were entering, I was in the lobby just outside. 

I am rising on a point of procedure because the issue being discussed by my colleague is very passionate and very crucial. We need to follow him properly as he narrates it. As per now, we all do not have copies. I am trying to grasp what my colleague is trying to say so that we are at par, but we cannot easily follow without the copies. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if we could have the copies as the member puts his points across so that we can contribute from a knowledgeable view?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, he is just giving you information about an event which will occur at midnight tonight. It is not for debate; it is just information. He is telling us what is going to happen at midnight tonight and the implications. That is all. Instead of saying it orally, he has put it on paper. (Laughter) You will receive the papers with information about this great event.

MR LUBYAYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information is going to be circulated to all Members, and since you are not going to debate this statement, you will get the papers soon. They are only three pages and this is just for information as the Speaker ruled. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for volunteering to give us this information. This shows you how active the Committee of Trade is, especially its chairperson. I would encourage other committee chairpersons to take up responsibility on the respective issues that emerge and come and brief the House. May I seek clarification from the chairperson about the implementation of the common market?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he has not finished. (Laughter)

MR LUBYAYI: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, the challenges of the Common Market include:

•	States might find it difficult and challenging when it comes to implementing the Common Market principles. The approximation and harmonisation of laws, academic and professional qualifications may be an uphill task. 
•	It is feared that it will benefit only the wealthy countries with takeovers of small local corporations by large multi-national corporations hence concentrating wealth in fewer corporations.
•	Unchecked, the common market may increase the risk of economic bubbles that may affect the entire nations of East Africa and perhaps the region as a whole instead of just individuals. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this time. I hope the minister will give a full statement at an appropriate time. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you should really thank our chair for being proactive. (Applause) This should have been the minister’s responsibility but he has done it. He has informed you that beginning midnight tonight, the common market begins.

3.38 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I also want to thank the chairperson for being proactive and coming before this House. It is within his mandate when he gets authority from you to move that paper. 

The event that is being talked about begins tomorrow. It is the intention of Government to make a presentation here tomorrow. We shall seek your authority and opening in order for us to make a presentation on this momentous event tomorrow. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since the Minister says that he will bring his statement tomorrow, you will use it and that of the chairperson of the committee to debate.

3.39
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope that the matter of the common market has been put off because this was just a matter of information although it has come late. Remember that I had raised this matter before on the Floor that the EPA was coming into effect and all the five members of the common market had signed EPAs but Members of Parliament had no information. 

The Common Market Protocol is going to be effective beginning midnight tonight and we, Members of Parliament who are supposed to be driving these issues, do not know. I think this is a very serious matter. We should have been prepared. We should have discussed the implementation of this protocol. We should have discussed all other factors that will be affecting Ugandan traders but this is just being given to us now. 

Well, I am standing on a matter of national importance. If you allow me, I would like to say -(Prof. Kabwegyere rose_)- Madam Speaker, guide me, are you still on the matter of the common market?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Ogwal, I allowed you to speak on the matter which you told me about in my office. 

MRS OGWAL: I agree. So, can you call hon. Nandala-Mafabi to order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can you move away? (Laughter) 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a matter of national importance. Some of you might have read in the media that there has been a serious land conflict between Lango and Acholi, particularly among the Langi who are indigenous peoples of Pader District. This has engaged the two communities into dialogue for almost three years now. 

Madam Speaker, you know that in 2007 many of the people of Lango and Acholi who had been in camps were able to go back home because peace had returned to the region. These people were returning to their indigenous homes but in the process of returning, some unknown immigrants might have been Acholi people. They are blocking these people from going back to their land and this has caused a lot of confusion. These indigenous people who run from hundreds of homes, lists of which we have given you here, are now displaced. The Government has taken no action. An appeal has been made to His Excellency the President and to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness so that at least some humanitarian assistance can be given to these people while the dialogue is going on but nothing has been done. I want to, therefore, raise this matter as one of national concern so that at least we as a Parliament take action. 

Also, the concept of land ownership must be clearly understood. When the borders were drawn, you and I were not there. It is our grandparents who were there. Borders may have been drawn and found some Langi in Acholi-land and some Acholi in Lango-land. This has happened even with the borders between Kenya and Uganda and between Sudan and Uganda. You find that we have Iteso of Uganda and those of Kenya. We have the Aworis from the same family on one side in Uganda and Aworis who are on the Kenyan side. But people are living in harmony.

I am pleading with Parliament and with the two communities of the Lango, particularly the Acholi, to accept these Langi who have not known any other piece of land in what is now drawn as Lango. They have lived in Pader. The name Pader found them there and they can point to the graves of their great grandfathers in Pader and now they are being chased away from their land.

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. I want the matter to be investigated and resolved. We have already drawn this to the attention of the President and the Minister of Lands who also happens to be a Langi. I think he has written a letter concerning this matter, but my immediate concern now, while the dialogue and all other administrative matters are going on, is that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should not just prepare for this disaster. The disaster has already arrived and I would like him to move in and help the people who are displaced and who are suffering, as they have lost their property and have nowhere to stay. 

I beg to lay on the Table all those details - the names of families who have been displaced, all the letters which have been written to the various authorities and even some court cases which have been won but no action has been taken. I want to lay this on the Table. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is not for debate. She has stated a problem; let us hear from the minister.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I beg to officially lay on the Table the document on the land conflict between Acholi and Langi in Pader District. Can you protect me from the Langi and Acholi behind me? (Laughter)

3.46
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The drama part aside, I think this is a serious matter - the matter of land conflict. I have not looked at the document. I wish the honourable Member who has laid the papers on the Table had the courtesy also of sharing these documents with the Minister of Lands and with my office so that apart from having the documents on paper, we address the problems! 

I want to ask the honourable Member not to put too much emphasis on the ethnicity of those competing over land because the land question is very alive in all parts of Uganda even among the Langi, Acholi, Banyankole, and Baganda. Everywhere in Uganda, land is becoming a hot potato simply because development is taking high strides in the country and land is at the centre of development. I hope that we all take it in depth. It is not necessarily an ethnicity question as it is a development question. 

Let us hope the hon. Minister of Lands, who belongs to one of those ethnic groups mentioned –(Interjection)- if I could first finish my sentence and then you can come in! What I am saying is not hearsay. It is a matter that can be politicised for no good reason and we could have wars between ethnic groups when in fact it is a simple question of economics. 

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I expected the Minister of Local Government to make a statement here because the matter is not all that simple; it is a political matter. I listened to one of the FM stations when the minister was trying to restrain Radio Unity, which is in Lira, for simmering such conflicts. He physically visited the place. I would, therefore, expect that the responsible minister handles the matter other than the Minister of Disaster Preparedness who has no clear information about what is on the ground. Can we, therefore, ask the Minister, hon. Adolf Mwesige, to clear the matter? He will be supplemented by the Minister for Lands.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Lands wanted to say something.

3.50
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that this conflict is apparently taking place between two peoples who have lived very peacefully historically. I want to assure this House, the public and my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that the Government is aware of this conflict. All means are being undertaken by Government to get to the root cause of this problem. 

Secondly, law and order is being maintained in the area. The matter has reached His Excellency the President and he has directed the Minister of Local Government to handle this conflict, report to him; and for the Government to find a permanent solution to the matter.

When this problem started, the cultural leaders of Lango and Acholi tried their best to intervene. Political leaders, some of you are here, were also very objective on the issue and tried to solve the problem but unfortunately, it has not been possible. Therefore, as I speak now, in order to maintain law and order, the Government has deployed a police force in the area. I am aware of this because I spoke to the Inspector-General of Police. The two Regional Police Commanders of Acholi and Lango regions visited this area of Pader particularly in the areas called Lamincwida and Olwerowido. These are the two areas. It is not too widespread; it is in two main parishes but trying to have a multiplier effect in the area. 

I want to assure this House that the matter is being addressed. The Minister of Local Government has visited the place and he is soon going to the area again. He is working very hard to ensure that the issues are first of all analysed, the local people are told to maintain law and order and the people who are supposed to be there historically because of the border are allowed to go back to their homes. 

I want to add to what hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere has said and urge we who are in this Parliament as national leaders - because of the problem of the increase in population and the land surface of Uganda is not increasing in size, land conflicts are increasing everywhere. The new districts, which are being created, are also somehow adding to our problems – 

MR LUKWAGO: The minister has made a serious statement here - that the creation of districts has caused problems to this country. It is a policy that was adopted by Government and the districts were passed by this very House. Is the Minister in order, when he is fully aware that actually Otuke is one of the newly created districts where he comes from, to assert that this Parliament created problems instead of solving them? Is he in order? (Laughter) 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Actually, let me conclude. All I am saying is that some of these districts, which are newly created, are claiming borders, which they should not really be claiming and it is also increasing. You can see this with Tororo/Butaleja, Abim/Otuke and so on –(Interjections)- let me stop there and say that unless the Minister of Local Government wants to confirm what I have said, the problem is being handled not by me as the Minister of Lands but by the Minister of Local Government. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank you. You have been informed about the minister in charge. If you have issues, please take them to the Minister of Local Government because he is now responsible for listening to those complaints. 

Yesterday we had an issue from hon. Nambooze concerning the municipalities that are coming into effect tomorrow. We asked the minister to come and explain –(Interjections)- No, no, hon. Members! The issues have been raised and tabled before this House. You have been told. The House will not take a decision. The Minister is there and you can take them to him. Do you have a quarrel with the Minister?

MS AMUGE: No. I just want to help the House. The Minister of Local Government has done his part and there is some progress that he has made although it looks like we want to end as if nothing has been done. He has been to Pader and met leaders. He has even gone with the local leaders from Lango. How do we just seal off now and go out like nothing completely has been done? There is some progress on what has been raised and he should be able to make the House know. I thank you.

3.57
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): On the issue of the clashes in Pader, when His Excellency the President picked these conflicts, he assigned me the responsibility of going to Lira and Pader to try to talk to the leaders with a view of reconciling the people. I met the victims of the clashes, who happen to be people of Langi origin, first in Lira because most of them now live in Lira and not in their ancestral lands in Pader. They have been chased from those areas, so I had to meet them in Lira for security reasons and they raised all sorts of complaints.

The first complaint is that they are indigenous people of Pader who happen to be Langi but were born in Pader. Their ancestors were also born and buried in Pader. This is also recognised by the leadership of Pader. The Chairman of Pader does recognise that there are people of Langi origin who live in Pader. 

I travelled to a place called Arwai; it is at the border between Adilang and Kotmoro. Kotmoro sub-county is mainly dominated by the Langi people although it is in Pader. In fact, the Chairman LC III of Kotmoro is Langi and the Chairman of Adilang sub-county is Acholi. I held a meeting at the border. Their conflict was really a border conflict between Adilang and Kotmoro sub-county that had taken an ethnic dimension. We sat at that place and brought in my technical people from the ministry and surveyors from the Ministry of Lands. We agreed on the border between Adilang and Kotmoro sub-county. We did settle the matter. As I speak now, the area of Adilang and Kotmoro sub-county is calm. 

There was another problem in Lamincwida parish in Puranga sub-county again between the Acholi and the Langi. I visited that place and I met all the residents of the parish, both Langi and Acholi. The problem there is that there are 23 big families and by families I mean families headed by old people with grand children. In each of the 23 families, you find about 100 members who stayed in Lamincwida until 1985 when the coup took place. These people, for the fear of their lives, decided to leave their ancestral lands. When peace returned in 2007, they decided to go back to their homes but they were being chased by the local leaders who happened to be of Acholi origin. 

What we are doing now in Lamincwida is that we have set up a committee headed by a director in the Ministry of Local Government and in the Ministry of Lands. They are verifying whether each of these 23 families can trace its origins in Lamincwida. That exercise is now on going –(Interjections)– please, let me finish. That exercise is now on going. 

The only challenge that we met was that as soon as I left, some local leaders – LC I and II chairpersons - sometimes with the knowledge of the higher level leaders, decided to harass the indigenous Langi who are living in Lamincwida. They even stopped Langi pupils who go to Lamincwida Primary School, which I visited, from accessing the school. Now, that ceased being just a border conflict; it became a matter of law and order. Consequently, I and hon. Atubo requested the Inspector-General of Police to send a team from the Police Land Conflict Section to manage that conflict. They have now opened police posts in that area and at least now there is relative calm.

The verification committee will be completing its work next week. I have already talked to the chairman of Pader. I will be travelling there in two weeks’ time to receive the report of that verification committee. After that, I will go back to Lamincwida, which is the site, to start working on the resettlement pattern. 

We may not have a perfect system of resettlement because even the Acholi who had occupied Lango places may not be easy to evict. However, I have talked to the chairperson of Pader to try and look for alterative land for those Langi who cannot access their ancestral land. I would like to say that I was assured by the chairperson of Pader that there is more than enough land onto which to settle these people.

I would like to appeal to colleagues, especially those from that area, to give us time and also support us in helping our people to reconcile, unite and live together as they have lived before. This is important because there is no district in this country that is a one-tribe district. Most of our districts are multi-tribal. So it is possible and proper that the Langi and Acholi live together in Pader. 

That is the furthest I can go now. If you need more information, I can put it in writing. If Members have picked complaints from the ground, I am ready to receive and address them. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not think we should engage in a debate on this matter. It has been tabled and the two ministers have explained that they are looking for more information. Why don’t we wait for them to finish before we debate it?

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that on my own behalf and on the behalf of the Members of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum, we are also silently doing our part to promote harmony in the whole of the North. We have hope that this issue will be resolved even without the use of law enforcers like the police. It will be resolved the same way the one that occurred between the Madi and Acholi in the areas of Atiak was resolved. 

As Secretary-General of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum, I would like to say that we shall join hands with all the stakeholders in the interest of solidarity, peace and unity in the North. This issue will be resolved and we shall do all we can to ensure harmony prevails. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are glad you are going to meet the Minister. Okay, Minister, can you now respond to the issue of the municipalities?

4.02
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): I am now going to handle another subject. I have taken the information from the Secretary-General to the Greater North Parliamentary Forum. I would like to welcome him to work with us in ensuring there is total harmony in the North. However, you cannot rule out the use of the police because clearly there have been clashes. We only had to bring in police to restore law and order.

Madam Speaker, at yesterday’s sitting hon. Nambooze raised some questions on the operationalisation of the new municipalities, Mukono Municipality in particular. I have the guidelines that we have already issued. I do not know whether the honourable member had a copy, but if she did not, no need to worry. I have prepared a paper, copies of which are going to be circulated, as far as the creation of the new municipalities is concerned. After reading these guidelines, I will discuss them in the context of Mukono.

As you are aware, this Parliament recently approved the creation of nine municipalities namely Busia, Bushenyi-Ishaka, Hoima, Iganga, Kasese, Masindi, Mukono, Ntungamo and Rukungiri. In accordance with Section 95 of the Local Governments Act, I issued guidelines to operationalise these new municipalities with effect from 1 July 2010. The establishment of the structures of the new municipalities is governed by sections: 180(1) b, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185 and 187 of the Local Governments Act, which should strictly be read and followed in the process of establishing the new municipalities. I would like to clarify as follows:

1. 	The current chairpersons of the town councils, which were elevated to municipality status without adding to them any other electoral areas, shall act as interim mayors of the newly created municipalities. This applies to the new municipalities of Busia, Iganga and Ntungamo. These were just town councils, which were elevated as they are to municipality status. This is cost effective since they have been governed as one entity before they were elevated to municipality status. 

2. 	Where the new municipality comprises the current town council, for example Mukono Town Council which comprises other electoral areas like Goma sub-county, the Electoral Commission will be required to conduct elections for interim mayors of those new municipalities in accordance with Section 187 of the Local Governments Act. This applies to the new municipalities of Bushenyi-Ishaka, Masindi, Hoima, Kasese, Mukono and Rukungiri.

3. 	The interim councils in (2) above will comprise the following: chairpersons of town councils and sub-county councils in cases where the entire sub-county has become part of the new municipality; all councillors in the town council; and all councillors representing parishes where whole parishes have been incorporated in the municipality. 

I am in the process of approving creation of municipal divisions in the new municipalities in accordance with Section 7(4) of the Local Governments Act. I have already issued a circular to all districts where new municipalities have been created clarifying on this matter.

To be specific to Mukono, I would like to say that the councillors of Mukono Town Council including their chairpersons and those of Goma sub-county will converge to constitute the interim municipal council of Mukono, of course including the chairperson of Goma. Those councillors, under the supervision of the Electoral Commission, will elect from among themselves the interim chairman of the new municipal council who will also serve as the interim mayor. It will be this mayor who will choose his interim executive committee. I have already issued these guidelines. If there was confusion between the old and the new guidelines, I regret the confusion. This is the final clarification on this matter. (Applause) 

4.14
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): I would like to request the hon. Minister to withdraw the guidelines he sent to Mukono. (Interjection) Hon. Mbabazi was in Mukono to make sure that I do not come here; no wonder he is trying to disrupt me. 

These guidelines were given out in Mukono. The Minister of Local Government has been there with his team trying to educate the councillors about how to operationalise the municipality. The best would be to withdraw the guidelines issued. 

I do not think that this matter touches Mukono alone; it concerns all the nine municipalities. Section 181(2) says that, “… notwithstanding sub-section (1), a chairperson elected by universal adult suffrage shall have an option to remain chairperson of the original local government.” When you look at this section closely, you will find that the option the chairperson has is to remain in his previous position. In this case, the municipality is not the original local government. The previous local government in this case would be a division, which will be created out of the municipalities. My opinion is that the minister is trying to extend the meaning of this section deliberately to deny the people of these nine municipalities a chance to elect leaders through their councillors.

Rigging elections directly or indirectly is a bad thing. Of course this matter concerns my constituency but we should also think about the other nine municipalities. The option is to remain with the chairperson of the original local government and in this case the nine municipalities are not the original local governments.

4.14
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I want to ask the Minister of Local Government when Sironko Municipality will also come here because each one of us needs a municipality. If Busia is left out, that means that it has its nine councillors and the other one which has more than one may have about 18 councillors; where is equity here? I think we should be very careful when sending these guidelines. That is why I want to concur with hon. Nambooze that where there is an original local government already, members should make a decision. The town council, for example, should be the one to lead the municipality because they are the ones in charge of the municipality. These people have just been added on from the villages.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are now supporting what the Minister said.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification in a way of a rejoinder to the submission of hon. Nambooze but I want to be more specific in relation to clause 1 here in the Minister’s statement. He says that the current chairpersons of the town councils, which were elevated to municipality status without adding to them any other electoral areas, shall act as interim mayors of the newly created municipalities. Hon. Nambooze has laboured to explain this but I wanted to ask specifically looking at the provisions cited by the Minister. 

I wish to know the specific provision in the Local Government Act which provides for this principle. If you have the Act here, you should read it out to us so that we appreciate that this is the position of the law. Otherwise, if it is just a matter of convenience, we need to know. 

In the last sentence you are saying that this is cost effective since it has been governed as one entity before it was elevated. I would appreciate your concern that to cut the costs, we need no elections.

On the second issue, the Minister is saying that the commission will be required to conduct elections for interim mayors of the new municipalities. I understand that these municipalities are commencing tomorrow. We need to guide the nation as to when the elections are going to be conducted so that it is very clear as we take back the message to the people. It must be brought to the attention of the Electoral Commission; it cannot move by itself to conduct the elections. We need to get clarification whether an instrument has been made by the minister and the commission is already in the process of conducting these elections.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker -(Interjection)- protect me from the hon. Minister. I am happy that the Minister of Local Government is coming up to explain the controversies around the creation of these municipalities. I also wanted to say that Kitgum District should have been a municipality having given birth to two districts. I hope he will consider it next time.

I want to seek clarification from the hon. Minister whether when he is giving these guidelines, he takes care of who creates the boundaries of the municipalities. When we pass the municipalities in Parliament, are they subject to any alteration without the approval of Parliament? I am raising this because there is a problem. I got information from Rukungiri where they have created a municipality and they are saying that we approved that municipality with its boundaries but recently the local government sat down and added five more parishes onto what we had already passed in this House. I want to seek clarification as to whether the Minister is aware of this development and if it is within the guidelines that he has issued. There is a problem already on the boundaries of the municipality.

4.22
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for coming up with these guidelines. I am seeking clarification on No.3 - the interim councils which will have to constitute the executive out of the existing councillors and the chairperson. I want to know, and also the whole county should know what is going to happen to those councillors who have been representing parishes, which were split? The councillors are left in a dilemma because they would be representatives of both parishes. So where should such a councillor belong? Is it up to such a councillor to decide where to fall or are they free to go to the municipality?

Secondly, we want to know the area of jurisdiction of the women councillors, especially the representatives at the municipality level. 

Thirdly, there are some villages in Masindi Municipality which were joined to the municipality; these were brought on board from other rural sub-counties. In fact they were very many in that division and they wanted to form a parish. Who is supposed to give them that status? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with the last one; the new villages outside Masindi Town Council, which have been annexed to the town council to form a municipality; if they have not already been constituted into a parish, the town council can constitute them into a parish and that parish must be approved by the District Council of Masindi and it will become what we call a ward. A ward is a constituency for a councillor to the municipal council. 

Now, for the current women councillors who are in Masindi Town Council, they will continue to be councillors in Masindi Municipal Council. If they are councillors who represent parishes like Goma sub-county in Mukono – women councillors who represent two to three parishes will continue to be women councillors in Mukono Municipality because the constituency for municipal councillors is a parish. So, since they were already representing parishes in Goma sub-county, they will continue to represent those parishes in the newly created Mukono Municipality. 

What we should not forget is that this is an interim arrangement; and because it is an interim arrangement, there are going to be duplications because somebody will ask themselves - you are going to have councillors representing parishes in Goma sub-county, but the same councillors are going to represent the same parishes in Mukono Municipality. So there will be that duplication; that is because it is an interim arrangement. 

But in six months, during the general elections, the Electoral Commission is going to divide the municipality into constituencies, because constituencies in lower local governments or higher local governments are created by the Electoral Commission. It is the Electoral Commission to determine whether two parishes or even three should be represented by one woman councillor. 

Let me go back to the questions raised by hon. Nambooze. On the question of the option; an option is an option. An option to remind includes an option not to remind; that is why it is an option. So, the chairman of Mukono Town Council will remind the chairman of Mukono Division – because Mukono Town Council is going to become a division; but as we speak, it is a sub-county. He will remind the chairperson of Mukono Division, who is the councillor for that division because a chairperson of any town council is a councillor. So he or she will be a councillor in the municipal council. So he or she has the option to contest as interim chairperson of the new municipal council just like any other councillor in the municipal council. 

The same applies to the chairperson of Goma sub-county which has now become a division of Mukono Municipality. He or she has the option and the right to contest as chairperson of the interim council.

For Sironko, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has left – (Interjections)– Oh, he is here! He asked why Sironko is not a municipal council. Municipal councils are created by district councils with the approval of Parliament; they are not created by Parliament. So if Sironko is not a municipality that is the fault of Sironko District Council. When they make the request, we shall of course subject the request to a scientific study. If they do not merit the scientific study, then they cannot qualify to be a municipality but if Sironko Town Council, which I have visited, as you know; in fact Budadiri is bigger than Sironko Town Council –(Laughter)– Budadiri Town Council is far bigger than Sironko. But we shall look at the request. However, it must be moved by the district council of Sironko.

Hon. Lukwago raised a technical question, but the answer lies in section 181(b): “Composition of an interim council for a newly created local government. Until elections of council members are held, the composition of a council of a newly created local government shall be, in case of a lower local government, all members of the original local government council representing the parishes and other electoral areas within the new lower local governments”.

So, in case he is in category one, where the entire town council has become a municipality without additions, the leadership of that town council automatically takes over the leadership of the interim municipal council. You cannot import councillors who are not members of that town council. The whole essence of creating municipalities is to upgrade town councils. So if a town council is being elevated as it is, then it is proper, both legally and in logic that the leadership of that town council should not be interfered with in the interim until elections are held. 

You asked when elections will be held -(Mr Lukwago rose)– hold on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Lukwago, if you are still on that point, you know that for the districts which were formed here, the interims have also been formed out of the existing councillors; why do you want this to be different?

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, there is a technical problem here. We have a chairperson who is elected by adult suffrage and the law says that he can remain as a chairman for that particular local government; the original one. The problem is that the entire town council has been elevated to the status of a municipality and this new body called a municipality must have a leader. And this is where the issue is, the leader must be elected, as per these provisions here. The minister is talking about what is desirable, but not what is provided for.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if Kamuli Town Council becomes a municipality, it has a chairperson who was elected by adult suffrage; even if it is Mbulamuti, you know that person is a chairperson who was elected. For now it is just that body, which has been elevated to a municipality. Why do you want to interfere with that chair who was elected in Mbulamuti? -(Interjections)- For elevation -

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, let me complete. When will the elections be held? We have already written to the Electoral Commission to hold elections for new municipalities. 

Who creates the boundaries of the municipalities? A municipality is a lower local government and like all lower local governments; their boundaries are altered by district councils. Of course, in case of a municipality, it has got to come to Parliament. The boundaries of the current municipalities, which we have just formed, were fixed by the district councils and Parliament, in its wisdom, approved them. If you want to know who creates the boundaries, it is the district council with the approval of Parliament, which we did. (Interruptions)

MR DOMBO: Hon. Minister, thank you very much for giving way and thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is in relation to the statement by the Minister, which says that they have already written to the Electoral Commission to organise the elections.

About a year ago, new sub-counties were created and the local governments wrote to the Electoral Commission. However, the Electoral Commission took almost two months without conducting the elections, yet the sub-counties had to deliberate on their budgets. They had to pay penalties because of delaying to pass the budgets under the LGDP and so many issues that affect the running of the sub-counties. 

I want to seek clarification from the honourable minister. What is he going to do to ensure, either through the relevant minister who supervises the Electoral Commission or directly by himself, that the Electoral Commission handles this matter with urgency in order to allow the local governments function? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But she came late. You proceed (Laughter)

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We interact with the Electoral Commission as far as the scheduling of elections is concerned. We talk to them about the urgency like for the new districts, which were created recently, which take effect tomorrow, 1st July. The Electoral Commission has set the 5th of July as the day on which to have an interim council; so you can see they are moving very fast. Just five days after the effective date, they are going to carry out elections for interim councils.

We have just written to them for municipalities and I know they will move very fast because municipalities are very involving local governments if they do not have political supervision, the consequences can be very injurious.

So, we will engage the Electoral Commission to make sure that these elections are held on time. Of course they are independent, so we cannot dictate when they should hold the elections or how they should hold them; but we normally engage them regarding the urgency of these elections. I think I have answered all the questions, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, thank you very much. (Interjections)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE COMPUTER MISUSE BILL, 2008

4.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Rt Hon. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, hon. Dr Nsaba Buturo is not here. He should have been the one to handle this question. Yesterday, there was a proposal that the Computer Misuse Bill, The Electronic Signatures Bill and the Electronic Transactions Bill be amalgamated. On Tuesday, hon. Aggrey Awori will be answering this question. He is in South Africa and we have requested him to come back and answer this question. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER ARTICLE 179, CLAUSE (4) OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW COUNTIES

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Madam Speaker, I stand here to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 179 clause (4) of the Constitution providing for the creation of new counties.

“WHEREAS Article 179(4) provides for the criteria for alteration of boundaries of, or creation of administrative units, including counties;

AND WHEREAS Section 7(7) of the Local Government Act empowers Parliament to approve alteration of boundaries of, or creation of a new county; 

AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to create the counties specified hereunder for the effective representation and administration of those areas and take services closer to the people  having taken into account the means of communication, the geographical features, the density of the population and the wishes of the people concerned;

AND WHEREAS the creation of the said new counties is supported by a majority of Members of Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by parliament as follows:

1.	That the following new counties be created in Uganda as indicated herein:
a)	Dodoth West County out of Dodoth County in Kaabong District and the remaining part be called Dodoth East.
b)	Bunyole West County out of Bunyole County in Butaleja District and the remaining part be called Bunyole East.
c)	Agule County out of Pallisa County in Pallisa District and the remaining part be called Pallisa County.
d)	Bukooli Islands County out of Bukooli County in the new district of Namayingo and the remaining part be called Bukooli South County.
e)	Ikiki-Iki County out of Budaka Country -(Interjections)- in Budaka District and the remaining part be called Budaka County.

2. 	That the new counties take effect from 1st July 2010.”

Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I beg to be supported in this motion. Thank you.

HON. MEMBERS: Aye.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you justify it?

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, as I have already mentioned, this is in accordance with Article 179(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 77 of the Local Government Act. I am not going to repeat this because I have already cited them, but I will justify why we think we need to create Dodoth West County out of Dodoth County in Kaabong District. 

First of all, Kaabong District Council recommended that we create this county. The justification they gave was that it is extremely large in size, to the tune of 163 kilometres from one corner to the other. It has 13 counties and one town council, with a population of 314,000 people. 

We are proposing, therefore, that Dodoth West County comprises of the following sub-counties: Kapedo, Kawakol, Kalenga, Lugangiti; such that Dodoth County that will remain will comprise the following sub counties: Kaabong west, Kaabong East, Lurera, Loyolo, Lukido, Kalapato, Kamion, Katiire, Sudoko and Kaabong Town Council.

Madam Speaker, these are the wishes of the people of Kaabong East and in particular the people of Dodoth County in Kaabong District. 

Creation of Bunyole West County out of Bunyole County: again, this was passed by the district council of Butaleja. Bunyole County had 10 sub-counties, two town councils, a town board and a population of about 219,000 people. 

So, we propose that the new county we are creating should consist of the following sub counties: Budumba, Busamya, Busolwe, Nawanzofu, Busaba and Busolwe Town Council such that the old sub-county, which we have renamed Bunyole East County remains with the following sub counties: Butaleja, Himutu, Mazimata, Kachonga, Nauyo and Butaleja Town Council. 

In the district of Pallisa where we propose creation of Agule County out of Pallisa County, we also propose that the new county comprises of the following sub-counties: Gogonyo, Apupong, Abilukula, Agule, Kameke and Akisim. The county of Pallisa that will remain will comprise the following counties: Kamuge, Puti-Puti, Kasodo, Pallisa, Olok and Pallisa Town Council. Madam Speaker, the population of Pallisa County is well over 225,000 people. 

Creation of Bukooli Island County out of Bukooli County. We propose that it comprises of the following sub counties: Buhinga, Mutumba, Buhemba, Buswale and Banda. Madam Speaker, this is a very unique county, very unique in the sense that these sub counties are actually islands; numerous islands which are very difficult to reach out to and these are: Sigulu East Island, Sigulu West Island, Bugana Island, Yedi Island, Disu Island, Lorwe Island, Silo Island, Tama Island, Walyasi Island and Kyamulala Island. We thought that it is very important to bring services close to these people in the islands.

Ikiki-Iki County from Budaka County; we are proposing that the following sub counties constitute the new county: Kamwarula, Ikiki-Iki, Katera, Kamonkoli and Mugiti; and these sub-counties will comprise close to 100,000 people. Budaka County will remain with the following sub-counties: Lyama, Nankanda, Budaka, Mabowa, Kakule, Kaderona, Kakyomo and Budaka Town Council, which will also have close to 100,000 people. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to assure you that Government has considered these new entities and has evidence that it will support them financially and, therefore, I want to show evidence that we can afford to support these new entities by producing a certificate of financial implications from none other than the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development who also doubles as the secretary to the national treasury of this country. (Laughter) I beg to lay this certificate on Table and I want to implore you to support this proposal. Thank you very much. 

4.51
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While I support the minister, I think as an honourable House, we should be treated fairly. We cannot continue getting these constituencies in piecemeal. Why don’t you take a ride out of your office, go around so that we can have a general - because we created 214 constituencies before CA and I think we have been very comfortable. Now, after creating more, it should have been across the board.

I took the Minister of Local Government to Bukanga and he could not even finish it. Bukanga is a very big county with 12 sub-counties. When you talk to them they do not - in this House we need to support each other. There is no question about it; we support each other, but this business of piecemeal makes us look like people who are not serious.

I support you, Minister, but do not just speak things as if we are young children. We want to be treated fairly; we want counties to go across the board. We shall support you, honourable minister, but we also want to know that from today, we have finished. Let Gulu get, let Bukanga get and let everybody get so that we can be happy -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even Namuwongo -(Laughter)

MR BYANYIMA: So, Madam Speaker, let the minister tell us. We cannot continue like this. Let him be systematic - after the census or something - we shall support this one definitely. We shall support him. But let us use a general criteria and system across the board. We shall all be fair. I thank you. 

4.53
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. But commenting on what hon. Nathan Byanyima has just mentioned, may I propose that in future, we may need to revise the law under which new constituencies are created so that we do not take a whole ten years of census, but that the law should allow the Electoral Commission to use the population growth rate subject to the populations of the constituencies periodically so that they can create constituencies even mid-term without necessarily waiting for census? That would cover some of the problems and the challenges that we are trying to circumvent by doing what we are doing now. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I do sympathise with my colleague, hon. Nathan Byanyima, but I do not know whether his district council did the needful of doing a division and requiring Parliament to do a confirmation. What I know is that Butaleja -(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I do not want us to go backwards. We know all these counties do not have what they call resolutions. We support you but I want you to be genuine so that we can have a touch of reality for everybody. So, is it in order for hon. Dombo to tease this House that the council of Bunyole brought a resolution? Bring it on the Table. Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I did take the trouble to examine the documents brought by the Minister of Local Government to ascertain whether he has complied with all the requirements; and I can confirm that these have complied.

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If the contrary had happened in this House, that a minister had come here with a resolution without following the law, it would not only have undermined the credibility of the House but it would also have been unlawful. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the honourable minister, for following the law.

But all said and done, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we have seen these counties which are getting east, west and whatever. We know that whenever such an item comes, we have our Committee on Local Government whereby this thing would have gone there and issues which would have been raised would have been dealt with there and we would now be debating a report of the committee. 

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for people who have interests and who should have gone to the committee to come and bog us down here instead of going to the committee? 

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, in conclusion of what I was saying, I wish to repeat what I did mention in my party caucus a month ago. I did say that there are some Members of Parliament here who have the privilege of being area Members of Parliament but they are also “men” Members of Parliament. When you take an example of Bunyole, I have my colleague, hon. Dorothy Hyuya. She is the Woman Member of Parliament but I am also the “man” Member of Parliament, because, although I take a constituency it is also a district, which I have been taking as the Member of Parliament of Butaleja. 

Therefore, by Parliament confirming this division, it would be helpful to the people of Butaleja so that there is division of labour, better work done by an area Member of Parliament and the services are brought nearer to the people. I wish to support, and call upon the Members of Parliament to support the division of Butaleja into Bunyole East and Bunyole West. I beg to request.

4.59
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the motion to create more constituencies. 

We have set the precedent of creating new constituencies. We started with 36 districts, now they are 100 and they are going to be 120. We have now created more municipalities - another eight - and that will be 16. Now we are creating more constituencies and I would like to inform the Speaker and the House that many of us also want the constituencies. For example in Koboko we have one MP for the district and one MP for the constituency and even then they are disorganised. They call me Woman MP and the other one is “male” MP. So, we also need Koboko to be divided into two so that it is very clear that we have three MPs. 

What actually worries many of us is that many councillors submitted their constituencies to be divided but a few were selected. All those who submitted qualified to be divided into south and west but some few were chosen. I do not know why it was those lucky ones.

Madam Speaker, my other concern is this House. This House has remained the same size and we are increasing every year. I do not know whether in 2011 we shall fit in this House. The country is crying that the economy is too small and we should have fewer Members of Parliament but we are creating more Members of Parliament. Let it be the same when I come with my Koboko division; let it be considered like what you have done to Butaleja and the rest. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Munyira.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Member for giving way. I am rising on a point of procedure. I can see there are a number of issues coming up in this debate, and a short while ago hon. Nandala-Mafabi alluded to a very serious matter of procedure that this issue is not a matter we should just gloss over. 	
The Minister has given us details of a number of sub-counties here and there; they are all new to many of us. So the point of procedure I am raising is, shouldn’t this matter go to the committee first where all these details would be submitted, analysed and synthesised by the committee and then a report made to us so that we can debate from an informed point of view?

This has not only been a practice here but it is in the rules that when matters of this nature come, they should be submitted to a committee and memoranda are given even for some people who are not with us here. There are interested parties; there are stakeholders who are not here and they would have loved to also make their submissions to the committee. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to have this matter submitted to the committee and also to look at the economic viability because the minister is only talking about wishes of the people but even the viability of these units we are creating and so forth? The point I was raising is a matter of procedure. This matter should probably have gone to the committee first before we proceeded with the debate. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there is no harm listening to Members’ comments before it goes.

5.03
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the hon. Minister for Local Government for granting Busia the status of a municipality -(Applause)- -(Interjections)- and Cabinet and NRM of course.

I further bring the wishes of the people of Busia, that is in Lumino, that in future, this Parliament should consider creating a municipality at Lumino at the Lake Victoria -(Laughter)- I represent the people of Busia and those are their wishes and the reasons that they give - this is not for today but it is for the future. The people of Busia have on several occasions visited Mwanza Municipality in Tanzania. This is a resource at the lake and for purposes of economic development, there is a road that runs right across from Mwanza to Kenya and they have always wished that this road should come through Lumino and offer Lumino the opportunity to be part of the development of this country.

So, I would like to put it on record that the people of Lumino area and Majanji area at the Lake Victoria would really wish this area to develop into a municipality so that they are part of the development economically that is taking place in this country. I thank you.

5.05
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to remind my colleagues that last time when we were passing the counties, they did not go through the committees. What went through the committee were the districts and the municipalities. (Applause) For the Members who are saying that these counties should go through the committee, this is the committee of the whole House, we better take a decision as a committee of the whole House. (Applause)(Laughter)

I want to remind the Members that for Bukooli County, we have been having border problems over Migingo, and when we talk of Bukooli Islands County, this is part of Bukooli South. These are the islands we want to make a county on its own so that they have a direct voice instead of the two of us who they have been having, I and hon. Ochieng who are from the mainland who may not really understand well the problems of the waters. It has even taken us - under this arrangement of the East African Community we still have problems of Migingo. So, I want to urge colleagues like we have supported many of you on districts, municipalities and other counties, let us support this group. Thank you very much.

5.07
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion and allow me to thank the Minister for bringing this motion in a timely manner.

Pallisa County has been one of the largest constituencies in this country. When you look at the geographical location and the coverage, the population as we talk - when you read the UNDP poverty indices report, the population of Pallisa County stands at 287,000 people and our aim of creating administrative units is to purely have effective representation of our people. 

I want to assure honourable members that despite this large county of Pallisa, I have been trying to reach all these sub-counties but with difficulty. That is why I thank the President -(Applause)- and the Minister of Local Government for timely bringing this county into force.

I want to seek guidance from the honourable minister. These counties are coming into force on 1 July 2010 and they need effective representation in this Parliament. I want to know from the Minister when my people will be electing their representatives to this House.
 
Hon. Members, we have been supportive to all of you when we were creating the districts; we have been supportive to hon. Lukwago when he had the land problems in Kampala. Therefore, I urge honourable members on this side and our colleagues on the other side, to support us and create these counties to be effective midnight tonight.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Members, we have already discussed this matter. There will be no new Members of Parliament in this Eighth Parliament. We are creating the counties but there will be no new MPs until the Ninth Parliament – yes!

5.10
MR SAMMY LOOTE (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to thank the ministry responsible and then thank the President because he visited the place recently and the people of Dodoth presented this issue.

It is overdue for Dodoth; Dodoth has been one of the largest counties in Karamoja and it was also one of the most populated counties in the original bigger Karamoja. In fact the size of Dodoth is combined with Moroto and Nakapiripirit and part of Kotido - actually that is the size of Dodoth in quotes. I think it is overdue. 

And also if you followed the population according to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in allocating constituencies, Dodoth would have actually three constituencies because of its population. So, that is why I thank the Minister of Local Government very much for taking the plea of the people of Dodoth seriously, and more so the entire Karamoja as a region because for us we go as one - as a region - our language is one.  

Thirdly, this will also go a long way – you know there has been a bit of conflict between the major Dodoth vis-à-vis the other small Dodoth, that is Dodoth West and Dodoth East, I think it will go a long way in solving that problem. 

I implore all my colleagues that instead of subjecting this resolution to a smaller committee of Parliament, I think that we are a bigger body and we have the powers to take a decision right now and I implore all of you to support it and we make a resolution. 

Finally, I would like to seek clarification; I did not hear clearly how many sub-counties constitute Dodoth West; are they three or four? 

5.14
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have looked at this list critically but I have not seen anything to do with Teso.  I do not know what crime we have committed. (Laughter)

Secondly, you have told me that you normally get the opportunity to look at these papers before they are brought to Parliament. I hope you had a chance to look at a resolution from Soroti District because they resolved that Soroti County be sub-divided, and it was taken to the minister but I do not see it here. 

Thirdly, I would like to know from the Minister what scientific study is normally done on these counties before they are sub-divided. Because he told us that they get the resolutions from the districts and then they make a scientific study. I wish to know from him what the scientific study is all about such that we do not make a mistake next time and we shall be compelled to fulfil the requirements of the study.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much hon. Member for giving way. The information I would like to give you since you have been asking about the criteria used, is that at times these counties are created in order to solve some political problems like we have in Bunyole. We are aware that they have been created for a purpose: Bunyole has a problem and so they want to sub-divide these constituencies. (Laughter)

MR OMOLO: Madam Speaker, if population is one of the factors taken into account, Soroti County has got a population of 300,000 people; and that is a population much bigger than some districts. 

If it is in terms of geographical size, Soroti County has got seven sub-counties. Some of them are as large as counties. If anything, Soroti County alone should have been a district but because we have a municipality, that is all we have. Serere and Kasilo can make a district and we remain as one; but geographically, Soroti County is very large.

Bukedea, for instance is also very large; and it is more or less a Movement constituency. So, I don’t see why they don’t divide it so that they can get more seats, if possible. 

I would rather go by what one honourable member said because when I looked at these lists, most of these areas are inclined to the Movement. So, it appears as if these counties are being created in order for them to have more constituencies and thus MPs in this Parliament. Otherwise, if it was being done for the sake of delivering services effectively, Soroti County should have been divided and so should have been Bukedea. So, Madam Speaker, I will not support this motion unless Soroti and Bukedea counties are included in this motion. Thank you. 

5.17
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion but I would like to comment on the issue of Tororo. Tororo has in this case been left out and we are in abeyance. I know we have a problem of a district but to solve this district issue, create counties for us. 

We need a county out of Tororo County and we need two counties in West Budama. That is how we can solve the issue of Tororo District. So, I would implore the Minister of Local Government to look into it because they said that we should have this across the board and it should not be in selected areas only. He knows the difficulty in handling Tororo. But once this is done, I know that we shall have no problem and we shall not even need a district -(Interjection)- yeah, we shall not need a district if we are given these counties. Thank you, Madam Speaker.    

5.18
MR ABRAHAMS LOKI (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to thank Government, the Minister of Local Government and the President for providing services to the people of Uganda by creating these counties.

Even in terms of the creation of districts, Members recall that the President had one thing in mind, the element of giving a voice to the voiceless in terms of minority groups. 

I would like to give an example of Amudat District; Amudat District was created in Karamoja because they are unique people. They speak a different language from what the rest of the Karimojong speak, and I think that was a good response. 

In this case, it also applies to the people of Kaabong. For those of you who have not been to Karamoja, you think the people of Dodoth speak one language, but the Napore are different people and, therefore, the move to create a constituency to cater for them is a very welcome move. 

I would like the Members in the Opposition to support this motion. The view that the creation of counties is lent towards giving impetus to the NRM is not true. We have just recently created Serere District out of Soroti.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And Ngora? 

MR LOKI: We have also created another district in Ngora. So, I think we should be fair to ourselves. I would also like to go on record, Madam Speaker, and say that disarmament is a success and the population of Kotido has picked up. The Minister of Local Government, take note that you need to give consideration to create a municipality in Kotido. I sit down in support of the motion. 

5.20
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I would like to start by thanking the minister for bringing this. It is a rare occasion that I support splitting of Uganda. But on this occasion, I support it basing on specific reasons. 

Before I express support for this, I would like to make some comments. One, we are living in the 21st Century and I want to also believe that the Ministry of Local Government should be responsible for giving direction to the lower governments. And I would like to believe that on the basis of the times we are living in, the Ministry of Local Government should show some scientific inclination in giving these areas some autonomy. The point I would like to drive at is that we should consider infrastructure rather than segmenting the areas we are living in. If we create these counties without scientific basis of the areas, population and the political difficulties these areas are facing, we are just wasting time. 

Last but not least, I want to say that when we are creating these entities - I do not want to downplay the wishes of the people and that is true - but the wishes of the people should be directed towards realisation of specific needs not because of political considerations. Most of the districts we are creating are, to me, based on political considerations without solid scientific considerations.

I want to repeat that we are living in the 21st century and we should be more scientific than making random decisions. I support this because of the specific reasons that I have given. Thank you very much.

5.24
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to re-emphasise the issues of procedure and criteria in creation of new administrative units. I have this paper from Sironko District Local Council. The people of Sironko District Local Government submitted their request for the creation of Bulambuli Upper and Bugusege Counties in Sironko District on 12 December 2007 but in the list of the counties that have been brought before Parliament to approve, these counties are not featuring.

Secondly, yesterday I was called by the District Speaker of Amolatar District who informed me that they had submitted a request to create two counties out of Kyoga County and because of this, I thought it was important for me to raise this matter as to whether we are making consideration basing on the wishes of the people and the requirements in our Constitution or we are just sitting as a group of people and deciding on which one to pick, regardless of the criteria.

Hon. Byanyima raised a very pertinent issue that he was passionate and that he believes that the Minister is doing the right thing by creating many administrative units but it should be genuine and that procedures and guidelines should be followed. It is not just a matter of coming here with two districts today, two counties tomorrow and the next day we come here for the same thing. So, I would like the hon. Minister for Local Government to clarify whether they had been following the right criteria for creating these administrative units because in some parts of the country, people are crying foul. 

In some areas where I think they have influence within the Cabinet, their counties and districts are being created in one night. People who have petitioned with documents like this do not feature anywhere. How can the Minister explain this? The question of procedure, which is clearly written in our Constitution, is not being followed. 

In any case, as Members of Parliament today, we may pass these counties but do we know them? Do we know whether they are going to constitute a basis for effective representation? Not at all, because we are only reading the names; each and every time we are passing names of villages when they are brought here as counties but we do not know them. That is why even another issue was raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi: why don’t we have this matter out before the committee so that those who have complaints and issues can substantiate - even complaints of written petitions from counties and districts would be ironed out from that committee.

Madam Speaker, I beg that you allow the Minister to specifically substantiate on districts and areas, which had petitioned his ministry but he has not granted them. Why? We have a number of tense counties. Hon. Omolo here from Soroti is giving a very serious argument. Soroti County is the largest in this country with a very high population and they have been crying for this each and every time but nobody is considering it. That is why I want to be on record in this Parliament to say I do not support the creation of new administrative units unless procedures are followed. Thank you.

5.29
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Issues of politics are going to make this country ungovernable. If we were following procedures - I heard the Minister talking about a county with 100,000 people. I have just one sub-county in my place called Buwalase with 100,000 people so if you are going by the numbers then you should go all over the country and make a scientific study and create these administrative units.

We have mentioned that the district counties, for administrative purposes, should have a minimum of two; East and West. If that is the procedure, then all districts we have created, which have one county should become East and West or South and North to avoid all these problems. 

I believe that at an appropriate time, since you have not allowed us to go to the committee, I am going to move an amendment to this motion for specifically two districts from my area, which are one county districts and create West and East. That is Bulambuli where we should have East and West and even we have a resolution of the district, which was passed on 10 October 2007 and given to the Minister of Local Government on 12 December 2007. They came but what action have you taken? You should have created them if you are really sincere people. You are becoming very insincere and unrealistic on this earth.

The issue of saying we agreed that they should not start on 01 July 2010 - under what law? The law says the moment there are still six months to an election, you must elect. The moment you create this on 1st July, there must be MPs here. That is the law and you must be aware. You can pick any Constitution. The moment you create units, be ready to have MPs here. If you do not do it, you will be subjected to court. So be, ready. 

Madam Speaker –(Interruption) 

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you for raising that issue hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The information I would like to give – I have scanned through the Certificate of Financial Implications raised by the PS of Finance and it is dated 28th June, that is Monday this week. The PS is indicating that in that Certificate of Financial Implications for this particular motion, they have already earmarked funds for elections and the money is provided for in the Financial Year 2010/11. The Certificate of Financial Implications, which was laid on the Table by the Minister, says so. That means we are going to have elections for these five counties and in a couple of months we are going to have MPS joining us here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the election will be held at the general election of 2011. So those are the elections that will bring in the MPs in the Ninth Parliament.

MR AHABWE: I would like to give this House some information, in two parts. The first past is about electing a Member of Parliament. Once we create a county, we write to the Electoral Commission to gazette that county into a constituency. Under Article 63 of the Constitution on constituencies, it is very clear and it reads as follows: “Where the boundary of a constituency established under this article is altered as a result of a review, the alteration shall come into effect upon the next dissolution of Parliament.” That means that until this Parliament –(Interjections)- I am being asked to interpret this specifically for hon. Erias Lukwago, the Shadow Attorney–General of the Opposition – (Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: And the Leader of the Opposition right now. (Laughter)

MR AHABWE: Who is also acting Leader of the Opposition today, that when the Deputy Speaker is saying that the elections will be held in 2011, the elections will be held upon the dissolution of this Parliament. Therefore, representation will come in the Ninth Parliament and not this one.
 
The second explanation is –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is right.

MR AHABWE: The second explanation is that a county under the local government administrative unit is not a service delivery point. There is no expenditure at that level other than an ACAO who will be appointed by the District Service Commission to take charge of monitoring Government programmes in that county. The council at that county is a composition of the various executives of the various sub-counties within that county. So, it is by operation of law – these ones are already there and were elected under normal arrangements and so they will constitute themselves into a council at the county –(Interjections)– yes, and they elect among themselves who will be the chair and secretary and for purposes of harmonising the monitoring processes of the programme under that county. So, there is really no serious election implication other than for a Member of Parliament to the Ninth Parliament. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is okay. I am happy that there are some people who know the law and there are those who will interpret it. You can try to interpret it for us here and we shall seek the indulgence of those outside there and they will interpret it. If you win, that will be your chance.  

Since we have put here – I have shown you the resolution from Sironko District Local Council and it was not worked on by the minister and since you have said you do not want to take this to the committee and this is a full committee, at an appropriate stage, I am going to ask you to allow me to move amendments because a resolution is here and the minister has stamped on it and he has not communicated why he never acted on it. He said we should go to the districts. 

You see those double standards are not right; there is unfairness on this earth. I think even abuse of office. Hon. Adolf Mwesige there has created three town councils in the shortest time in his constituency – this is abuse of office. There is Kibito, Rwimi, Rwabona –(Interjections)– -(Laughter)- just in the shortest time. This is really abuse of office and we should look at these men and women because the moment you create a town council, it has an implication. This must be looked up further. 

We are now telling them that there are places that qualify but they do not want but when they come to their offices, they are doing it. You will see. Finally, since you are saying 100,000 qualify to be a county, we need to go for our census. The book is very clear – they carried out census and the population of Uganda is growing at 3.3 percent. We want to get the finance data and hon. Kajara knows it. We want to use their figure. So, we must now do what we call the trends analysis – for those who know trends, exponential or projection and know that this sub-county now has this number of people. Now combine this and that, do we get a county? We do not want to just do business of politics, trying to settle the differences between hon. Hyuha and hon. Dombo. We do not want – you see this is not right -(Interruption)

MS HYUHA: Order! (Laughter)

MS HYUHA: I have been in this august House. When I last joined this august House, we had only 39 districts. We created more, to 57 and then 87. We are now moving to 112. This is moving services nearer to the people. We have created municipalities and counties here. When I joined this Parliament, Sironko District never existed because we created it. We created Bulambuli, which is taking effect tomorrow. We created Bududa and Manafwa. 

Is the hon. Member in order to give the impression that we are creating Bunyole West and East to resolve conflicts between hon. Dombo and hon. Hyuha? What conflict? 

May I educate the hon. Member in this august House that even if Bunyole West and East are created - I live 20 meters away from hon. Dombo - he has been to my home. (Applause) When you came to bury the late Nabala, I hosted you in my house and you know it is 20 meters away from hon. Dombo. Even if we were to contest –(Interjections)- I still live in Bunyole West and not Bunyole East. I, therefore, urge this august House from experience that we are creating administrative units to take services nearer to the people and not to solve conflicts. I do not have any conflict with hon. Dombo. I want to educate you that hon. Dombo is my student. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to say that we are creating Bunyole East to resolve a conflict between me and hon. Dombo? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should be fair to one another. This House has progressively considered requests from all over the country – districts, municipalities, counties – so you are out of order and please, wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for that wise ruling. It is unfortunate that they are reminding me that I ate some food after burying Nabala.

However, I would like to implore the House –(Member timed out_)

5.43
THE MINISTER STATE FOR REGIONAL CO-OPERATION (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. We have heard, listened and received contributions from so many Members for this House on this matter. I, therefore, beg that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the question be now put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question that Dodoth West County be created out of Dodoth County, Bunyole West County be created out of Butaleja District, Agule County be created out of Pallisa County, Bukooli Islands County be created out of Namayingo District, Iki-Iki County be created out of Budaka District and that the counties take effect from the 01 July of 2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS SEEKING FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO INCUR AN EXPENDITURE OF SHS 5.6 BILLION IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2010/2011 FOR HOSTING THE AU SUMMIT

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion was moved before this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning Development on the 17 June 2010.

The motion is seeking Parliament’s resolution to authorise Government spend Shs 5.6 billion during the next financial year to support the African Union Summit whose budget was Shs 11.886,066,914 out which Shs 6,286,066,914 was availed in the Financial Year 2009/2010. So, the balance is being sought to be spent in the next financial year well and above the money that is provided to be spent on the Vote-on-Account.

When this motion was moved before this House, the Speaker did direct that the Committee on Foreign Affairs scrutinises the budget and makes a report to this House. 

The committee has met officials from the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Foreign Affairs, scrutinised this budget and they intend to table a report of this expenditure by way of a resolution of Parliament so as to enable Government provide funds for the preparations for the hosting of the African Union Summit, which will start on 19 July 2010.

The additional funds required above the Vote-on-Account amounts to Shs 3,733,333,333 and it is to be charged on Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Programme 09/African Union/Output 162104/Special Summits and Conferences.

This motion is moved in accordance with the provisions of Article 154(5)(a) and (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. That is why we are seeking a resolution of this Parliament to incur this expenditure.

5.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Alex Byarugaba): Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, you will all recall that on 17 June 2010 the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to incur an expenditure of 5.6 billion during the Financial Year 2010/2011 to enable Uganda host the AU Summit in July 2010.

You will recall, Madam Speaker, that the motion was rejected due to contentious issues arising out of monies appropriated for the same activity. The matter was then referred to the Committee of Foreign Affairs for scrutiny and report to the House.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee now begs to report.

Methodology

The committee held meetings with officials from the following ministries: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The committee also interacted with the different sub-committees from State House, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Health, Ministry of ICT, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is also involved in organizing the AU Summit.

Background

The background to this is that in 2008, the Government of Uganda won a bid to host the AU Ordinary Summit in 2010 amongst other member states that had expressed interest to host the same. At the time, the three conferences that go along with this activity were estimated to cost Shs 10 billion. The three conferences were: Smart Partnership, African Union Special Summit on Refugees, and the African Union Ordinary Summit of July 2010. Allocations were made as they are indicated in the document. In the process of organising the Smart Partnership, it was realised that the budget allocated for the three conferences was not enough and the Prime Minister constituted a high level technical team chaired by the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister, to review the budget for the three conferences and later came up with the following proposals; Smart Partnership was Shs 4.3 billion, African Union Special Summit, Shs 3.8 and African Union Ordinary Summit was budgeted for at Shs 8.6 billion.

In February 2010, the Prime Minister constituted yet another Cabinet committee and later formed a national task force chaired by the Head of the Public Service/Secretary to the Cabinet and national secretariat headed by the Deputy of Public Service and the Secretary to the administrative reform.

However, specific to the AU Ordinary Summit in a December 2009 letter, His Excellency the President directed the Prime Minister to constitute the above committees to discuss and address issues on the budget, commitments, and disbursement of funds, which would lead to hosting of a successful summit. Through the chairmanship of the national task force, sub-committees were constituted to review budgets and work plans. They later presented an additional budget that amounted to Shs 2.2 billion, which was approved by the Cabinet committee in March 2010. This brought the total budget for hosting the African Union Ordinary Summit to Shs 10.82 billion. The additional budget as you can see in table 1 has been displayed in details.

In April 2010 the Cabinet committee approved yet an additional request for airport apron under the Civil Aviation Authority amounting to Shs 0.280 billion and a further Shs 0.222 billion for repairing the radar. These funds were directly released to the Meteorology Department that is housed under the Ministry of Water and Environment. This brought the total budget for hosting AU Ordinary Summit to Shs 11.322 billion.

The amounts under table 2 have so far been appropriated by Parliament to host the AU summit. In mid June 2010 His Excellency the President further directed the Prime Minister to budget for an additional 13 heads of state invited from the Caribbean. The sub-committees responsible sat and prepared the additional budget that was discussed at Cabinet sub-committee level and also by the national task force.

They came up with a total budget of Shs 748,479,375 which the committee has scrutinised and lowered to Shs 697,979,000 after finding out some cases of double budgeting.

Findings of the Committee

The committee agrees that the total amount approved by Parliament so far is Shs 8,932,000,000.

The committee is also in agreement for an additional budget request of Shs 2,222,000,000 required and approved by the Cabinet committee (refer to table 1).

The committee recommended for approval and additional budget of Shs 697,979,000 after close scrutiny of the budget presented for the additional heads of state from the Caribbean.

The committee further notes that Shs 8,932,000,000 previously approved by Parliament, Shs 3,812,863,009 was garnished by URA. After an assessment by a team of officials from URA and officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, URA has agreed to refund Shs 1,166,593,013 which leaves another funding gap of Shs 2,646,270,086.

The total funding gap is, therefore, about Shs 5,564,249,086. The committee, however, made cuts and reductions in the budgets of sub-committees and savings made amount to about Shs 291,155,375.

The committee recognises that there is a total funding gap of Shs 5,273,093,711 after deduction of the savings from the total funding gap.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that Government lacks comprehensive plans for some of its conferences or summits. The committee recommends that in future a complete assessment of the activities should be carried out and a total budget of these activities should be presented at once to avoid any last minute, rushed decisions.

It was observed that although hosting events of this nature is good for the country in many ways including improving of the tourism industry, hospitality sector and employment, there is a tendency to overspend on these activities. The committee recommends that in future, Government should ensure manageable budgets and there should be value for money for these activities.
 
As indicated earlier in the report of the first Shs 4 billion appropriated by Parliament for the AU summit, Shs 3.8 billion was garnished by URA. The committee observed that the ministry was at fault since they should have paid the PAYE before paying the allowances to the officers that served during CHOGM. The committee recommends that accounting officers should remit taxes to URA in time in order to avoid this kind of scenario. Furthermore, the committee recommends that there should be full recovery of this money from the beneficiaries. 

The committee noted a case of double budgeting in the budgets presented before to it by the ministries involved in organising the AU summits. For instance, the items of media and publicity as well as the item on health occupational safety and entertainment were double budgeted when planning for the additional heads of state from the Caribbean. The committee, therefore, recommends that strict adherence to budgeting procedures be observed to avoid such mistakes of double budgeting and the officers involved should be seriously cautioned. 

The Government ministries and departments have a problem of waiting for events such as the upcoming summit to carry out last minute responsibilities and arrangements that should ordinarily have been carried out during the day to day operations of the ministry. This observation refers to the decision to repair the three BMWs that broke down in previous summits. The committee recommends that Government should avoid last minute action as it tends to result in hurried and poorly done work.

The decision made by Government to hire rather than procure some of the items used in these conferences or summits is not cost effective. For instance, the committee noted that Government is going to hire heavy duty photo copiers to the tune of Shs 45,000,000 million. The committee recommends that in future, planning should include procurement rather than hire. This is only possible if the planning of activities is done in time to allow compliance with procurement procedures. 

Finally, the committee appreciates and recognises that the Vote-on-Account provision for hosting the AU Summit of Shs 1.8 billion will not be adequate to cover the required budget amounting to Shs 5,273,093,711 in the Financial Year 2010/11 to host the summit in July this year. 

The committee, therefore, recommends to this august House to approve the motion for a resolution of Parliament as amended by the committee to authorise Government to incur yet another expenditure of Shs 5,273,093,711 in the Financial Year 2010/11 to be able to host this important summit, the African Union Summit to be attended by well over 50 heads of state and governments and all kings in Africa. I beg to move. 

6.04
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Okello Oduman): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the report of the committee, I think the summary was well captured on page 3. The committee chairperson said that there are certain aspects that were not covered and those aspects are well captured on that page, and I want to deal with each one of them.

First of all, the provision or the request for the Shs 2,222,000,000 – on page 3, the chairperson says that Cabinet approved that amount of money in March. But at the same time, he says on page 4 that there was a supplementary passed by this House in March. I just want us to be sure that we are not double counting. 

If a supplementary was passed here in March and Cabinet passed a budget of Shs 2.2 billion in March, where the supplementary we passed was more than what Cabinet passed, that is, we passed Shs 4.43 billion as supplementary at the end of March because I have a certified copy here from the Clerk of Parliament. Now, how sure are you that the Shs 2.2 billion that you are asking for was not included in the supplementary?

On page 5, you say that you need another Shs 2.222 billion, in addition to what was passed, amounting to Shs 8.9 billion. But also in March - and in my opinion, that could be before we passed the supplementary, because it was passed at the end of March - why are you considering the Shs 2.2 billion as not part of the supplementary we gave; what evidence do you have? I see there is a very high risk of double counting and double appropriation.

Furthermore, a funding gap cannot be taken to cover double counting. If you need more money, then come straight out and say it. The point I am making is that if Cabinet passes a budget and after that, this House passes a supplementary; convince me that what Cabinet approved was not in the supplementary we passed. I need very hard evidence on that.

The other point is the garnishing by URA. Mr Chairman, you said that Shs 2.6 billion is now the potion that we need to cover the gap left by the garnishing after URA has accepted to refund the balance. But from the report of the committee, we are told that this was money paid as allowances to officers who were involved in the CHOGM arrangement. 

The people in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are the same people who were responsible for withholding taxes and also earned allowances. And because they have a conflict, they did not withhold taxes. And they are still there working. Now you are saying, because they took the money which was meant for taxes – for CHOGM, you want to put that shortfall under the AU Summit. That is not acceptable. Somebody should advise Government that you cannot appropriate money to cover gaps in CHOGM using the AU Summit. The best way would have been to come here with a motion or a provision in the budget to cover funding shortfalls in the CHOGM activities. If you touch this money we are giving you, if at all we give it, and use it for taxation for CHOGM, the Auditor-General will find you at fault because the money would have been appropriated for purposes of the AU Summit. 

The people who took the money are there; this Parliament appropriated money and the people who were handling the money ate it. Now you are coming back here to tell us, “Forgive us, and give us more money to fund these activities”. Some of this money was grabbed by the people, who were handling it, and they are Government officers; this is not right at all.

As I said earlier, we cannot appropriate money for CHOGM expenditure using the jacket of the AU Summit; it is wrong. And if you put that in this motion, you will have changed the heart of the motion and I think there is a limit to the extent to which you can modify or amend motions. The substance of the motion is to seek for funding for purposes of the AU Summit, so touch the heart of this motion, which is to provide funding for the AU Summit. You need to convince us that we should include this and let go or handle with kid gloves the person who ate that money because he is still in the ministries of this Government.

On the issue of scrutiny of the provisions of the budget line, the committee has given us a detailed explanation of what the Shs 2.2 billion is meant for. They have also said that some money was meant for the radar. And also, as said, some money was for the meteorological - for the parking, there is a parking place here. Then additional money was requested because of the expansion of the team on the AU Summit. 

I thank you for that. You have broken down Shs 2.2 billion. You have explained the radar; but before you break down the additional money that is required, I had expected you to have scrutinised where the other money went; the first money. You can only appreciate the need for additional money if you have appreciated where the other money went. You are saying you have been given a breakdown of where the new money is supposed to go, but you have not delved and explained to us where the first Shs 4 billion went and where the Shs 4.43 billion went. You are saying part of it went because URA garnished it; but we are saying we are not accepting that. What about the Shs 4 billion? Where did the Shs 4 billion go? 

In his presentation the honourable minister has attempted to give a breakdown at the end of his motion. I have seen attachments; but as a committee, you are our eyes; what were your findings on expenditure by the ministry? As we said earlier, we make mistakes at this point and when we leave here, we also have a share of the blame for what happens with the money. We need to pay attention to that detail. 

Lastly, on page 3 of the report, you said of the Shs 2.2 billion, the transport sub-committee will need Shs 1 billion. You really need to make us understand matters of transport. This budget was already done; the function should have been held in June but because of the World Cup, it was postponed. What has just happened to this transport? We bought cars under CHOGM. What is the additional requirement? Is this fuel or what? We need to understand.

Mr Chairman, from your request on page 5, the only item I think we should discuss is the additional one, which arose out of the directive of His Excellency the President because of the invitation of additional delegates for the AU Summit; that is the Shs 697 million. You should convince us that Shs 2.22 billion is not double counting; that the Shs 2.6 billion is justified for us to appropriate money a second time, which we appropriated, but was eaten by officers who were handling money by paying it to themselves and they decided to forget the law that requires that part of it should go to URA. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.15
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. We know that a motion was brought to this House and because of those contentious issues, the motion was rejected. But I am surprised that whereas the committee recognises the issues, it makes recommendations that are not in tandem with the observations it has made.

For instance, look at page 6 on recommendation No. 3. The committee recommends that, “Accounting officers should remit taxes to URA in time in order to avoid this kind of scenario. Furthermore, the committee recommends that there should be full recovery of this money.”

Again, the observation is referring to the figures that hon. Oduman talked about that funds amounting to Shs 2.646 billion were garnished by URA and not refunded as shown in that table. The implication is that these funds should have been remitted to URA. It is a statutory obligation for the minister to have remitted this money and the officers who should have done it did not do it. I expected the committee to probably have held the technical officer, who is the accounting officer who should have advised on what should have been done, that is the permanent secretary, accountable. He should have been held liable. They should have held some people completely responsible because right now, it is being brought to this House as a request that must be handled through a supplementary; yet by sheer negligence, laxity and irresponsibility of some officers, it was not remitted to URA. The money they are talking about is a lot of money.

As far as I am concerned, in that table of the funding gap, that money, the Shs 2.646 billion, should be excluded from what is supposed to be the total funding gap of Shs 5.564 billion because this it is recoverable. The officers are still serving and they did not perform their statutory obligations of remitting this money to URA. It is wrong to have included it as what you are calling a funding gap. It overstates the funding gap. 

The committee also observed that there was no complete assessment of the activities and rushed decisions were made. That is the first observation, but the question is, if you observed that the assessments of those activities were not completed and rushed decisions were made, you should have held the persons who made these rushed decisions responsible. 

So, the committee has not helped this House as far as I am concerned. It is going ahead to say and actually support the requests by the ministry that more than Shs 5 billion be given as supplementary; yet it is aware that some fellows simply made rush decisions even after knowing that the assessments of the activities were incomplete. I can see that very plainly and I am sure the committee should be able to agree with me on that.

Then of course, the aspect of Shs 45 million – this is No. 6 and it is on page 7: “The committee noted that Government is going to hire heavy duty photocopiers to the tune of Shs 45 million.”

Then the committee simply makes a recommendation that says, “In future, planning should include procurement and re-use rather than hire.” But this has already happened. What decision have you made? How are you guiding the House on people who have spent Shs 45 million to hire heavy duty photocopiers? I am really dissatisfied with all this.

6.21
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am lucky that when we made the Income Tax law, I happened to have been with hon. Isaac Musumba. I think he has gone away and Section 124 of the Income Tax Act is very clear about taxation of income. The agent must withhold and if he does not withhold, he must pay; and when he pays, he is entitled to recover this amount from the payee. Hon. Musumba knows this well. But a withdrawing agent who fails to withdraw tax in accordance with the Act is personally liable to pay to the commissioner the amount of tax, which has not been withheld and the withdrawing agent is entitled to recover this amount from the payee. We passed this law and hon. Musumba wants the money without even having to refer to this paper to tell them that the law says this and how have we acted? 

On page 3 the deputy paid off public service and the secretary of the administrative reform; I am sure she is called Madam Hilda Musubira. This was the Executive Director of CHOGM. She was being paid allowances and she is the one being consulted and yet she never paid taxes. How can you leave persons to walk with our money on their hands? I think we are taking Ugandans for a ride. The money that we should not be talking about is the money garnisheed by URA. We should be talking about the money of addition for the 13 heads of state if we love Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, we are hosting this conference on 17th July. You are aware that these people always plan to delay the items so that we flout the rules and regulations –(Interjections)- whatever the case is, and you know it. I wanted to make you happy. But I can assure you they want this Shs 5.6 billion. This is already terrible. You can see, hiring a photocopier! What has the Ministry of Foreign Affairs been using? What has Parliament been using? What has the President’s Office been using? If we have a five-day function, why don’t we put together these resources that we already have in Government, for this function? Are we really fair to this country?

I want to talk about the radar. I want to remind you, Members of Parliament that we passed Shs 750 million during CHOGM to repair the meteorological radar and you are now talking of Shs 222 million? What happened to the other money? It hurts especially when the Ministry of Foreign Affairs knows what they did. We are talking about the heads of state; it is an average of Shs 63 million. 

I want to thank hon. Oduman; he put a very good case and I know that hon. Alex Byarugaba is a very serious man. I do not know why these things skipped his hands; he never did it with these people. You could see that these are big errors. You are creating jobs for the Auditor-General, which are not necessary. You are creating unnecessary jobs for Parliament, questioning people for issues that they should not have been questioned for. 

Let me come to the issue of the apron. The apron was done by ROKO during CHOGM. It had a defect period and I do not know if it is over. We are again appropriating Shs 280 million for an apron. Are we fair? We spent Shs 13 billion under CAA to do that. If you do not know, go and read your records. How many hospitals are those? How many schools are those? How many districts are suffering? Even when you consider the Shs 2.64 billion, you can see that that is already Shs 10 billion income, which was paid out and not taxed. I do not know what expenditure that was; we are bringing another query on that. But what is important is that we should be very realistic with the items we need to handle and these are the items we should fund, like the additional 13 heads of Government. I hope the Prime Minister gets that and those who committed crimes should be dealt with and CAA should not be given money. Meteorology should not be given money and apparently if you go to Entebbe, the meteorological department is using the radar, which is used by CAA and Defence for monitoring the weather. Why again put more money into it? Why don’t we use that one radar to serve this purpose? 

For your information, we paid over US $25 million to procure it to do all those functions. Why spend more money for an item already existing? This is duplicity.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, hon. Oduman said that already the Shs 11.85 billion was appropriated. If you total those figures, I do not see anything that we want to appropriate in Parliament. This money has already been dealt with and I think the best we can do - unless there are figures which are not included in the figures we mentioned - if we get the Shs 2.2 billion already there in March –(Member timed out_)

6.27
MR GAUDIOSO TINDAMANYIRE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister and the Chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee for their report, but I think what honourable members should look at is the gist or the essence of the motion. The motion is telling us that we have already approved Vote-on-Account of about Shs 1.8 billion for the African Union Summit. What we are trying to do is to authorise Government to front load the balance because the meeting is taking place by the end of July. What the committee has done is the digestion of all activities to be done, which is going to help the committee in their final report when they get their policy statement. 

The gist is the figure of Shs 5.6 billion, which is what has been budgeted for by the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Finance is precisely asking Parliament, under Article 154 of Constitution to front load the amount that we are supposed to do when we are in the budget process so that the conference takes place. As to the merits and the demerits, the committee should be able to handle with the ministry when time comes and if for example they are talking of Shs 11.8 billion, the Ministry of Finance has already paid funds garnisheed by URA. 

URA has knocked off Shs 3.8 billion, so they don’t have it. In other words, the Committee on Foreign Affairs should be able to hold the accounting officer of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs accountable on why he or she paid out that money. That should not be our concern. 

Our concern should be that as Parliament, we should authorise the money because when you get the Shs 5.6 billion, which is supposed to be spent in the Financial Year 2010/2011 and we have already given a Vote-on-Account of Shs 1.8 billion, the balance is about 3.7 billion. That is what we are supposed to pronounce ourselves on as Parliament. Then if there is the misuse that was done by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs especially with the URA, we shall hold them accountable and we shall direct the Auditor-General to go and audit those people who actually took allowances without paying. But our essence here as Parliament is to authorise Government to give the Shs 3.7 billion right now before the whole budget process takes place; and I think we should support the motion and allow Government to front load this Shs 3.7 billion, so that the Committee on Foreign Affairs makes all the preparations and we have the conference that takes place in about 14 days to come. I think that is the import of the motion from the Ministry of Finance. I beg to move that we authorise. I thank you. 

6. 31
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister and the chairperson for their reports. We have seen that we won a competitive bid and they put a vote of confidence in us to host this summit. We cannot breach this contract. We should, as this Parliament, approve these funds so that we fulfill the bid we won. It would be suicidal for us to sit here and the summit does not take place or it does not go on very well. So, for those reasons we should stand on our feet and ensure that we support these additional funds to host this summit.

When you scrutinise this thing, these funds are needed in critical areas. This money is needed for transport and infrastructure. Which one of you here does not know the status of roads in Kampala now? Don’t you want them to be repaired? Do you want our visitors to find them in this state? This money is needed for accommodation. We cannot put these people on the streets. This money is needed for security. Security is very important. We are going to have many people here. We need to be sure that our security is okay.

Having said that, I appeal to Government to ensure that this time, everything possible is done to ensure that the procurement processes are followed to avoid any suspicion. As we have been told, hosting this summit is going to increase our capacity in the tourism sector. They also talked about hospitality. We are going to add on to what we gained during CHOGM and all this is in the interest of Uganda.

I have heard my colleagues talking about CHOGM. Yes, we have received the CHOGM report but Parliament has not pronounced itself on it and so we cannot stand here and say somebody is guilty. We have not pronounced ourselves. We are waiting for this report. We are going to debate it. Nobody can stand here and say that what came from the Nandala Committee is the Bible truth. That is why they are going to bring it here and we debate it. After debating it, we shall know whether these people are guilty or not and decide what to do. 

In any case we are going to start debating the budget very soon. Are we going to put the budget at a standstill because we have not cleared the CHOGM issues? These issues stand alone. This is AU and CHOGM was there. We are going to pass a budget in many aspects and we should be mindful of what happened but let us wait after the debate. After getting the conclusion -(Interjections)- but that should not interfere with the monies needed for this summit.

Finally, the Prime Minister should look into this issue of the PAYE this Ministry of Foreign Affairs or whatever ministry did not handle well. This has to be done because you hear most local governments’ accounts being closed because of this. It is a big problem in local governments. Why shouldn’t it happen in the central government? I think we need to do something to these accounting officers. Why were the monies that were deducted from somebody not passed over? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, Members, perhaps for the avoidance of doubt, the Minister I think forgot to read the last part of his motion because if you turn to the last page of your motion, you are requesting additional funds of 3.7. That is what you are actually asking for and which you did not read. So, at the end you will have to read it so that we have the proper facts. You read only the 5.6 and did not read the 3.7. So, now, you know he is asking to add Shs 3.7 billion something to the Shs 1.8 which is on the Vote-on-Account. That is what the motion says.

6.36
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really do understand the request being made by the Minister that funds be available for the AU Summit, and I also understand that the money being requested for is outside what was approved by Parliament for the coming financial year on Vote-on-Account. In other words, the Minister is requesting that the money that was requested for and approved under Vote-on-Account at 30 percent be released at a go, at 100 percent, so that it can be used to host the AU Summit.

The problem comes from two questions which I think the honourable minister is going to answer. One, did the money that was released last financial year 2009/2010 not include the Shs 2.2 billion? Therefore, is there going to be double counting here by releasing money used last year and releasing more this year? That is one question.

The other issue is, what happens to the money that was released for CHOGM but garnisheed -(Interjections)- I mean that was released for the AU Summit but garnisheed in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs? What happens? How sure are we that when we authorise the Shs 3.7 billion, it is not going to be garnisheed when it is now time for the AU Summit? 

The fear is that there is a lot of laxity in the ministries and the Government. The Prime Minister should now know that there are officers of Government that want to embarrass Government when Government has planned so well - I am going to host my visitors, I have set aside money to do that. URA does not wake up on a single day and garnish an account. Accounts are garnished from those authorities that have not co-operated with the reminders they have been given or that have not put their point clear that they are going to pay this money. In any case, this was money that was received and eaten. So, why could they not recover the money and they were here recovering money from an available source? An account that has nothing to do with the taxes under CHOGM but in the ministry is ready to cover the money so that is what URA does. 

So, my thinking is that -(Interruption)

MR ODUMAN: Yeah, in addition to the questions you are raising, where was the AU Summit money? When money for the AU Summit was released to the ministry, on which bank account was it banked? Did they create a special account? Now, if there was no special account - because I do not think there should have been such a requirement - that means the AU money was part of some big money. What colour was the money that was garnisheed? (Laughter) What colour was it? 

MR BUKENI: Well, while you requested to give information you were giving me a question. I do not know what to take. (Laughter) But what I am saying is that Government is planning so well to carry out activities, in this case the AU Summit. It has set aside the money and as Parliament we should facilitate Government to get this money. My only problem is officers of Government that use money badly. Otherwise, we should take AU as AU and CHOGM as CHOGM. Those people who were responsible for the money being garnished should be handled according to the procedure in Government and in accounting and those found responsible should be dealt with. But we cannot stand here and deny Government money because officers of Government have acted wrongly. We should facilitate Government and give Government money to handle the AU Summit. However, serious and necessary action should be taken against the officers who could have let the money be diverted.

I, therefore request, hon. Members that we help Government, our own, to host this AU Summit by supporting the motion and availing the money but other issues that have been raised on the other money being garnished should be dealt with appropriately. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to build onto what the speaker who has just left the Floor said on the issue of garnisheed money. First of all, URA did garnishee some of the money that was on the account of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs with the Bank of Uganda. Unfortunately, they did so largely in error. That is why when reconciliation was made, there was a reduction of Shs 1.16 billion and reconciliation is continuing to happen. This House is entitled to have an explanation about this money but the process is continuing. We will have opportunity at an appropriate time to come and explain after the audit and the reconciliation has been done. 

This is normal in taxation. The URA has a claim, they come and garnish your things and you arrange your affairs. This will be done -(Interjections)- yes, this will be done. What I want to propose, however –(Interruption)

MR BUKENI: The honourable minister is saying that it is normal. Really, I want to find out from the honourable minister whether it is normal for URA to garnish an account. It is abnormal and out of the ordinary!

MR MUSUMBA: Actually, it is normal and it is authorised by law. What I want to say, however, is that we will have an opportunity to explain these matters. What we have now is that money is required for this exercise and this money has been given to us in the budget in two parts: in the previous budget and in the new budget of this year and the purpose is now to request that front load and have this money so that we go ahead with our activity. The issue of accounting and explaining is a continuous issue with this House and we will bind ourselves to do so. I thank you.

6.44
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me an opportunity to make some comments on the motion. Allow me also to thank the committee and the ministry for bringing this request of expenditure to Parliament. One of the issues we had in the famous CHOGM was committing certain expenditures without parliamentary approval. This is a lesson learnt and I think we should commend them for that.

My second point and which I think is a concern of many Members is that we are proud that we are becoming a conference destination country but I think one conference should build certain capacities that we should exploit as we hold other conferences. I am happy the committee noted here tendencies of hiring equipment. Maybe what I will need to know from the committee chair is whether these expenditures were disallowed by the committee or they continued to be part of the sum being requested for. 

The point of garnishing; we cannot argue more - those who did not withhold the taxes or remit them are culpable and are responsible and the process of pursuing them should go on. We should differentiate the two processes. Money was voted and passed for that purpose. Some people who did not do their job caused that unfortunate incident of garnishing. I do not know what garnishing means - if I am to put it in some scientific language. Anyway, I will make –(Interjections)- hon. Nandala-Mafabi will be offended because he wants to hear more of URA money but garnishing actually has some other meaning. Next time I will tell you what it means but we should separate two processes.

The process of facilitating the AU Summit should continue irrespective of who did what mistake because time for making that person to account should come. The responsible people like the Auditor-General - it is now a fact that we should now keep an eye on this and know who was responsible for this but this again we should not deprive the ministry or Government an opportunity of hosting this important event.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give my brother hon. Frank Tumwebaze is that I have a letter from URA to the Permanent Secretary but I am going to read two parts [Ms Kabakumba: “Procedure.”] No, I want to give information, please.

The ministry had requested the refund for the excess funds recovered from the account having ascertained the tax liability on CHOGM secretariat expenditure, a waiver on interest on tax overdue on CHOGM 2007 secretariat expenditure. That means it is already an agreed position and now the ministry is asking for a waiver of interest and the refund of excess. Whereas the minister comes and says we are still negotiating, the URA is communicating the position.

On 1st June -(Interjections)- no, you are saying you asked for a refund of the excess and interest so my brother Frank Tumwebaze, what we are talking about - I am laying it on the Table.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, the point I am making is that all that can be looked into by the responsible offices. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi can actually be a witness for the Public Accounts Committee and bring all those documents or the Auditor-General can utilise all that. My point is that we are not condoning all those actions but we are saying that indiscipline or that irregular behaviour notwithstanding, the importance of facilitating the noble cause of the AU Summit should not be jeopardised because of those irregularities. We need to understand this clearly and I want to invite the hon. Shadow Minister of Finance to appreciate this fact. Let us facilitate the AU Summit and at the same time pursue the irregularity and hold those who were in charge accountable. On that basis, I support the motion that we pass the money and enable the conference to take place. Thank you so much.

6.49
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I am not well schooled in diplomacy or protocol and I want this clarification. If it was a bilateral arrangement where our President visited country X and country X looked after our President without you spending a single cent, then in the words of the late President Amin, we would say, “When your President also visits us, we shall revenge and we will also look after your head of state.” But this is an association. I would have expected that member countries make contributions to the AU headquarters in Addis Ababa then the headquarters after selecting the country that is going to host the next summit would hand these contributions of member states to the host.

It would make matters much easier. I am seeing here things like accommodation, which of course goes with meals. For a head of state leaving his home country, I expect him or her to carry some per diem to look after some of these things. We can talk of African hospitality but this is hard economics and we are accountable to our people for whatever we are spending. It may not help today but for the future, this is the best way to go. If I am not following this kind of rules well, I need to be educated –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way. Two things; one, as a host country, we have an agreement with the AU on what we are expected to provide. So, some of this is a condition of what we have already accepted in the agreement.

But even without this agreement, there is an international and diplomatic understanding that when a head of state comes to visit another head of state, surely you should provide accommodation to that person and you should give them meals. Just like, if I visited you, I don’t think that you would charge me for meals and accommodation. I thank you. 

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, this is a learning process. I have heard; let us rest it here, Sir. (Applause) 

6.53
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a few observations. The observations to be shared with my colleagues and hon. Members is that when Uganda won the bid to host the AU in 2008, the cost estimated then was Shs 4 billion and it has since tripled. The budget initially anticipated by Government has tripled and this raises special concern more particularly when we look at some expenses like on transport.

Shs 1.26 billion is really on the higher side since we already have the fleet, the infrastructure and equipment we need. It is unexplainable and unjustifiable to look at this huge amount of money more so that we are not buying anything. We already have the motor outriders and escorts and all that. They are all in place, so why should we require this amount?

Around March, I had the opportunity to visit Entebbe Airport and we climbed up the radar. They testified to us that they were in top position and operational. They said the radar was perfect and in fact it is one of the sites and installations that we found to be in good and sound condition. We were shown around and nothing was seen to need any amount of money for repair.

What I would imagine at this point in time is for us to be frugal and economical. I would appeal that without going through the nitty-gritty of the taxes garnisheed and all that, do we really have money to repair the radar when we were there and it was in sound condition? 

I would request that we look at these costs to see those we can save from and leave the rest. We are all agreeable that we want to host the AU but it shouldn’t be a fetter. Mind you we have held and hosted other conferences like the Smart Partnership, the Conference on Refugees; we have had all of them here. How come that now this one takes us overboard? I would imagine at the end of the day that we can put our heads together; we can support this appropriation but let us have it reduced in those amounts and items where we are being extravagant.

I would request that we revisit them and sincerely it is up to us. I thought we could have learnt a few lessons. I don’t agree with hon. Byandala that we need to fix roads. You can’t at this point in time; it is ridiculous! If this is what we are remaining with, can’t we come up with an appropriate amount that is feasible so that we can all support it?

Lastly, I have seen a motion for a resolution and its being argued that we request for the Shs 3.7 billion front loading because Shs 1.7 billion is already on Vote-on-Account. I don’t know whether this is a competent motion in that we still have the budget running. Technically would this pass? Or we should have, at an appropriate time, another competent motion that we seek the appropriation of this amount because we are still in the budget process? We are still on Vote-on-Account; how will this front loading be effected by this? Are we going to borrow somewhere then it is repaid at an appropriate time? I need guidance on that technical aspect and how we shall proceed. I thank you.

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to allay the fears of the Members especially the Shadow Minister of Finance that there is likely to be double counting. In my submission, Annex II of this paper, it lays out in detail all the sub-committees that are going to be beneficiaries to this budget; information and technology, transport and infrastructure, accommodation venues and conference, security and accreditation, State House/spouses, media and publicity, health and occupational safety, entertainment and so on; altogether adding to Shs 11.886 billion. 

It also lays out in the middle row the money that has been released during the Financial Year 2009/2010 as part payment for this budget and it comes up to Shs 6.286 billion. The third column clearly spells out the funding gap or shortfall, which is to be financed under what we are applying for, which also adds up to Shs 5.6 billion. So there is no double payment.

These budgets were first of all generated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the sectors as hereunder outlined. These budgets were scrutinised. We did cut some of the budgets as the Cabinet sub-committee, not once or twice in order to accommodate the budget within the available money to Government.

In addition, the Committee on Foreign Affairs did look at all these details. They did not only stop at talking to the Minister of Finance and PS. They called all these sub-committee heads on media, infrastructure, and accommodation and interviewed them. They also looked at the rates, which were being charged by the hotels and looked at the rates charged for the venues. That is how the committee was convinced that we needed this money albeit with what they have said should be reduced, which as Government we concede.

On the issue of the radar, when it was agreed that Uganda would host this conference, the African Union sent teams to come and inspect facilities. They inspected hotels, the airport and the radar. It is after that that they recommended that the radar be repaired as a requirement so that it can accommodate international aviation standards with the many planes that will be there. I know that there is one head of state who is likely to come with more than ten planes. So the radar must be able to accommodate this kind of traffic and that is why it was recommended -(Interjections)- we are winding up, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)
 
MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue - hon. Mwesige and hon. Mbabazi, could you please - in the last CHOGM, this radar equipment was secured. When we went there three months ago under the CHOGM Public Accounts Committee, we did find out that this was procured both for the - hon. Mbabazi, this is not Temangalo. Can we have some order? You are senior colleagues, I expected you to behave in that way.
 
These issues of the radar had been secured both by the aviation and the Meteorological Department. For the minister to come again and say that we need another piece of equipment - unless they are telling us that what they bought at that time was second hand or has failed. These were secured both for aviation and the Meteorological Department. How can he now come back here and say they are procuring another radar?
 
MR KAJARA: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, we are not saying we are going to procure another radar because the cost would certainly not be Shs 222 million. We are saying we are going to improve, repair and upgrade to accommodate the traffic that will be coming into the airport.
 
The problem of the apron was also raised and the money that we voted to CAA. I want to inform the House that before CHOGM, the works that were accomplished were on the new airport runway. This money this time round is to be for works on the apron at the old airport where the presidential jets will park. The presidential jets are going to park at the old airport and –(Interruption)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let him inform us.
 
MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, this issue of Pay-As-You-Earn has been explained adequately. This money was garnished because the 30 percent of the allowances that were released to people during the CHOGM time was not taxed. That was an oversight on the part of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs but also the reconciliation that was carried out with URA found that URA had attached more money than they were supposed to so that is why - and together with the letter, which he has just put before Parliament was the issue of interest of two percent. All these were negotiated and that is why URA has accepted to refund the Shs 1.16 billion.
 
The committee report clearly says that for those who did not pay, money is being recovered from them but this money that is being recovered cannot be used to fund this summit. That is why it will be recovered and returned to the Consolidated Fund but meanwhile we need to fund this summit.
 
Hon. Members alluded to why this money could not be spent in 2009-2010. While the whole budget was generated in the financial year that ends today, the whole of this money could not be found because in the two supplementary budgets, supplementary one and supplementary two, we had already exceeded the cash limits for which we could spend for last financial year. That is the reason why the ministry is seeking your express authority to spend this money in this financial year. We are doing so, well and above what is voted on the vote on account and authorised by the Constitution, to be spent in the first quarter of the year.
 
Members have alluded to the fact that this meeting is starting on the 17th July so how shall we spend the Shs 5.6 billion. The explanation here is that most of the activities are ongoing. Contracts were already signed, service providers have been part paid so this money is supposed to complete those contracts for the services and this balance is supposed to settle what has already been contracted. 
 
You asked me to clarify on the content of the resolution. The content of the resolution is that we are seeking, in accordance with the provisions of Article 154(5)(a) and (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, for authority to incur expenditure amounting to Shs 3,733,000,333 above the Vote-on-Account of Shs 1,866,666,667 in the Financial Year 2010/2011 under Vote 006 of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for hosting the African Union Summit 2010 in Kampala, Uganda thus bringing the total approval to Shs 5,000,600,000 which is the entire budget provision for this item.
 
The committee recommended, through the cuts and reductions in the budgets of the sub-committees, that we could make a savings amounting to Shs 291,155,375. This amount I have just read could be offset. We agree that this amount can be offset from what we are seeking under this resolution.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Minister, please help us. First of all you have said you have conceded to their reduction and then you are reading the full amount. You remove that amount, which you have conceded to. We want the figure less what the committee has recommended.

MR KAJARA: We are seeking that Government incurs an expenditure of Shs five billion, two hundred and seventy three –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable! You know you are confusing us. We gave you the Shs 1.8 billion.

MR KAJARA: Yes, you did.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do not continue to talk about Shs 5.2 billion.

MR KAJARA: I was about to say less – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. You deal with the additional that you are asking for beyond the Vote-on-Account; you calculate. 

MR GODI: Point of order!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order?

MR KAJARA: We have just been adjusting – we are adjusting these figures. Instead of the Shs 3.703 billion, we are deducting Shs 291,155,375 and therefore we are seeking authority to incur expenditure amounting to Shs 3,542,177,958 –(Interjections)- you can see that people have different figures but I have added here and my amount which we are seeking to spend is Shs 3,442,177,958.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “Above the Vote-on-Account.” You add those words there.

MR KAJARA: Above what is on Vote-on-Account.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. That is what you should do.

MR KAJARA: And it is above Shs 1,866,666,667. I beg to move.

7.15
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oduman): Starting from where the Minister has ended, I would like us to add this amendment I am proposing, that “… of which Shs 2,645,933,086 shall be recovered and remitted to the Consolidated Fund.” So that the appropriation we are doing in total is not seen to be appropriation of the AU Summit. Part of it is an advance but in the body of the motion, the recovery part is missing. So I am suggesting that we include that of which that amount is an advance because we already appropriated, it shall be recovered and remitted to the Consolidated Fund.       

7.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Isaac Musumba): We appreciate the concerns of the House. We would like to make that kind of commitment. However, this is a motion to supply, to which we cannot add these provisos. The motion is very clear; to request that this money be made available up front in the amounts that have been mentioned. We can have a different undertaking in a different setting but not this one.

MR ODUMAN: You see we have to be honest with each other. How harmful is this amendment I am proposing? It is very harmless and it follows on from what the minister says. We are not in a Committee of Supply but this is a motion and a motion in our rules is open to amendment. Let us debate my proposal for amendment –(Interjections)- yes. I think that if we mean well between us or among us, I do not see why we should raise a big issue on the wording of that amendment. It is a commitment and we want that commitment recorded in the motion. Yes!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a problem with undertaking to recover?

MR KAJARA: As I did mention to the House, the Cabinet sub-committee was concerned that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had not been paying Pay-As-You-Earn and we were informed that they are now recovering this money and remitting straight to the Consolidated Fund. The committee also recommends on page 6 that accounting officers should remit taxes to URA in time to avoid this kind of scenario. As we speak today, the money that is being released under this summit is being taxed. The allowances are being taxed and money is being remitted. The committee recommends that there should be full recovery of this money and we agree and it is already being done. I do not think it is necessary for us to capture it in this resolution –(Interruption) 

MR ODUMAN: From what the Minister has said, he is in agreement with my proposal –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: I am a member of the committee and one of the issues I was very strong on was the issue of the garnished money and I support the proposal that we should make a commitment in the resolution because when we asked the permanent secretary to recover all this money in the committee, the permanent secretary started telling us that some of these people were volunteers and students and that they are not sure whether they can get all this money and yet it is money we had already approved. The law is very clear - a withholding agent who fails to withhold tax in accordance with this Act is personally liable to pay to the commissioner. We even told them that we cannot now start saying, “Because some were volunteers, it was not our mistake.” It was his responsibility. So to make them recover the total of this money knowing that in the committee they had already started creating excuses, let this Parliament pronounce itself on this matter. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a report of the committee. We shall put the question that we adopt the report of the committee of this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do authorise the Government to incur additional expenditure of Shs 3,442,177,958 above the Vote-on-Account of Shs 1,866.666,667 towards Uganda’s hosting of the African Union Summit in July 2010. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We already adopted the report. Okay, hon. Members, thank you so much. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 6 July 2010, at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.22 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 July 2010, at 2.30 p.m.) 

