


Tuesday, 30 June 2020

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.


PRAYERS


(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.


COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have only three issues to communicate. The first one is that on Friday, I received a petition from 5,420 citizens asking Government to consider renaming a number of historical monuments, our roads and streets in the country. A number of them have got colonial names. I will be sending the petition to the Prime Minister so that the Government can consider it and advise us on what to do. 

Secondly, I am giving notice that the National Coffee Bill will come for second reading tomorrow. Therefore, I would like to ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the committee and the Members to be ready for the second reading. 

Thirdly, is to urge the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development who are handling the National Social Security Bill to expeditiously conclude it so that we can deal with the amendments. There is a lot of anxiety around that Bill and I want it out of our docket. 

There are just a few matters of national concern and I am giving strictly two minutes. Do not give Floor to anybody to give information. 

2.48
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to raise a matter of national importance regarding the verification of Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment beneficiaries. 

The officials of Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development have been in the districts trying to verify the beneficiaries. However, it seems that all they are interested in is deleting names of those who have died. 

One would have expected that they would use this time to pick names of those who were omitted on these lists and those who have turned 80 since the last registration, so that these names can be entered into the system right at the beginning of the financial year, in order for them to benefit. Instead, they are just deleting.
One wonders where the money is going because we were told that the reason that the age was lifted to 80 was because the money was not enough. We know that not many of our people live up to 80. Therefore, when you delete those who have died, why would we not enter into the system, those who now qualify? We would like an explanation from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development should come and update the country on the questions raised by hon. Kamateeka. It would be nice if he would do that by next Tuesday. 

2.50
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Much as water remains one of the most important consumables in the fight against this COVID-19 pandemic, the National Water and Sewage Corporation has begun a very serious and dangerous exercise of disconnecting several of its clients in Kampala City. 

We passed a resolution earlier this month, urging Government to, among other things, avoid disconnecting water throughout this pandemic. What the National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) are doing around Kampala, disconnecting clients for non-payment of arrears, is wrong. 

Government should come out to explain how people are expected to cope during this scientific style of living without water. People are expected to be using water, first to wash hands but also to drink. Doctors have been advising that the population should be drinking a lot of water, because when the virus enters your body, when you have been hydrating, it will just pass through and you will not be affected. 

The minister responsible should also come and explain what steps have been taken so far to honour the resolutions that were passed by this Parliament earlier this month. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Minister of Water and Environment to come and update this House regarding what has been done about our resolutions. Honourable minister, please, come and tell us what you have done about NWSC.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT)(Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank my honourable colleague, hon. Kasibante for raising the concern about disconnection of water. 

It is true that during the COVID-19 pandemic, water is quite essential and that we agreed to put all disconnections on hold. However, having heard my colleague say that there are disconnections going on in the Kampala area, I can cross-check with NWSC to confirm whether it is true. I will, then, come back and report here, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.53
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I have a matter of national importance. Busia Port Health Centre is one of the key health ports in East Africa with some of the highest cases of positive COVID-19. 

I was at that centre on Saturday but I found the workers’ morale very low because there is a report from the ministry that they want to remove all the health volunteer workers and replace them with people from the ministry. It must be noted that these people have been working there for four months with meagre allowances and yet, they were working very hard. 

Madam speaker, I bring this matter because most of these volunteers were recruited from the community. Our people are worried that if they stop them abruptly and send them to their homesteads – they are still stigmatised because of the disease. Therefore, my prayer is that they should allow these people to work since they recruited and trained them and they are doing a very good job.

Secondly, we have a quarantine centre but people are almost dying of starvation. People share basins at the quarantine centre, which is very unhealthy. The district says they have made alarms and requests to the National Taskforce on COVID-19 to give them food supplies but there has not been any response. They do not have any foodat all. Therefore, I pray that we close Busia Quarantine Centre. Otherwise, most of the people in that quarantine centre are Kenyans and they are starving. They may run away and go to the communities. You never know, when the results come back, these people could be COVID-19 positive.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, Busia District as key centre needs a standby ambulance. Two weeks ago, when they got COVID-19 positive cases, it took almost 24 hours because there was no ambulance. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have two minutes.

MR MACHO: It is, therefore, our prayer that among the ambulances that were donated, one should be given to Busia Health Centre IV. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Health should address the situation at Busia Quarantine Centre. The Chairperson of the National Task Force on COVID-19 should also address the issue of food and come back to us by next Tuesday. 

Hon. David Mutebi, the question you asked was answered by the Minister of Works and Transport. He came here and gave us a programme about what he is going to do on the roads.

2.57
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the forthcoming general elections. 

In February, Parliament did its work by passing the electoral laws that were formerly Bills presented by the Executive. We amended the Parliamentary, Presidential and Local Government Elections Act. Among others, it has a bearing on many issues pertaining to the candidates. Critical to what was amended, was the introduction of qualifications for mayors and councillors in town councils and municipalities. 

Another critical issue concerned the women representatives. As opposed to one-third representation, the law was amended to introduce each member representing a sub county. From the time the Bill was passed by Parliament, it has gone way beyond 30 days that Article 91 of the Constitution stipulates. Up to now, there is a lot of uncertainty and confusion as parties are going on to conduct their primaries. 

Madam Speaker, there are many questions in the community, which we cannot answer. Candidates are being stressed especially the women, who have continued to consult in the different areas.

Further, the Electoral Commission is still working on the Act since the amendment has not been assented to. We are worried that the Bill may be assented to, when it is just one month to elections and yet, institutions have activities, which have a bearing on the elections. They are already issuing timelines. For instance, the Uganda National Examinations Board has a timeline on which they want these local councillors or whoever intends to stand, to go and verify their papers.

My prayer is that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should brief us on the state of these electoral laws. Otherwise, there is tension and anxiety in the public. Some intending candidates are being discouraged. We really need to be updated on what is going on. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is required to come here by Thursday to explain what happened to the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, Presidential Elections (Amendment), Bill, Local Government (Amendment) Bill, Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, which were passed in February 2020. Let us know by latest Thursday. 

3.00
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raise on a matter of urgent national importance concerning the non-committal by Government to deal with the grave damages on the national road network, even after the minister appraised the country and this Parliament on the problem that is impeding a lot of services in this country.

Madam Speaker, on your instructions, the Minister of Works and Transport came here and appraised us on how much the heavy rains inflicted damage on the national road network including the national roads, District, Urban and Community Access Roads (and district roads.

You also pointed out that inadequate financial resources had been released to the ministry to deal with many of those roads. Even in the budget for the year starting tomorrow, these roads have not been catered for. Unfortunately, all the supplementary budgets for emergency interventions that have been presented to this House do not reflect an emergency intervention on these roads. It is, therefore, my prayer that the Speaker directs the Government or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and present to us the arrangements they have, bearing in mind that the minister indicated to us that the required Shs 97 billion to carry out the necessary emergency interventions, which have not been catered for in the budget starting tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is required to come here and explain to the House and the country, how soon he will be able to raise Shs 97 billion to attend to the emergency interventions on the roads in the country that have been affected in a very massive manner. Let us have the answer by Tuesday next week.

3.03
DR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, this year alone, over 15 citizens have met their death in Kanaba Sub County in Kisoro District. Those who are familiar with Kisoro, when you come from Kabale and you negotiate Echuya Forest, you are able to see Kisoro, Rwanda and DRC.

That spot, soon after Echuya Forest, is a very sharp bend that has led to the death of over 15 Ugandans. It is very essential that Government does something immediately. Otherwise, all indications are that if nothing is done, this nation will continue losing its citizens. 

My prayer, therefore, on behalf of our people from Kisoro and many others who use that highway, is that Government takes drastic actions to address that situation so that the whole stretch - for those who know Kisoro, the district is characterised by many sharp corners.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Works and Transport is required to come and explain to us the proposals to remedy the situation on Kisoro-Kabale Road, which has claimed many lives. Come back to us by next Thursday. 

3.05
MS CHRISTINE ACHENG (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning what is happening in Alebtong District.

On Friday, in Aloi Sub County in Alebtong, in one of the parishes, hailstorms destroyed crops, people’s gardens and houses. About 100 people in that parish had their crops destroyed. My colleague, the constituency member of Parliament is collecting data on the ground.

Madam Speaker, I remember some few months ago, I raised an issue concerning floods in Alebtong District. I wrote to the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. The minister told me to liaise with the Chief Administrative Office so that I could get a letter from him to back-up my letter. However, up to now, I have not got any response.

There is a Sub County in Ajuri Constituency, which has been disorganised by the floods and people’s houses were carried away. People are suffering. 
My prayer, therefore, is that the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should help my people. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should urgently address the situation in Alebtong.  

3.07
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Eng. Hillary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, the Woman member of Parliament from Alebtong, for raising this issue.

We are following all those counties and districts that have been affected by the floods, especially those living near swamps. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has pledged Shs 20 million, which they said will be released in the first week of July, for buying food. 

Alebtong is one of the districts we are going to send food to and other places along lake shores, for example, around L. Victoria and L. Kioga, where the rising water levels have affected the population. Your district will be one of those to be handled.

We are also comprehensively addressing the challenges caused by the various disasters in the country, particularly, the recent disasters. The matter is before Cabinet and once approved, I will report to this Parliament. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Waluswaka, you have only two minutes.

3.09
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here with pain to present a matter of national concern. 

You are aware Parliament approved a supplementary for the Ministry of Health to handle issues relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, last week, when we were interacting with Uganda Virus Research Institute, the professor who heads that institute gave shocking news that they have not received a single penny from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in relation to COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, he even said that the nitrogen plant, where they keep reagents and samples broke down three years back. They wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informing them about it. He showed us a copy of their letter, which had been acknowledged by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  The cost of the nitrogen plant by then was Shs 630 million but that up to now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has given a deaf ear to that issue.

Madam Speaker, now that some members of Parliament returned money to the National Task Force on COVID-19 and given the fact that Ugandans collected money for that purpose, I pray that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases money to Uganda Virus Research Institute to buy and install a new nitrogen plant. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, were they supposed to get this money directly or was it through the Ministry of Health? 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, the money was supposed to come from the Ministry of Health but when we asked them further, they said some of it would go to buying testing kits. However, when we asked the professor, he said the test kits they are getting are from World Health Organisation and the United Nations. Let me take information. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we passed a supplementary in April. The Minister of Health should come and explain to us what happened to the money appropriated for Uganda Virus Research Institute and the nitrogen plant. Otherwise, it is urgent. 

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information, I would like to give is that we were requested to take the money that had been given to us to our respective districts or the Parliamentary Commission. Those who took it to their districts were asked by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to deposit it on to some account that was provided.

Later the districts were asked to write what they wished to spend that money on, which they have done but they have never received that money. 

I would like to know from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, when the districts will get that money. We expected that money to be used in the districts.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we did our duty. However, let me ask the Minister of Health to come and explain the failure to remit money to the Uganda Virus Research Institute and other institutions for which we appropriated. Honourable members, let us go to item three. 
BILLS
FIRST READING
THE NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE BILL, 2020

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity.  I thank God that I have been able to make it here. I left Kitgum District at 8 O’clock, this morning. I also thank Government for the good road network. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Bill entitled, “National Climate Change Bill, 2020”. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: The certificate?

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I have the Bill and I have the Certificate of Financial Implication hereby attached. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded or you are alone? (Laughter) (Members rose_)Okay, it is seconded. You can lay it. 

Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Climate Change or to the Committee on Natural Resources. Should we send it to the Committee on Climate Change? It is an urgent Bill. As you know, we have been waiting for it. Since that is the only Bill they have, we urge them to do it within less than 45 days, if possible. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FAILURE BY GOVERNMENT TO PAY UGANDAN TRADERS IN SOUTH SUDAN AS RESOLVED BY PARLIAMENT AND MONEY ACCORDINGLY APPROPRIATED IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE SPEAKER: Has the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development disappeared? He will have to come here. He has work here and so, he will have to appear. Let us go to item 2.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ALLEGED USE OF GOVERNMENT PROPERTY ON THE DISPUTED LAND IN KIULA CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Works and Transport? He is not here. Honourable members, I had separately asked the Clerk to write to the Registry to establish the state of this matter. I have a letter here dated today, 30 June 2020; Miscellaneous Application No.5 of 2020 arising from Miscellaneous Application No. 44 of 2019, also arising from Civil Suit No. 102 of 2019; National Forestry Authority (NFA) versus Semuga Badru.

The Registrar says the actual acreage of the land contained in Bugerere, Freehold Register Volume MKO, Folio 19 Bugerere, 14 Plot 9, Kirasa Galilaya, has an acreage of 466 hectares. 

The question whether the ruling of the court covers the 2,147 hectares of the entire Kiula Central Forest Reserve is a matter, which will be determined by the trial Judge after hearing the main suit.

Honourable members, the matter is still alive in court and we are not in position to interfere with it for now. However, I still want the Minister of Works and Transport to explain to us whether the tractors are from his ministry and also to explain whether the equipment of NAADS’’’ is also being used to destroy this forest. Thank you.

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. What you have just informed us about is that the land in dispute measures approximately 465 hectares, which is equivalent to 1000 plus acres. However, the entire forest reserve is 5,000 acres.

The entire forest is under degradation and what the ruling is allowing this litigant to use is 1000 acres and not the entire 5000 acre piece of land that covers the entire forest reserve. They have gone beyond that scope.

Madam Speaker, you are saying that we should leave this matter to court and yet, these people have already gone beyond what court has allowed them to utilise. 

I request Parliament to protect the rest of the acreage of land, which is 4,000 acres because they are degrading the entire forest. When the Minister of Water and Environment was there, she saw all this happening.

The ministers are not here to respond to the matters you asked them to come and respond to. This shows that they are not giving this matter the urgent attention it deserves and yet, this is an urgent issue that needs urgent attention.

Madam Speaker, by the time the minister went there, she saw more than 20 graders putting down the forest. They are now more than 40. They are doing this because they know the Judge will conduct a locus visit and by the time he conducts the locus visit, there will be nothing to protect at the time.

I request this Parliament - The minister, NFA and the entire Executive is conflicted. I brought this matter before Parliament because this is where I think the right solution will come from.

Madam Speaker, my urgent request to you is, please, can we use Parliament? We have committees; one on natural resources and another of physical infrastructure. I wish you could send them to the locus and they see what is going on because even regarding the tractors that belong to Government, the ministers have refused to come and give their side of the story. They have refused and yet, the tractors are still putting down a reserve that is not for Nantaba but for the entire country. 

My request, Madam Speaker, is that you delegate these two committees to save the community because they want to riot and I am reining them in. I am telling them that I am handling the matter in a different way. I do not want to handle it in a different way because they will end up in jail. 

They have been jailed before. I keep going to court to bail out people. Even this morning, I was at Mukono High Court trying to bail out these wanainchi - these victims who are trying to block this degradation of the environment. 

Madam Speaker, I have put up a fight for this. It does not belong to me; this is for the country. Kindly, they have gone beyond the scope of 1000 acres. Can we save the 4000 acres? Even when it is already degraded, we can do something. We cannot simply leave this to court.

The same Registrar who has written that ruling, which you have just read, is the very same Registrar who visited the locus and declared that there are no forests. You sent the Minister of Water and Environment who went to the ground and saw the forest being degraded.
I request that the committees visit the locus and stop the impunity that is going on. Government tractors putting down a forest is beyond what I can understand. We are here to protect the environment, for our good and for the good of the future but no one seems to care.

I am requesting that the committees visit the locus and save the community from this impunity because it is beyond what we can afford. We do not want to riot. We have used the right measures but courts have been compromised.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Nantaba’s submission really makes one feel frustrated. You feel as if there is no one in charge. What is the minister doing? Why don’t you tell us what to do? 

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the passion that hon. Nantaba is expressing before this Parliament. Madam Speaker, indeed, as you directed, we went to Kayunga. The honourable member and I came back here to report. The word which was used was that “there are people out there in a crooked way who want to bring the future of this country down.”

What they are using is court procedures, which as she is righty stating - you are a lawyer and this Parliament has the authority. If you do so, direct me to go and reign over the remaining 4000 hectares, which is not within the court procedure and I will do that.

However, Madam Speaker, if you say, as you know that the case is before court, it is a way they are hiding before court. We are not even sure when this court case is going to be concluded. At an appropriate time, we need environmental courts that can help us expeditiously deal with environmental issues. As per now, I need your guidance and as a ministry we are ready –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let the minister not speak like she is not a minister. You know how you earned the name “Mama Mabira.” If you are not careful, you will be called former “mama Mabira” because of that forest.

Madam Speaker, you have read from the Court Registrar the acreage. Hon. Nantaba here says that the acreage of that forest is over 5000. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is your colleague and NFA is under you. What is the acreage of that forest? If it is true that it is over 5000 and the courts talk of 1000, why are you allowing the tractors to go beyond the 1000, which is contested? 

Is it true that that forest is over 5000 acres? We would like you to clarify to us because that is not under contestation if it is more than 1000 acres. Tell us if that forest is more than 5000 acres or not. The courts talk of 1000; why are you failing the 4000 acres?
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, honourable minister, I do not think you need the authority of this House to stop the damage to the environment. It is your responsibility and you have the capacity. 

Honourable minister, I did not want a discussion on that matter here because we shall decide on it, yet the matter is in court. However, you have the power to protect the remaining part of the forest and ensure that nobody goes there. I do not have parliamentary police to take to Kiula. You do not need my authority. Please, just do your work.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I have heard and thank you, colleagues for supporting us. Most obliged. I am going to swing into action. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON BENEFITS TO FORMER HEADS OF THE LEGISLATURE

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, on Tuesday 23 June 2020, at the 7th sitting of the First Meeting of the Fifth Session of the 10th  Parliament, you raised a concern that whereas Administration of Judiciary Act, 2020 provides benefits for the retired and serving heads of the Judiciary, there was no clarity on the benefits due to the former heads of the legislature. 
The Clerk to Parliament consequently on 24 June 2020, communicated the directives of Parliament requiring me to provide a brief to Parliament in response to the above concerns.

Madam Speaker, there are multiplicities of laws providing for retirement benefits, emoluments and other terms and conditions of Public Service paid from the Consolidated Fund to the different categories of public servants. For clarity, some of the laws include; 
    1. The retirement benefits for the Public Service as well as the Judiciary, which provides for the pension under Article 254 of the 1995, Constitution as amended.
    2. The retirement benefits of the Public Service as well as the Judiciary under Pensions Act cap 286, which provides for the grant and regulations of pensions, gratuities and other allowances in respect to the Public Service of officers under Government of Uganda. This includes the Judiciary, Public Service, Health Service, Education Service, Local Government Service, Uganda Peoples’ Defense Force and former employers of the defunct EAC.
    3. The retirement benefits of the President, Vice President and the Prime Minister. This is provided for under schedules fifth, sixth, seventh and part of (a) of the fourteenth schedule for the President and parts (a) (b) and (c) of the eighth schedule and schedules ninth, tenth and part (b) of the fourteenth schedule for the Vice President and parts (a) (b) and (c) of the eleventh schedule and schedules twelfth, thirteenth and part (c) of the fourteenth schedule for the Prime Minister.
    4. Madam Speaker, the fourth one is the Public Service Retirement Benefits for specified officers. This category is provided for under the Salaries and Allowances Specified Officers’ Act, 1999. These specified officers include the Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Principal Judge, Justice of the Supreme Court, the Justice of Court of Appeal, the Judge of the High Court, Auditor-General, Inspector General of Government, Deputy Inspector General of Government, Chairpersons of the commission established by the Constitution, the Deputy Chairperson of the commission established by the Constitution, Members of a commission established by the Constitution, Inspector General of Police, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Commissioner-General of Prisons and the Deputy Commissioner-General of Prisons.
    5.  The retirement benefits for Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament. That category is catered for under the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007 as amended, which establishes a contributory pension scheme and fund for members of Parliament as well as staff of Parliament. It provides for payment or granting of pension or retirement benefits for members of Parliament as well as staff of Parliament. The Parliamentary Pension Scheme does not cover a member of Parliament who is a Vice President or Prime Minister; the Speaker as well as the Deputy Speaker is also not covered under this.

Madam Speaker, the gist of your concern is under the retirement benefits for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and that is catered for under schedule four of the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) (No.2) Act, 2011, which provides for retirement benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker under schedules four and five.

Prior to the enactment of the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Act, 2007 His Excellency the President, using his executive powers granted ex gratia to former heads of the legislature, which my ministry paid as follows;
    1. Retired or deceased former Speaker of Parliament was  paid Shs 350,000,000;
    2. Retired or deceased former Deputy Speaker of Parliament was paid Shs 300,000,000. 
That was under the ex-gratia terms.

Madam Speaker, on the implications of the enactment of the Administration of the Judiciary Act, 2020, you realise that the Act establishes the Judiciary Service as distinct from the Executive. It dis-applies the Pensions Act, Cap 286, repeals section 46(3) of the Judicature Act as well as dis-applying the salaries and allowances of the Specified Officers’ Act, 1999.

Accordingly, terms and conditions of service for judicial officers and Judiciary staff including retirement benefits are provided by the Administration of the Judiciary Act, 2020.

Madam Speaker, in response to your question, while the Administration of the Judiciary Act, 2020 provides for the terms and conditions of service and benefits for the retired and serving heads of the Judiciary, the former heads of the Legislature are provided for under the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) (No.2) Act, 2011.

The question as to whether the provisions are adequate compared to those provided under the Administration of the Judiciary Act, 2020 may be raised and resolved by Parliament in accordance with the powers provided to the Rt Hon. Speaker under the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007 with amendments.

Allow me to submit that the retirement benefits for former heads of the Legislature are covered and that enactment of the Administration of the Judiciary Act, 2020 does not affect the emoluments of the former heads of Legislature.

The laws governing terms and conditions of services and retirement benefits for public servants under the three Arms of Government are different as clarified above.

Madam Speaker, there is Schedule (4) and Schedule (5), which go into the detail of the benefits for the serving Speaker and Deputy Speaker prior to the coming in of the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007.

I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the information. I will now direct the Clerk to examine the situation of the former Speakers - the ones who have been in the other Parliaments - to see whether this has been applying to them; so that we know how to move.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, if I got the minister right, he was referring to the matter that was raised on 23 December. 

I remember that on that day, additionally, there was an issue that you directed the minister to come and report about. He had given us a month. It is the issue about taking care of ministers and formers members of Parliament in the event of death. It was supposed to be part of this.

I do not know whether it is intentional for the minister to keep it out. It is a matter, which keeps coming up when a former Member of Parliament or minister passes on. Of course, for the former Judges, we covered it when we passed the Administration of the Judiciary Act. However, for these others, why has the minister left it out? We do not want embarrassment again tomorrow when a former minister or Member of Parliament dies and the body is brought to hang here. 

Therefore, can the minister clarify why he has left that out?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that matter is long outstanding.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Although you have directed the Clerk, the clarification I would like to seek from the minister is that when we passed the Administration of the Judiciary Act, everyone, especially the judicial officers, was happy.

Even here at Parliament, when people bring petitions, they come to your office; when they do not have transport, it is you to give it to them from your salary. I would like to request the minister to bring an amendment to the Parliamentary Act so that we cater for it. As politicians, almost 100 per cent of what we earn goes to the voters.

That is why even the President had said that the former members of Parliament would be getting Shs 100 million. I have one in my constituency - Mr Ali Hasatsya, who was here in the 1960s. People are languishing. When is the minister bringing the issue of former members of Parliament? Some of them are over 95 years suffering in the villages.

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate honourable colleagues for that concern. The House put this issue to us and it has been discussed by the ministry. 

We are still having wider consultations. We have to bring it to Cabinet since it has financial implications. It also deals with the bigger group especially those who worked before the Parliamentary Pensions Act came into place. 

I think that since we are going into the electoral period, I do not know whether we will have enough time to discuss this and the budget has already been worked on. However, as of now, I think we can continue requesting members to submit names the way Government has been handling them.

If you get a case of a prominent ex-public servant, we should bring it forward. Otherwise, our ministry is handling the issue. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are now encouraging Members to start bringing here people. What we have been asking is what the categories that must come here are. Some are brought while others are not. In the end, I have to explain to the country why so and so was not given a state funeral. It is a serious issue.

We want the other matter, which we asked you to handle. We asked you to handle this some time back. We would like to know.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was perturbed by the last statement of the minister, although he had proceeded well, to propose that if any Member knows the whereabouts of former leaders of this country, they should bring them to his ministry. It is as if the minister and Government do not have records of the former serving ministers and leaders of this country. It is unfortunate.

It is disturbing that we may also leave this Parliament tomorrow and they will forget us. They will say whoever knows where you are should look for you. That means, from the minister’s submission, that there is no proper record of former leaders. 

I am asking whether the minister, in his statement, proceeded well by giving that kind of guidance to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is very risky and dangerous because everybody will assume that they are entitled to come here. Honourable minister, when can you come back to us? This is a long outstanding matter.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, to simplify the work of the Minister if he says he does not have the records, you summoned all the former members of Parliament - this Parliament has records. I remember the Member attended that function; how dare he say he does not have the records? If he does not have the records, get to the Clerk. The Parliamentary Commission has the list of the former members of Parliament. Therefore, you cannot just come and say, bring us the records - that is laxity and weakness on your part.

THE SPEAKER: The records are available. We have the records from the First Parliament, the Legislative Council, etcetera.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, as I said, my colleagues have raised that concern. However, it is an issue which touches all the three Arms of Government and even other groups, which include cultural and religious leaders. Even eminent sports personnel and other groups. Therefore, that issue needs wider consultations from the different stakeholders and our Ministry is handling it.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item 4(iv).

STATEMENT ON THE PENDING FULFILMENT OF GOVERNMENT’S UNDERTAKING TO PAY TOBACCO FARMERS

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Trade? Absent. Item 5

PRESENTATION OF PETITION OVER THE CLOSURE OF ETOP WEEKLY NEWSPAPER

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abala? He is not here? Item 6

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE OF SHS 1 BILLION FOR THE ANTI-TICK VACCINE DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE AND SHS 14.18 BILLION FOR LOCUSTS CONTROL IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance? He is absent. Item 7

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEMORATE THE THIRD EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL DAY OF PARLIAMENTARISM AND THE 131 ANNIVERSARY OF THE FOUNDATION OF THE INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sebaggala, if you could just use seven minutes.

3.47
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGALA SENGENDO (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the foundation of the Inter-Parliamentary Union and to celebrate the Third Edition of the International Day of Parliamentarism. (Moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament)

“WHEREAS on 30 June l889, the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) was founded as the first political multilateral organisation in the World aimed of encouraging cooperation and dialogue among national Parliaments and currently has 179 member Parliaments and 13 Associate Members;

RECOGNISING that the IPU has over the years facilitated Parliamentary democracy by;
 
Strengthening the effectiveness and representative role of Parliaments, Supporting Parliaments in implementing the Sustainable Development Goals with a particular focus on health and climate change, Working to increase women's representation in Parliaments and empowering women Members of Parliaments, Encouraging youth participation in Parliaments and bringing a Parliamentary dimension to United Nations processes to ensure international commitments before national realities;

AWARE THAT on 30 June 2020, the IPU and the Parliamentary Community will celebrate the Third Edition of the International Day of Parliamentarism and the anniversary of the foundation of the IPU;

FURTHER AWARE THAT this year’s celebrations will be an opportunity for the IPU and its member Parliaments to reinforce the message that the World needs its Parliaments now more than ever before, to put in place legislation and pass budgets responding to the current health and economic crisis;

NOTING THAT the IPU through its campaign "Parliaments in a time of Pandemic", is helping to facilitate inter-parliamentary coordination and solidarity by collating and sharing examples of how Parliaments can continue to legislate, debate and scrutinise the actions of Government in a time of lockdown and social distancing;

COGNIZANT THAT the IPU has called on its members to support the World Health Organisation (WHO) through the COVID-l9 Solidarity Response Fund, a partnership between the WHO, the United Nations Foundation and the Swiss Philanthropy Foundation designed to raise money to support the work of WHO and partners to help countries respond to the pandemic, including financing personal protective equipment for frontline health workers, boasting laboratory capacity through training and equipment, and accelerating efforts to fast-track vaccines, diagnostics and treatments;

APPRECIATING THAT since its founding in 1889, the IPU, throughout these 131 years, even at the sharpest turns of history, has worked towards balanced solutions to global problems, the establishment of principles and norms of international law, and inter-governmental diplomacy in international relations.

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved as follows;
The Parliament of Uganda joins the rest of the Parliamentary Community all over the World to commemorate the foundation of the Inter-Parliamentary Union and celebrate the Third Edition of the International Day of Parliamentarism today.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded?

(Motion seconded )

3.52
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for moving the motion for commemorating 131 years of IPU.

Madam Speaker, I am here to thank you, first, as the leader of the delegation of the IPU, for the consistence in ensuring that the Parliament of Uganda subscribes as a member to enable us to participate in International Assemblies and the Governing Council of IPU.

I also want to thank you for enabling the Parliament of Uganda by correlating and ensuring the Parliament contributes, legislates and debates and scrutinise the actions of Government in a time of lockdown and social distancing by supporting the WHO guidelines.

The Parliament of Uganda has also supported WHO again in approving the budget to help Ugandans and Uganda as a country to respond to the pandemic. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members. I believe that you have spoken for all of us. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do commemorate the Third Edition of the International Day of Parliamentarians and the 131st Anniversary of the Founding of the Inter- Parliamentary Union. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEMORATE THE 75TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UN CHARTER

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item 9.

MOTION THAT THANKS BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA, GEN. YOWERI KAGUTA MUSEVENI, TO THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA, ON THURSDAY, 4 JUNE 2020

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had some contributions made last time. Can I put the question? Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that thanks be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, to the Parliament of Uganda, on Thursday, 4 June 2020

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO EURO 162,445,674.1 FROM THE INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE POWER SUPPLY TO INDUSTRIAL PARKS AND GRID UPGRADE AND POWER TRANSMISSION EXTENSION PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: The Finance ministers are not here. Let us go to item 11.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE MANDATORY INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure? He is not here? Is the Minister of Works and Transport here? They are both not here. Okay, let us go to item 12.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT, UNDER ARTICLE 179 (4) OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW COUNTIES



3.56
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament, under Article 179 (4) of the Constitution, providing for creation of new counties. The motion reads thus:

“WHEREAS Article 179(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (as amended), provides for the creation or alteration of boundaries of districts and administrative units, including new counties;

AND WHEREAS section 7(7) of the Local Government Act, Cap. 243, empowers Parliament to approve alteration of boundaries or creation of new counties;

AWARE THAT for effective administration and representation and the need to bring services closer to the people, the local government councils of the following districts: Kibaale, Katakwi, Agago, Isingiro, Kisoro, Nakaseke, Kiboga, Buhweju, Lamwo, Kakumiro, Nakapiripirit, Mubende, Kwania, and Jinja have expressed the wishes of the people for the creation of the counties of Buyanja East, Ngariam, Agago West, Bukanga North, Bukimbiri, Nakaseke Central, Kiboga West, Buhweju West, Lamwo East, Bugangaizi South, Chekwi East, Buwekula South, Kwania North, West Budama Central and Kagoma North respectively;  

AND WHEREAS the creation of the said new counties was approved by Cabinet on 15 June 2020; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:
That the following new counties be created as follows;
    1) Buyanja East County out of Buyanja County in Kibaale District and the remaining be called Buyanja County;
    2) Ngariam County out of Usuk County in Katakwi District and the remaining be called Usuk County; 
    3) Agago West County out of Agago County in Agago District and the remaining be called Agago County; 
    4) Bukanga North County out of Bukanga County in lsingiro District and the remaining be called Bukanga County; 
    5) Bukimbiri County out of Bufumbira East and Bufumbira North counties in Kisoro District and the remaining be called Bufumbira County and Bufumbira North counties, respectively; 
    6) Nakaseke Central County out of Nakaseke North County in Nakaseke District and the remaining be called Nakaseke North County; 
    7) Kiboga West County out of Kiboga East County in Kiboga District and the remaining be called Kiboga East County; 
    8) Buhweju West County out of Buhweju County in Buhweju District and the remaining be called Buhweju County; 
    9) Lamwo East County out of Lamwo County in Lamwo District and the remaining be called Lamwo County;
    10) Bugangaizi South County out of Bugangaizi West County in Kakumiro District and the remaining be called Bugangaizi West County; 
    11) Chekwi East County out of Chekwi County in Nakapiripirit District and the remaining be called Chekwi County; 
    12) Buwekula South County out of Buwekula County in Mubende District and the remaining be called Buwekula County; 
    13) Kwania North County out of Kwania County in Kwania District and the remaining be called Kwania County; 
    14) West Budama Central County out of West Budama South County in Tororo District and the remaining be called West Budama South County; and
    15) Kagoma North County out of Kagoma County in Jinja District and the remaining be called Kagoma County.

2. The new counties as read above take effect 1st July 2020. (Applause)

3. That Parliament takes note of the composition, in terms of the subcounties/town councils, in each of the new and old counties, as i will present in the justification.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, take your seats; allow the minister to justify before you can speak.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, on the justification for creation of these counties, the ministry has received, overtime, requests for the creation of new counties and I beg your indulgency. I am here to present to you all the requests as they have been received and to indicate why some of them are not being presented for creation today. 

The people of Kibaale, Katakwi, Agago, Isingiro, Kisoro, Nakaseke, Kiboga, Buhweju, Lamwo, Kakumiro, Nakapiripirit, Tororo, Mubende, Kwania and Jinja, requested for the creation of these counties in accordance with Article 179 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Their requests were endorsed by the respective district councils. 

The requests of the districts for creation of new counties were subjected to rigorous evaluation by the ministry, as given in the Constitution, on the basis of need for effective administration, need to bring services closer to the people, means of communication, geographical features, population density and the wishes of the people. (Interjections)

The 15 counties, which I have presented here, Madam Speaker, were found justified in view of the aforementioned considerations and we think they are really necessary for sectoral economic development planning, for improved service delivery and for efficient political representation. (Applause)

The ministry went ahead and consulted the various sectoral ministries for their input. We also consulted the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the financial implications for creation of the new counties. 

On 1 June 2020, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development granted a Certificate of Financial Implication, a copy of which is here attached and which I am going to lay here on the Table. 

On 15th June 2020, under minute 271/CT2020 Cabinet considered the request and accordingly authorised me to present a motion in Parliament for approval to create these 15 new counties. 
Madam Speaker, the motion, which I have presented, requires that Parliament takes note of the composition of each new county and the remaining county, which I hereby beg to present. 

I hereby present the composition of the proposed new counties: 
    1) The new Kiboga West County will consist of the following sub counties and town councils: Kibiga Sub County, Kiboga Town Council, Kapeke Sub County, Nkandwa Sub County, Kayera Sub County and Kyekumbya Sub County. 

The remaining Kiboga East County will comprise of the Dwaniro Sub County, Bukomero Town Council, Bukomero Sub County, Kyomya Sub County, Nakasozi Sub County, Muwanga Sub County, Lwamata Sub County and Lwamata Town Council. 

    2) The new Buwekula South County will comprise of the following: Kitenga Sub County, Kayebe Sub County and Kalonga Sub County. 

The remaining Buwekula North County will comprise of Madudu Sub County, Butologo Sub County, Kiruma Sub County and Kiyuni Sub County. 

    3) The new Kwania North County will comprise of: Aduku Sub County, Aduku Town Council, Abongomola Sub County, Akali Sub County, Inomo Sub County and Inomo Town Council. 

The remaining Kwania County will consist of Chawente Sub County, Atongditi Sub County, Nambieso Sub County, Ayabi Sub County and Ayabi Town Council. 

    4) The fourth county is Buyanja East County. The new county will comprise of the following: Nyamarwa Sub County, Matale Sub County, Karama Sub County, Kyebando Sub County and Kasimbi Sub County. 

The remaining Buyanja County will consist of Kibaale Town Council, Bwamiramira Sub County, Bubango Sub County, Kabasekende Sub County, Mugarama Sub County and Nyamarunda Sub County. 

    5) The new Bukimbiri County will consist of the following: Nyundo Sub County, Bukimbiri Sub County, Kirundo Sub County, Nyabwishenye Sub County and Rubuguri Town Council. 

The remaining Bufumbira County will comprise of Murora Sub County, Nyakabande Sub County, Kanaba Sub County, Busunza Sub County and Nyarubuye Sub County. 

    6) The new Buhweju West County will comprise of the following: Bihanga Sub County, Burere Sub County, Rubenje Sub County, Kyahenda Sub County, Engaju Sub County, Nyakashaka Town Council, Nyakaziba Town Council and Nyakishana Sub County. 

The remaining Buhweju County will comprise of Rwengwe Sub County, Kashenyi-Kajani Town Council, Bisya Sub County, Karungu Sub County, Nsiika Town Council and Buhunga Sub County. 

    7) Nakaseke Central County
The new county will consist of the following: Wakyato Sub County, Butalangu Town Council, Kikamulo Sub County, Kiwoko Town Council and Kityo Sub County. 

The remaining Nakaseke County will comprise of Ngoma Sub County, Ngoma Town Council, Kinoni Sub County and Kinyogoga Sub County. 

    8) The new Bukanga North County will consist of Ngarama Sub County, Kakamba Sub County, Kashumba Sub County, Rugaaga Sub County and Rushasha Sub County. 

The remaining Bukanga County will comprise of Endiizi Town Council, Endiizi Sub County, Mbaare Sub County, Bugango Town Council and Rwanjogyera Sub County. 

    9) The new Agago West County will comprise of Lira Palwo Sub County, Omot Sub County, Arum Sub County, Lamiyo Sub County, Abene Sub County, Geregere Sub County and Lira Palwo Town Council. 

The remaining Agago County will comprise of Patongo Sub County, Adilang Sub County, Kotomor Sub County, Kapelebyong Sub County, Lokole Sub County, Ajali Sub County, Patongo Town Council, Adilang Town Council and Agago Town Council. 

    10) The new Ngariam County will comprise of the following: Ngariam Sub County, Akaboi Sub County, Gerom Sub County, Katakwi Sub County, Palam Sub County, Okore Sub County and Katakwi Town Council. 

The remaining Usuk County will consist of Usuk Sub County, Guyaguya Sub County, Onganju Sub County, Okulonyo Town Council and Usuk Town Council. 

    11) The new Lamwo East County will comprise of Palabek Kal Sub County, Palabek Gem Sub County, Palabek Abera Sub County, Palabek Ogili Sub County, Palabek Nyimur Sub County and Kal Town Council. 

The remaining Lwamo County will comprise of the following: Padibe West Sub County, Padibe Aceba Sub County, Padibe East Sub Sub County, Padibe Katum Sub County, Padibe Town Council, Lokung West Sub County, Lokung East Sub County, Lamwo Town Council, Porika Sub County, Agoro Sub County, Madiopei Sub County and Madiopei Town Council. 

    12) The new Chekwii East County will comprise of the following: Moruita Sub County, Lemusui Sub County and Nakapiripirit Town Council. 

The remaining Chekwii County will consist of Namalu Sub County, Loregae Sub County, Loreng Sub County, Kawach Sub County and Kakomengole Sub County.

    13) The new Bugangaizi South County will consist of the following: Kyabasaija Sub County, Bwanswa Sub County, Kakumiro Town Council, Kisengwe Sub County, Kasambya Sub County, Birembo Sub County, Igayaza Town Council and Kikwaya Sub County. 

The remaining Bugangaizi West County will consist of the following: Kijangi Sub County, Kitaihuka Sub County, Nyarweyo Sub County, Kakindo Sub County, Kikoora Sub County, Nyarweyo Town Council and Kikondo-Igomba Town Council. 

    14) The new West Budama Central will consist of the following: Mulanda Sub County, Mwello Sub County, Pajwenda Sub County, Siwa Sub County, Nabuyonga Sub County and Nabuyonga Town Council. 

The remaining West Budama South will consist of the following: Rubongi Sub County, Magola Sub County, Lyolwa Sub County, Nyangole Sub County, Osia Sub County, Ojilai Sub County and Lyolwa Town Council.

    15) Kagoma North County
The new county will consist of the following: Buwenge Sub County, Buyengo Sub County, Buwenge Town Council. 

The remaining Kagoma County will consist of the following: Butagaya Sub County and Budondo Sub County. 

Madam Speaker, I now wish to present to you the list of other requests for which Government has received. In light of the above presentation, Government is still evaluating them and we will be presenting them to you for approval, subsequently. We have received requests for the following:

    1) Butambala South County out of Butambala County, in Butambala District.
    2) Chekwii West County, out of Chekwii County in Nakapiripirit District.
    3) Achwa County out of Kapelebyong County in Kapelebyong District.
    4) Obalang County out of Kapelebyong County in Kapelebyong District.
    5) Too County out of Kongasis County in Bukwo District.
    6) Igara North County out of Igara East and Igara West Counties in Bushenyi District. 
    7) Ochero County and Otuboi County out of Kaberamaido County and Kalaki County in Kaberamaido District.
    8) Buwekula North County, out of Buwekula County in Mubende District.
    9) Kwania South County out of Kwania County in Kwania District.
    10) Buyanja West County out of Buyanja County in Kibaale District.
    11) Kioga West County out of Kioga County in Amolatar District. 
    12) Ngora North Kapil County out of Ngora County in Ngora District. 
    13) Soi County out of Kween County in Kween District.
    14) Bubutu County out of Bubulo East County in Namisindwa District.
    15) Bumbo County out of Bubulo East County in Namisindwa District. 
    16) Gweri County out of Soroti County in Soroti District.
    17) Pingire County out of Serere County in Serere District.
    18) Kazo North County out of Kazo County in Kazo District. 
    19) Bukanga South County out of Bukanga County in Isingiro District.
    20) Bungokho South County out of Bungokho County in Mbale District.
    21) Aringa County East out of Aringa County in Yumbe District.
    22) Napore West County and Nyagia County out of Karenga County in Karenga District.
    23) Kyegegwa Central County out of Kyegegwa North County in Kyegegwa District. 
    24) Ruhaama East County and Ruhaama West County out of Ruhaama County in Ntungamo District.
    25) Ruhinda South County out of Ruhinda County in Mitooma District.
    26) Buruli North County out of Buruli County in Masindi District.
    27) Aruu Central County out of Aruu North County in Pader District.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members of Parliament from those constituencies. They have followed up these requests. As I have said, they are still being evaluated and will subsequently be presented for approval. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the Minister of Local Government for the presentation he has made on the creation of the new sub counties.

The point of order I am raising arises from the minister’s statement. He was reading the list of other counties that he received but I did not hear him read the creation of Mawogola South County out of the current Mawogola County, which he received. I, personally together with my colleagues, discussed and handed over - we even gave him the reasons for creating that county. 

Madam Speaker, Ssembabule District fits in each and every reason. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable minister to come here and delete Mawogola South County from his list of new counties to be considered? Is he in order? Was it an oversight?

THE SPEAKER: I cannot rule on that because I did not know that you submitted to him. You did not give me a copy. So, I do not know. It is only the minister who knows why it is not here.

Honourable members, I would like to propose that we deal with the existing. Those who have issues will also be recorded. So, let us finish with the other side. I put the question – 

Honourable members, do not get excited. Please listen. I am saying there is a list he brought, which has 15 new counties to be created. There is also a list of the ones which are in the pipeline that he mentioned. I am saying we deal with the old ones. Members, let us deal with the request, which are outstanding separately.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members. Take your seats. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance with your wealth of experience in this House. The first guidance I seek is whether the Minister of Local Government is the right person to present the creation of new constituencies because he has conflict of interest. He is deliberately creating a constituency to run away from hon. Mbwatekamwa.

The second issue on which I seek guidance is, all these constituencies, which are pending are urgent to members of Parliament; every constituency is urgent. Why should we consider a partial part of the motion yet the whole country should be consulted on which areas should be created into a constituency? In any case, we should be talking of suspending the next election, which may never take place instead of creating new sub counties. I seek your guidance.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know the criteria that was used to select these few and leaving out the others. Otherwise, all these requests came at the same time and they are urgent.

Madam Speaker, there is no equitable distribution of these new counties and so, we need further clarification on the criteria that was used. Otherwise, the minister should withdraw the submission and go and finish all the submissions so that he can come up with a comprehensive submission. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Order Members.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The guidance I would like to see is: the minister came here and read the 15 counties that have been considered and the 31 counties that have been received as requests. 

From the Hansard of 2011, Ngora District presented and fulfilled all the criteria. The district council sat and resolved and the resolutions were presented to the Ministry of Local Government. When the new counties were created, it was clear and they stated that among those to be included, would be Ngora. I have a whole booklet as per the submission then.

Like any other constituency that has been proposed, I would like to seek guidance from the Speaker before I say “Aye” to this motion. What criterion was used and the timeframe? Otherwise, the people of Ngora have been waiting for long. Even the constituencies that had never applied were considered –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you observe social distance? Please summarise.

MS AMONGIN: I would like to know what criterion was used to consider the 15 counties and leave the 31 pending. Yet, a proposed constituency like Ngora fulfilled all the requirements on population and all the other requirements that constitute a county. That is the clarification I am seeking before I say “Aye” to this motion. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of procedure. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you please take your seats?

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we have to agree that there is a lot of work, which has gone into selecting the 15 sub counties. I would like to therefore appreciate what the Ministry of Local Government has done to identify other sub counties, which are yet to be approved.
The only problem is that the minister did not tell us when those will be approved. Otherwise, I am interested in Amolatar. The minister knows it. 

Madam Speaker, if you may allow me, I think it is wrong at this time for us to talk about districts. The issue of the districts was sorted out. However, the minister should confirm to us when the districts will come. Otherwise, we should not confuse it with the exercise we are carrying out now. I am therefore begging members – 
Last time, when we approved the municipalities, there were very many other districts that wanted municipalities but we could not accommodate them. Even God created heaven and earth in seven days not in one day. Therefore, can the minister tell us that today, we are giving birth to 15 twins so that we all agree? Otherwise, we do not want to create an impression that we are against each other. Can we therefore agree that we approve 15 counties and then the minister tells us when we can expect the others? (Interjections)
Madam Speaker, we need to behave like mature people. I am just begging you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please take your seats.

MS OGWAL: I want to know when Amolatar and the other counties will be created. Otherwise, it will be wrong for us as Ugandans to block the created 15 counties from being approved.  That is the guidance I am seeking.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the minister to tell us when he expects to consider the other list, which is not yet done?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Please take your seats.

MR MAGYEZI: First of all, Madam Speaker, I take note that the there are some requests, which have not been brought out here. The purpose was exactly that. In case, I did not read that request - we received it and we shall follow it up. That was simply an oversight by the secretariat.

Secondly, I also pointed out that we have criteria, which are given in the Constitution that we follow. Among others, we have communication, population, geography etcetera. We then subject these to thorough technical evaluation by the ministry officials. So, in some of these cases, Madam Speaker, the team is still doing the processing. As soon as we are sure, we are going to present them to Cabinet and immediately bring them to Parliament. We guarantee that we process our work and secure their certificates of financial implication and bring them to Cabinet and then here. We shall do that.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Local Government has said they are “considering” but among the requests, which were submitted, when Maj. Tom Butime was the minister, was for Busolwe and the minister has not mentioned it here. I do not know whether in the handover, Busolwe was not given to you as a municipal council. 
Madam Speaker, therefore, could the minister clarify whether in the handover, Maj. Tom Butime did not give to him Busolwe Town Council.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there are those who submitted their requests and did not hear their areas, just name the area now and get off; speak and leave. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, could you allow me to raise a very serious procedural matter? This august House created constituencies in July 2015.

Madam Speaker, out of the very many constituencies that were requested, Government was able to give only 38 but 27 district resolutions we unattended; but it was resolved that in the next determination of the new counties to be created, those who had petitioned needed to be considered.

I was present in this august House in 2015 and I made a petition to the committee. In the committee report No.17, Amolatar District was captured because there was a resolution to split Kioga County. Therefore, Madam Speaker, don’t you think the Government would have proceeded well, if they had started by considering constituencies that were petitioned earlier, rather than coming up with new constituencies and completely rejecting the constituencies that had petitioned?

Madam Speaker, Amolatar District is currently hot. If you allow, I would like to give space for hon. Amule Doreen to give information -(Interruption)

MS DOREEN AMULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I believe the Minister of Local Government should be fair. In the circumstance, where he is telling us that the technical people are still on ground – how long does it take the technical people to verify whether Amolatar qualifies to be split into Kioga constituency? How long does it take for a new constituency that was created a year back - Amolatar asked for a constituency in 2010 and it is still being verified? I think this is not right information that the minister is giving us. 

Madam Speaker, this is being purported by some of the politicians and it is attributed to the weakness of Members of Parliament, regarding the fact that even districts and constituencies that have just lasted for less than a year have gotten new constituencies.

What do you think we are going to tell our electorate and yet we qualify? In 2014, it was the Parliament of Uganda that said population of Amolatar was less. Today, we have over 182,000 people. What other parameter does the minister want to give us a constituency? 

When we talk about geographical location, Amolatar is one of the most disadvantaged. As we speak now, our population is almost going to sink into water; our people do not have any access route because the ferry is down. As we speak now, our people are dying of hunger because all the places are flooded. What other parameter does Government want to give closer service delivery to our people? Madam Speaker, I pray this either includes –

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a document on the Table that was sent by the council of Amolatar. I beg to lay.

MS NAMOE: Madam Speaker, from the list that has been presented to this House, Bokora East constituency does not appear. The council resolution minutes of Napak District were submitted to the Ministry of Local Government on the 16 February 2015. The new constituencies that have just been mentioned were submitted in 2018 and 2019 –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you please separate? You are too close to each other. Separate.

MS NAMOE: Madam Speaker, there is no fairness; there is no justice. The minister is not following the criteria under which these constituencies should be created.

Napak District remains the largest district in Karamoja with only one constituency. The population of Napak is 176,000. Our distance from the headquarters to the farthest area - that is Otuke - is 200 kilometres. You cannot have only two MPs to reach all these areas. We are bordering Katakwi and Amuria. We are bordering Kotido. Sometimes when we have issues, we cannot handle.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is about fairness; it is about equity. It is not about who you are. What I am seeing here is you are given a constituency according to who you are. This is unfair –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you keep your distance please? We are on camera.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister on the statement he made. First of all, I am seeking clarification on the criteria; how does the process of counties begin?

The minister has said for those Members of Parliament who followed up, their names came out. However, there are districts like Gulu and others which passed a resolution in 2005. All these came to the Ministry of Local Government but the ministry has sat on them up to now. But they are coming with new requests - those ones which came late purposely for the interests of some individuals.

Counties, for example, may not even need any financial implication. I want another clarification from the minister: We in this Parliament have passed sub counties and town councils. Up to now, they are not operational. Why? It is because there is no money. 

So, why has the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development given that Certificate of Financial Implication to the counties now, when many sub counties and town councils, which were passed by this House, are not operating to-date?

I come from Gulu District. My constituency stretches 90 kilometres north, 104 kilometres north to east. What criteria do you take, honourable minister, in choosing? These are national issues. You cannot be sectarian in terms of political interests in demarcating counties.

I, therefore, would like to move that this matter be postponed until everybody is brought on board. I beg to move.

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, the district of Bududa followed and exhausted all normal procedures in creating the new constituencies and county. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is if indeed among the criteria used is about Members of Parliament following up - I have done exhaustive and aggressive follow-up with the minister, even his predecessor.

For that reason, therefore, I second the motion moved by my colleague, hon. Okumu Reagan. 

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and thank the minister for the motion. First of all, we must realise that the Constitution requires the Electoral Commission, after every population census, within one year to demarcate constituencies. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, for all this time, the Electoral Commission has not been able to do this. This is why we are having quite a number of concerns from almost all constituencies where the population has increased beyond what the population quota would require for the creation of a constituency. This is why the Minister of Local Government had to use 197,000, with a request from district local governments.

Quite a number of districts submitted their requests to the ministry. However, here we are in a situation where Cabinet, with a consideration from the ministry, resolved to create about 15 constituencies. 

I would like to know from honourable members: I have children - five of them - but I did not produce these children in one day. One had to come after the other until I got five. Madam Speaker, I would like to request this Parliament - because even when we created districts, constituencies and cities, they had to come in bits. As Parliament, we would need to consider -let us deal with what has been processed and ask the minister and Government to make commitment on when we can have the other constituencies coming up.

Madam Speaker, I seek your protection - when my colleagues were speaking to this motion, I was quiet but there is now a problem on the Floor – (Interjections) - may I be protected?

Madam Speaker, I would like to request Parliament to support the motion moved by the minister and consider all those other submissions. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the record of this Parliament where, in 2015, some local government units were created. After, more proposals were brought to the Parliament but they are not appearing in the motion moved by the minister -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, take your seats.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister ought to have brought all those proposals for fairness. Nobody is against the creation of these constituencies but we need to appreciate that fairness is mandatory; we should not just create constituencies because we have thought about them today.

There are some proposals that have been here for a long time. If it is about demand from the people and for development purposes, why is it that those who requested long time ago have been left out and the ones, which have just come now, are on the Table?

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence but Parliament needs to know that Ugandans deserve being fairly treated. And so, the minister should be given time to organise to bring all the requests including the ones in his motion. 
You know very well that the people of Kanungu came here before - the first 15 municipalities - the then Chairman on the Committee of Local Government, hon. Rapheal Magyezi, is aware of those requests. Why is it that the new requests are coming up for approval when the old ones have been shelved? 

I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that Parliament get to be fair in approving constituencies. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know whether hon. James Kaberuka is in order to say that all the 15 constituencies or counties that are being proposed by the minister right now are brand new proposals. Is he in order to say that when Agago District proposed for a new district and new county in the Eighth Parliament?

Madam Speaker, since the Eighth Parliament, we are on record. It is not in order for him to say that all the counties are new.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. After listening and watching, I have realized that this Plenary cannot solve this matter. I would like to plead with the minister – members have raised very pertinent issues. There are members who are saying theirs are not on the list yet they submitted their requests long time ago. The only way to have these arguments and disputes reconciled is to let members go and put up their cases in the Committee on Local Government and Public Service.

Madam Speaker, if it pleases this House, let this matter be referred to that committee to be sorted out there. That will help members get to know the criteria used - you can give that committee two days to report back here. Otherwise, this matter cannot be resolved in this House; the way we are debating and handling it here clearly shows we shall not resolve it. The committee will help to sieve and make us understand the criterion the minister used. I beg to be in support of the motion raised by hon. Reagan Okumu as well. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is not closing tomorrow; we are here. Therefore, I would like to defer this matter because I have seen the records of the 2015 report, a number of decisions and resolutions were made at that time, which we need to look at wholesomely. I would like to give the minister three weeks to examine all the proposals and come back to us. Matter deferred. 

4.50
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the House handles the issue of the new counties and the alteration of boundaries, I would like to take this opportunity to sound a reminder to the minister that sometime back, he gave us two weeks within which he would bring up the issues of Tororo for the management of this House.

Madam Speaker, in the motion the minister has just presented, there is an issue on alteration of boundaries within Tororo District. Therefore, I request that the issues of Tororo that came to the House first on the alteration of boundaries, as far as districts are concerned, also be considered. 

I request that when the minister comes back in three weeks; let him come with a substantive motion on the creation and division of Tororo into two districts. That will help us to proceed well.

It will be very unfortunate to alter boundaries for only one county in Tororo yet Tororo County issues have been pending for a long time. Let him come with one motion to handle the division of the district as we alter the boundaries of West Budama and the district that will fall on that side. I beg - (Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO:  Thank you, for yielding the Floor, my brother. First of all, I would like to thank the Speaker, for the wise ruling and guidance. The action of the minister this afternoon shows that indeed it was not just enough. There are many people and many constituencies and Members of Parliament, including us from Tororo, whose issues have been pending for the last 20 years. The minister has chosen to give them a deaf ear yet there are districts like Kasese where there are issues but they want to give them by force.

I would like to thank and request you, Madam Speaker, that since it is God who is guiding and helping you to make this decision, you ask the minister to include Tororo County issues as he handles the division of West Budama County in the next presentation to come in three weeks. The other day, the minister gave an assurance to this House that he would come back after 15 days. We have gone to the minister’s office countless times. It seems the minister has his own interests.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for guiding correctly. Let the minister clean up this issue and all of us shall support it. I beg to move. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION AND OVERSIGHT VISITS ON OPERATIONS OF THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Is hon. Amule ready?

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE EVICTION AND DISPLACEMENT OF THE PEOPLE OF APAA COMMUNITY

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ameede? Item 15 -




BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are on the issue of Bills, Second Reading; The National Coffee Bill. Where is the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? Isn’t he here?

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you had earlier on called upon the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain why the delay in paying the traders has been going on endlessly. 

Now that I have sighted the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development around, I am asking for your guidance whether he should not be called to explain. Today is the last day of the Financial Year 2019/2020.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we were finishing with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and then come back to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Let us go to item 10.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO EURO 162,445,674.1 FROM THE INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE POWER SUPPLY TO INDUSTRIAL PARKS AND GRID UPGRADE AND POWER TRANSMISSION EXTENSION PROJECT

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion to amend a resolution of the House, which was already passed:

“WHEREAS the Government of Uganda, in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, laid before the House a draft agreement of 162.4 million to be concluded between the Government of Uganda and the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance the power supply to industrial parks, grid upgrade and power transmission extension project;

AND WHEREAS on 30 January 2020, Parliament authorised Government to borrow as per the terms and conditions in the draft loan agreement from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China of the People's Republic of China;

NOTING THAT circumstances have arisen that require urgent need to amend the Resolution of Parliament by substituting “Industrial and Commercial Bank of China” with the name “Exim Bank of China” as evidenced in the revised loan agreement between Government of Uganda and the Exim Bank of China hereto attached on the same terms and conditions;

NOW THEREFORE this Parliament resolves to amend its Resolution of 30 January 2020 as follows:
    1. That Government is hereby authorised to borrow up to Euros 162,445,674.1 from the Exim Bank of China to finance the power supply to industrial parks and grid upgrade and power transmission extension project.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by the chairperson. Okay, give the justification.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this House resolved to borrow the said amount. However, during the implementation, the Government of China has indicated to us that the financing institution will be the Exim Bank of China and not the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, as already stated.

Therefore, we are amending the resolution of the House to change the name of the funding institution.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the resolution be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FAILURE BY GOVERNMENT TO PAY UGANDAN TRADERS IN SOUTH SUDAN AS RESOLVED BY PARLIAMENT AND MONEY ACCORDINGLY APPROPRIATED IN THE FY 2019/2020

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but I would like to give notice that if he is not here tomorrow to explain this matter, we shall send him to the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges because he has defied the resolution of the House since April, 2020.

    MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. On the matter for which you have referred the minister to come tomorrow regarding payment of Ugandans that lost property in South Sudan, the financial year ends today. This means that the money Parliament passed for these traders is being sent back to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

    For some reason, the minister has been variously called to the Floor to explain and his dodging behaviour cannot be explained under normal circumstances.

    I recollect because I had occasion to interact with the traders. There are a number of Ugandans who lost very small money and others a lot of money. We issued this money, as Parliament, to help the big and small.

    I have, up to now, failed to understand why Government is hesitant in compensating these Ugandans. Perhaps, as a member observed the last time this matter came up, the “big fish” have their “big fish fights” but we have the small people that need their small monies.

Can the Minister of State for Finance - my dear friend who is good at presenting borrowing - explain what is happening at finance in regard to payments for the small traders? The big ones can go on with their fights.   

Shs 76 billion was passed by Parliament. The financial year is ending and people who were selling tomatoes in South Sudan have not got any penny. We do not even know whether Cabinet did think about the people who we thought would get some form of ex gratia to survive having lost business. I do not know where they are now, given the COVID-19 outbreak. The money was passed by Parliament but the minister is hazy in his explanation. 

I do not know where we are now. Hon. Bahati is here; I am sure because he can borrow, he can even explain payment- (Interruption)

MR ARIKO: Thank you, hon. Mpuuga, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I have information that this morning, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development invited these traders to a haphazard meeting. In this meeting, the traders were being coerced to accept 10 per cent of the money that Parliament appropriated. The argument is that that is what the ministry could be able to give to the traders for now.

Madam Speaker, these Ugandans got dismayed because during this meeting, they were being referred to as “those who participate in forgery”. If the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can come and enjoin this House to provide money either through a loan or appropriation and later go to a meeting in the ministry boardroom and call these traders, “those that participated in forgery” -  Did the ministry, therefore, also broker this Parliament to join in a forgery? 

Madam Speaker, there is more to it than the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is telling this House. I, therefore, call upon the Members of Parliament, in exercise of their mandate, to interrogate this matter very deeply. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.06
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is the Government of Uganda that went to South Sudan and entered into a bilateral agreement. Under section 5(a) of that bilateral agreement, the Government of Uganda agreed with the Government of South Sudan that during that time, because the Government of South Sudan had issues of cash, Uganda Government would take on the payment of the verified traders as agreed to by the Government of South Sudan.

They were in two categories. There was the first batch of traders under the memorandum of understanding in 2010. After the Government of South Sudan had only paid a portion of the money, the Government of Uganda sent a delegation led by His Excellency the President. The delegation to the next meeting was led by the Prime Minister of Uganda and in the delegation was the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Attorney-General of the Government of Uganda. On the side of South Sudan, we had the President of South Sudan and his team. After the first memorandum, they entered a bilateral agreement to include other traders who had been left out.

Madam Speaker, under the bilateral agreement, they agreed that the Government of South Sudan would do that by first sending a sovereign guarantee. I informed this House that the Uganda Government got a sovereign guarantee in 2019. It is from that sovereign guarantee of $41 million for the first group that the Government of Uganda came to Parliament to actualise the bilateral agreement, which Parliament ratified.

Did Government of Uganda bring people here who had participated in a forgery? The person who reads the motion when we are appropriating monies is the Minister of Finance. We appropriated Shs 76 billion. We should stop games and act as leaders. 

Madam Speaker, Parliament has done its part. Unless Government of Uganda changes it policy, but we are saying that Government of Uganda received a sovereign guarantee, which is with the Bank of Uganda. They came here and we appropriated close to $10 million out of the $41 million. Were we conned to appropriate that sum? It is against this background that we put in some more money. This is very unfair to the traders. 

Madam Speaker, last Thursday, you guided this House that we would not handle any business of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as long as they do not respect Parliament. If we come and appropriate and they do not implement, then they should do everything by themselves- (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: I would like to give you information. Madam Speaker, in addition to what they call the 10 super companies, we were able to get evidence of 23 additional companies that were verified by Uganda Revenue Authority. They have authentic documents that have been verified – their deliveries and everything.

Therefore, we have authentic documents from 23 additional companies, in additional to the 10 that were earlier on paid some $25 million. We have documents that have been verified by Uganda Revenue Authority although the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is still insisting that a private auditing firm be engaged to do further verification.

However, we are saying, why further verification by this private auditing firm when Uganda Revenue Authority have already confirmed that these people are authentic, they supplied and they have been verified by both sides - South Sudan Government and Uganda Revenue Authority.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you. However, I also want to give you more information. It is not the role of Uganda Revenue Authority. Under the bilateral agreement, two teams were supposed to be set up to form a joint verification team, just for the purposes of having a team from Uganda to work with the team from South Sudan.

Madam Speaker, when you sent the select committee to South Sudan, we had meetings with the Minister of Finance of South Sudan, the honourable Gen. Salvatore, who was at that time a Permanent Secretary in South Sudan, who they call an Under Secretary. Some of the traders had even received payment in form of cheques but they bounced. We asked him whether the signature on the cheques was his and if he wished to verify his own signature.

They said, “the traders did business with us, not with the Ugandan Government; therefore, it is us, the Government of South Sudan, to verify who we should pay.” They paused a question: “We have already sent a sovereign guarantee worth $41 million, why doesn’t the Government of Uganda clear that so that we can send more sovereign guarantees?” We tried to explain that this sovereign guarantee was for one category of traders and yet there was another category and we had hoped they could all be handled together. We came to terms on that.

Madam Speaker, before you set the committee, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was always informing us that the Government of South Sudan had refused to set up a team on their side. By the time we came from South Sudan - Madam Speaker, we gave you the documents because we were your representatives there - they had set up a verification team. Therefore, the Government of South Sudan is saying that they are the ones to verify and they have verified; under what moral authority did the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development engage Ernst & Young to do verification? 

Did the traders supply Government of Uganda? The traders supplied South Sudan. When South Sudan says “pay this person; we are sending a sovereign guarantee for these persons” and indeed, they sent a sovereign guarantee – 

Madam Speaker, I am informing you and this House that we are going to make losses because the traders have gone back to court; they are claiming this money with interest. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has sat on their rights. The sovereign guarantee was sent in their names under the bilateral agreement entered by the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan to pay the traders. Uganda took over the responsibility of a debt collector. That is why traders who traded with the Government of South Sudan can no longer go to South Sudan to claim for payment because my government took responsibility. 

Madam Speaker, can you please help us to write to the Ministry Finance, Planning and Economic Development to uplift the dignity of traders? They are sleeping in churches and they are losing property. It is not fair to Ugandans. I submit.

5.14
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): I would like to thank hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa for refreshing our minds. Madam Speaker, the issue here is that we appropriated Shs 76 billion. Why has the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development failed to pay? That is the question hon. Kasaija is supposed to answer. Where is the money? That is the question the minister should respond to. 

I can see that the two honourable state ministers from finance are armless; they cannot answer. There is a problem in that ministry and we would like to call upon President Museveni to sort out this problem. That is why hon. Bahati and hon. Kasolo cannot get up to answer because there is a problem between them and their senior colleague. The President must sort out this matter. They have vested interest in this matter and now, they are going to cost this country a lot of taxpayers’ money.

Madam Speaker, you made a ruling the other day that we shall not pass anything from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development unless hon. Matia Kasaija is here. Today, is the last day of the financial year and we thought the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would be here. We are left with just hours to cross over to the next financial year; I do not think a miracle can happen. What can we do to punish hon. Kasaija? He is a senior colleague in that ministry, he is the political head in that ministry; something must be done to hon. Kasaija - 

THE SPEAKER: There are some good articles in the Constitution which we can use to bring the minister to order.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to my honourable colleague. I would like to beg you, again, because the issue we are discussing currently, is bringing an embarrassment to this Parliament. This Parliament is an institution of governance and when it takes a decision, the state institutions should comply. 

Madam Speaker, under your authority, it would be important before we proceed that you demand that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Mr Kasaija, comes and explains to this Parliament why he did not comply and respond to the decision of this House on this matter. He should do this before this country suffers the losses and consequences of this national humiliation that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is subjecting the country to, together with all of us.

Madam Speaker, that was the information I wanted to give to my honourable colleague.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I have said, if the minister does not come here tomorrow, I am sending him to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for defying Parliament.

5.18
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do recall hon. Bahati, who is present here, coming to the Committee of National Economy. Hon. Bahati will recall the questions that we asked him when he was representing the Government and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Hon. Bahati convinced the Committee on National Economy that they wanted to effect payments within a period of one week. 

Hon. Bahati, I think it is not even fair to transfer this matter to hon. Matia Kasaija because it is you, in the office of Minister of Finance, who came to our committee and convinced us to process this request and we did it. Madam Speaker, can hon. Bahati explain to this House why he duped a committee of Parliament and the whole of Parliament on the same matter?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Nzoghu is referring to a different matter, the issue of the supplementary. 

Concerning the matter of South Sudan, this matter has been here for almost four months. Madam Speaker, you have ruled that if the minister does not come to the House tomorrow, he will be referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I wish to request that we leave that matter at that and we are going to convince our - (Interjections) – 

Let the truth be told; we came and requested this House to pass the agreement. You appropriated Shs 76 billion and it is with the Government. However, as you know, the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the head of the Treasury and he has been requested to come here to speak in that capacity. Therefore, I think we can leave it at that stage and see what happens. Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, I think it is important to put certain matters into perspective. In development economics, you can never have your industries and businessmen grow if Government does not subsidise, especially in difficult times like we are seeing now, where the traders went to South Sudan and lost their businesses. All developing countries subsidised businesses and natured the young industries of their citizens. 

In this country, we have had issues of our Government standing with our businessmen. It started when we had wars in northern Uganda. Very many bus owners, including Nile Bus Company, had their buses burnt from West Nile and from that time, the President agreed and said that these people must be compensated. Up to date, Madam Speaker, it has remained just in word that the President said we need to compensate bus owners who lost their buses. Now, this has also continued to our businessmen who were even remitting taxes back to this country. Therefore, Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally right to trust Government and give them more time to respond to the plight and the directive of your Chair, and even to the decision of Parliament? 

We passed money here for the traders to be compensated and yet we have not received any response up to today and still, Government wants more time. Are we really proceeding right, given the track record of Government? They have not been doing well on their commitment to our traders in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said that if the minister is not here to respond tomorrow, we are going to take this matter to the rules committee. He will take political responsibility for the mess in that ministry. 

Minister of Works, are you in a position to respond to item No.18 regarding the ferry at Nakiwogo?  - Not today? Okay.

5.23
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Thursday last week, I raised an issue of human rights abuse regarding Simon Peter Odong who is working with the Internal Security Organisation (ISO). 

Up to today, Madam Speaker, he cannot be accessed by his family. On Friday, his wife went to court. Under miscellaneous cause No.0099 of 2020, a verdict was passed and the Attorney-General of Uganda, the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) and the Inspector General of Police were ordered to give Mr Simon Peter Odong the right to liberty, as his rights were infringed upon. 

Court ordered that Simon Peter Odong be produced by the respondents before a competent court of law within 48 hours of the order; that the respondents pay the damages in the sum of Shs 50 million to Simon Peter Odongo for contempt of court by the servants of the respondents; that the respondents pay the cost of the application; and that in the event that he is not produced, court issues an unconditional order for his release forthwith. 

Madam Speaker, it has been more than 48 hours since this verdict. As I told you that day, Simon Peter Odong is a diabetic case yet he was shot in the leg. He is in bad shape. Worse still, on Monday, the lawyer representing him, Mr James Byamukama, together with the human rights lawyer, Mr Nicholas Opiyo, revealed that when they got access to him, the unbelievable had happened to Simon Peter Odong. An instrument was inserted in his penis. Even his anus had an instrument inserted in it. 

To date, the family is in pain. The Inspector General of Police has not produced him. The Director of CMI has not produced him nor has the Attorney-General, 48 hours down the road. The family is worried that it is possible that Simon Peter Odong is dead. 

Madam Speaker, I would like you to use your powers. I know the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, hon. Adolf Mwesige, had given a guarantee. However, now the court has issued orders, and there is evidence here that these orders of the court were served to the Attorney-General, to the Inspector General of Police and to the Director of CMI, and yet Mr Odong has not been produced. 

It is with this pain, Madam Speaker, that I ask that you order the Attorney-General to come here tomorrow to explain why they have disobeyed the orders; and secondly, to confirm whether Simon Peter Odong is still alive. Madam Speaker, we would also like to know what crime this son of Uganda committed. The family is in pain. With these stories we are being told, about the humiliation he has gone through, it is terrible pain and we would not want any Ugandan to go through that pain. 

Gen. Katumba, you are an army General; you can help in this situation.  What is it that this young man has done? He has been working for the Government of Uganda. He has been working with ISO. Why is it that you can even defy court orders? 

Madam Speaker, we would like you to use your powers to summon the Attorney-General to appear tomorrow to explain because these orders were served to him. It is painful.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter of Mr Simon Peter Odong is a question of gross violation of human rights, if what hon. Okupa has said is true. However, it is worse if the Attorney-General has been directed by the courts of law and he has defied the court. I think we need an explanation tomorrow to know why he has not complied with the court order and produced the subject as required by law.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, please allow me to lay on the Table the following: One, the court ruling that was made by Justice Michael Elubu, which was entered on 23 June 2020. Two, the order that was issued before his worship Dr Alex Mushabe, Assistant Registrar. Three, the affidavit of service of order to the Attorney-General of Uganda, the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence and the Inspector General of Police. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have done quite a bit of work today. It is coming to 5.30 p.m. and we still have curfew. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.29 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 1 July 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)



