30th June 1999.

(Parliament met at 2.35 pm in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker,  Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 1999.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  I recall that yesterday when we were dealing with clause 3 we stood over sub clause (4),  to enable the hon. Members who were talking about the same thing but from a different angle,  look at the draft and see if they could synchronise before the House pronounces itself on that sub clause.  I do not know whether that has happened.

MR. ONGOM:  I rise on a point of order,  Mr. Chairman.  Before we start the proceedings,  I realise that the House is far, far short of a quorum and this being a very important Bill,  I think it is not proper for us proceed this way.  Would it be in order for us to proceed under these circumstances?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I have been advised that we are far, far below the quorum required.  I suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended for 15 minutes)

(On resumption_)
  
THE CHAIRMAN:  Before I suspended the proceedings, I was informing you that in respect of clause 3 we had reached sub clause (4) at which we decided to stand over,  to allow the various interests who were proposing different text to come together and harmonise their positions.  I do not know whether it is the hon. Minister or the Chairperson to report the results of the efforts?

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  Together with the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs and hon. Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine, we have agreed on the following formulation.  Clause 3 sub clause (4);  "Any question submitted to a referendum under this section shall be framed so as to require the voter to make his or her choice."  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can I have the text,  please?  The text reads as follows - and you should listen to it against the background of the existing sub clause (4) of clause 3 in order to appreciate what has transpired.  It reads as follows; "Any question submitted to a referendum under this section shall be framed so as to require the voter to make his or her choice."

THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES IN THE PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera):  I would like to request the Chairperson of the Committee and the Minister,  to allow a slight Amendment to this so that,  "to enable."  You see,  Mr. Chairman,  questions can be set in such a manner that even when a person knows the answers, they fail to answer because of the way it is set.  We must bear in mind the fact that our people,  many of them,  are not endowed with the skills to discern what is wanted.  Therefore the most important thing about these questions should be to make it easy for the voters to know what is being asked.  That is why I would rather we amend this "to enable" the persons rather than "to enquire" -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  In other words, what the hon. Minister is proposing is that, it should read as follows; "Any question submitted to a referendum  under this section shall be framed so as to enable the voter to make his or her choice."  Hon. Chairperson,  do you have any objection?

MR. OGALO: No objection,  Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: No objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that sub clause (4) of clause 3 be amended to read; "Any question submitted to a referendum under this section shall be framed so as to enable the voter  to make his or her choice."

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 3 as amended,  agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  in clause 5 we had reached as far as sub clause (6) and we were dealing with a new addition which was to be paragraph (c) of sub clause (6);  the famous hon. Kaggwa's amendment.  I have been reminded that we actually did pronounce ourselves on that but what we were trying to get was to ensure that the provision is made for failure, refusal, or absence in the clause.  If we did pronounce ourselves,  the draftsman has come up with a text which incorporates what we agreed on yesterday.  My understanding is that it will be necessary to move a form of an amendment on that issue. 

Clause 6

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much,  Mr. Chairman. I am moving an amendment on clause 6.  Instead of,  "referendum shall be taken to determined by a simple majority,"  I am amending that to,  "should be determined by a 5l percent of the votes cast"  -(Interjection).  It is a Committee stage, I do not need to be seconded.  I am moving this simply because a simple majority will not give clear mandate of any of the sides that will win.  For instance, let us say that there is a difference of five or ten votes,  I do not think whatever side will have won will have a mandate for that.  And in the House here and in many voting procedures,  you find that we have a percentage on important issues as this one.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  My feelings should be for the amendment,  but I am constrained to say no.  The reason is constitutional. It is Article 68(5) which reads;  "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, an issue for determination by a referendum shall be taken to be determined by a majority of the votes cast at the referendum."  To me the ordinary reading of a majority of votes cast means that it is not quantified.  So if you want to do it the way the hon. Member is suggesting,  we have got to go through the laborious system of amending this Article first,  and also Article 261 of the Constitution.  

MR. NYAI DICK:  If the Minister can continue to read that section again, does he want us to understand that the English word majority only means simple majority?  Does it not allow this Parliament to determine the percentage of that majority? Can he say that?  Is that a constitutional matter?  I do not think so, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mine is going to be a legal interpretation.  It is the way I see what that Article 68(5) means.  Mr. Chairman, can I just read it out so that hon. Members can follow?  "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,  an issue for determination by a referendum shall be taken to be determined by a majority of the votes casted at the referendum."  In understanding the word majority,  you can have a provision for two thirds majority,  a simple majority or any other majority determined by Parliament.  Because when you look at it,  the political systems start from Article 69 up to 76.  If you look at for example Article 74 (2) on page 47 of the Constitution,  it says; "The political system may also be changed by elected representatives of the people in Parliament and districts councils by resolution of Parliament supported by not less than two thirds of all Members of Parliament upon a petition to it supported by not less than two thirds majority of the total membership of each of at least half of all the district councils."  In other words, the majorities on political systems and some stages have to be determined by majorities decided at two thirds.  
When you look at Article 76 of the Constitution - the general provision - it says, and I may read it for the hon. Members who did not come with their Constitutions;  "Parliament may, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, enact such laws as may be necessary for the purpose of this Chapter,  including laws for the registration of voters, the conduct of public elections and referenda...."  So, Parliament has the power to make laws on referenda and where necessary make provisions for voting by proxy,  and you can even add et cetera,  because Parliament has this power to make these laws.  

So in normal practise, you can win an election by a simple majority or you can win an election if you get 51 percent,  or more than 50 percent.  You can also win an election if there are five people running and you get 21 percent, another gets 19 percent and the rest each gets 20 percent.  In other words,  we have got some Members of Parliament here who won elections with less than 30 percent and they are representing their constituencies.  They got majority,  but it is not a simple majority; it is a majority which is acceptable for purposes of the Constitution.  But for purposes of a referendum,  I think it is very important for us to decide what type of majority we want.  Do we want a simple majority of 50.001 while the other one gets 49.999, or do we want a simple majority as proposed by hon. Lt. Col. Mudoola who says he wants 51 percent?  Or do we want any other percentage in order to reflect the national political will?  Mr. Chairman, I was just standing to give a legal opinion.  Thank you.

MR. PINTO:  I am seeking a clarification from the hon. Minister.  He stood up,  after my Colleague moved this amendment which most of us have an inclination to support,  and he said,  'my feelings are for the amendment, but the matter is a constitutional matter.'  Then he went on to read something that talked about majorities.  My Colleague was saying that it must be the majority of over 50 percent.  I am wondering why his feelings are for the amendment,  yet he comes to talk of a constitutional aspect which does not seem to give sense.  Could he clarify and amplify himself?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The issue of simple majority differs depending on the number of alternative answers you have.  If you have more than four answers to put,  what hon. Karuhanga is saying would be correct,  you would win with 30 percent.  But where you have two issues,  simple majority means 50 percent plus one.  But when we have more than two alternatives,  50 plus one is an absolute majority.  So we have to decide.  Is the referendum going to be about two answers only?  If it is,  when we are talking about simple majority,  we are talking about 50 percent plus one,  and that is a constitutional provision,  therefore I cannot see how we can amend the Constitution.  There is no way you can say that a simple majority can mean anything from 50 plus one to 99,  it cannot.  The moment you have simple majority on only two answers, it means 50 plus one; it cannot mean anything else.  

MR. WACHA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to give hon. Kagonyera some information.   Hon. Kagonyera's explanation is perfect in respect to a referendum in which we expect to have only two sides.  But this Bill is dealing with several aspects of referenda and therefore we cannot restrict ourselves to a possibility of having only two sides.

MR. KAGGWA:  I also want to use hon. Karuhanga's words to disagree with him from a legal point of view.  He has argued very well,  but I think he has misread Article 76.  Parliament would have had the power to change this majority if it had not subjected that Article to the Constitution.  My interpretation of that is that Parliament can make any other amendment or changes which are not part of the Constitution,  and that is why it deemed it necessary to say in one area you would need two thirds,  in another area you would need the majority - a majority as known in the normal English language.  I thank you.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: When you look at the constitutional provision under Article 68 clause (5),  here the English is very clear if you may allow me to read: "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,  an issue for determination by a referendum shall be taken to be determined by a majority of the votes cast at the referendum."  Mathematically,  as what has already been said, the majority would mean one point beyond a given point which is equal to the other.  If that is so,  Mr. Chairman,  the clause (6) could be amended by removing the word simple and you leave it to read,  "by a majority of votes cast at the referendum" so that it complies with the constitutional provision, and it is consistent.  If that is accepted, I beg to move that the word "simple"  be deleted.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I have had the advantage of having in writing what hon. Mudoola is saying.  He says he wants it to be by 51 percent of the votes cast at the referendum,  and he wants to make it 51 percent,  not any other percentage.  I am prepared to concur with that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members,  let me have the amendment.  I want to be sure about what we are talking about.  Read it for us so that we all know.  Which expression would you like to be replaced by the words,  or which expression have you written there in clause 6?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman, the words are "simple majority" to be replaced by "at least 51 percent of the votes cast".

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  I am having problems in knowing why the Minister was almost accepting or has accepted this.  It assumes that when you talk of 51, you are assuming that there are only two sides.  But in the event,  and most likely event,  and in accordance with the Constitution,  there could be three choices or even four.  But even for this particular type of referendum,  there could be three choices.  So how can you have percentages of 50 percent when you have more than two choices?  I find it very difficult to put any percentage to,  and I think the clarification should be clear.  How can you put 51 percent when they are more than two?  That is the clarification I wanted,  Mr. Chairman.

MR. NYAI DICK:  The clarification I wanted to give the previous speaker on the Floor was that I think if I read hon. Mudoola's mind correctly,  he is saying this referendum is of such moving consequences that even if they are ten sides,  the determining majority must be at least 51 percent of the voters.  Even if there are six students,  one can get 90 percent,  and another one gets 10 percent.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Nyai,  hon. Mudoola is fortunately right here.  I would like hon. Mudoola to clarify his amendment so that we can proceed.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  What hon. Nyai said is exactly what I meant.  Even if they are four sides,  even if they are ten sides,  the winning side should have 51 percent of the votes cast.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Having understood very carefully what hon. Mudoola has moved about the 51 percent,  and what hon. Nyai is proposing,  much as it is important that in order to be recognised on this important exercise of referendum in this nation one would require 51 percent to gain the confidence of the population;  realising what is stated in the Constitution,  if we go by the percentage of 51 percent and there happens to be three sides which are participating in this exercise,  we shall be acting contrary to the Constitution.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us listen to this.  I think what the hon. Member is saying is,  the Constitution is talking about majority of votes cast.  Here we are talking of percentage.  We have to be very careful to make the decision.  Because if we are talking of 51 percent,  no matter how many people are participating or how many sides are participating,  you may have problems in conforming with the Constitution.  I would like you to really look at that one.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, for one to say 51 percent,  this is a mathematical concept.  Whether they are two sides,  your vote should be 51 percent of the total votes cast,  and that is a mathematical concept.  This is not my amendment, alright!  It is the amendment of hon. Mudoola.  I am simply explaining that 51 percent of more than two sides can still make sense,  because percentages mean that of the votes cast.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  In looking at this issue I have been asking myself,  suppose in future I may side and get a majority which this law which we are trying to make denies for me, can I seek a redress in a court of law?  I think I would be able to,  because the Constitution is talking about the majority.  But now by trying to put figures, I think Parliament is trying to interpret the Constitution.  

The practice in this Parliament has been that where a provision refers to an exact provision in the Constitution, we have extracted it and put it in the law without attempting to interpret it.  If we needed an additional interpretation, then we would need to refer to those competent organs of the State which would interpret it for us.  I would think that the position which was advanced by hon. Okumu-Ringa that we should actually remove the word simple and extract the provision in the Constitution in this law,  is the correct one,  and I thought the Minister should accept that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mudoola,  do you accept this explanation? 

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Yes, I accept that.

THE CHAIRMAN:  So the amendment is that the word "simple" should be deleted.  That is the effect of the amendment.  I will now put the question that clause 6 be amended by deleting the word "simple" appearing in the last but one sentence.  (Interruptions).

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Mr. Chairman,  I have a further amendment to clause 6.  I beg to move that clause 6 be amended to add the following at the end of the sentence:  "Save that for the referendum on change of political system the following shall apply - (a) the referendum shall be taken to be determined by no less than 60 percent of the votes cast at the referendum."  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, it is unfortunate your amendment is coming after we have passed an amendment to this particular clause,  dealing with the percentages.  Ordinarily you should have introduced the amendment -(Interruption). 

MR. ONGOM: Point of information.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Ongom, the Chairman is talking.  I do not know whom you want to give the information to.  I am the Chairman,  and when I am talking you should be seated. 

Hon. Okulo Epak,  if you wanted your amendment to be considered prior to this one which we have passed, you should have immediately stood up and moved it.  But now we have effected an amendment which clearly goes against percentages - the thing you seem to be proposing in your own amendment.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, as for standing up I think I did.  Not only that,  my amendment has been circulated since 24th and when the time came I stood up.  It was your right to choose to give the Floor to hon. Mudoola,  and I thought that my turn would come.  

Secondly, -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let me understand you right.  I have a copy of your amendment.  It deals with clause 3 where you say new sub clause (3), (4) is that the one?

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Could you see the back of that sheet?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, you have an amendment to clause 6?

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Yes please.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay,  you proceed.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Furthermore,  my amendment has  totally different implications than the generality of the amendment which hon. Mudoola wanted to move.  If you allow me Sir,  may be I can speak to my motion.  I think when I made my contribution here I did express my concern that this Bill is making omnibus provisions for all referenda as if they have the same import,  and this equally falls in that category.  The Constitution also in that particular clause 5 was referring to all referenda regardless of their significance and import on many other issues of constitutional significance.  I am therefore saying in my amendment that for all other referenda,  you can depend on the constitutional provision or majority of persons voting.  But for a referendum on change of a political system I think we ought to be a little more serious in the manner in which somebody is given the mandate to govern this country.  

The referendum on change of a political system has raised a lot of debate for very serious reasons one of which is that it impinges on the fundamental human rights of the citizens of this country;  whereas all other referenda may not have significance or impinge on human rights.  Therefore at this point,  and since there is no other provision in the Bill dealing with the proportion of voters to determine the political system,  this should be the correct moment to move this amendment and alleviate the worries of those who think that their basic human rights will simply be taken away from them by a very simple majority.  

I take note that when we get to Article 74 of the Constitution on the future referenda,  there you can see very specifically that the designers of the Constitution were concerned about definite percentages.  In Article 74 they are talking of 50 percent,  and when you get to clause 2 they are talking of two thirds.  So there we are being very concerned about the number that determines an issue dealing with fundamental human rights.  Mr. Chairman, supposing a simple majority on the matter of referendum on change of political system happens to be 50 percent of the persons voting,  and then the turn up for the elections happens to be merely 30 percent of the eligible voters?  In effect it means that the winner, the one who is given the mandate to govern according to that system,  will basically enjoy only 15 percent of the eligible voters.  

Unfortunately,  when a political system to govern is determined,  the losers will not be allowed to participate in the political system,  and political decisions of this country.  That is why we have heard from people like hon. Bidandi Ssali that, 'if the Multi-party system were to win,  then the Movement will reconstitute itself into a political party so that they are not deprived of the right and the opportunity to participate in the political decisions of this country.'  This option is not available to the Multi-partyists, this option is not available to the Multi-partyists!  I have not heard of any Multi-partyist saying that, 'if the Movement system wins, then we shall also become the Movement.'  Apart from the conscription,  this kind of chorus does not take us very far.  At one time the chorus may even happen to be something else.

MR. KUTESA SAM:  Mr. Chairman, I hope I am following hon. Okulo Epak's argument properly.  His argument is that if you fix the percentage at 60,  the intention should be to enable people who want to change a system to achieve it.  I thought that like now we have a Movement political system in place,  Multi-partyists will be put to a higher degree of campaigning and having to achieve a higher figure of 60 percent to change a political system.  I think the argument he is making seems to make the case even more difficult for people who want to change a system.  They must achieve 60 percent.  

If it is such a God given right and such an alienable right as hon. Okulo Epak is arguing,  why is he trying to make it difficult for Multi-partyists who want to change this system to do so?  If you compel them to achieve 60 percent, you are putting the task too high,  the burden too high.  I would rather you leave it as a majority and if they achieve 51 then it is easier for them to change a system.  I am failing to understand the logic,  if indeed the intention is to make it easier for the outsiders to come in.  I would like clarification from hon. Okulo Epak.  I would imagine that if the political system as it is now is a Movement political system, and there was a question of changing it,  and the other side did not obtain 60 per cent which he is arguing for,  the current system would remain to obtain.  I thought that cannot be the intention,  from his logic.  I would like to have that clarification.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I thank the hon. Member for seeking this clarification.  I think what I can discern from that search for clarification is that we should always design laws which favour us.  That when designing any law,  you should consider your interest paramount to other people's interests.  That is not my standard of doing things.  

My own standard,  Mr. Chairman, when I am moving this motion I am quite oblivious of the fact that for the Multi-partyists or any other system which may not be in power in future,  it will have an uphill task to get this 60 percent.  But I would rather they did it.  I am also aware, and we all should be aware that even as a current system we cannot assume.  In fact what the hon. Member is implying is that the current system would always be having it easier,  therefore you should be making it simpler for those who are not in the system of governing to get there,  no.  I am concerned about the overall principle that we should set a reasonably higher standard and requirement for someone to be there and lock out other people.  

If it was an election where you lose and you still sit,  you still take part in political decisions,  you still take part in many political activities - not like the present situation where some of us are barred from political activities by Article 269  - then I would have no problem whatsoever in demanding that a lower percentage should be fixed.  But that is not to be,  and that is not to be.  I would like to say this that I make this amendment quite aware that if the Multi-party system is going to compete in the referendum and win and shut out the Movement supporters,  by whatever percentage they would have lost, they must command a higher percentage than just a simple majority.  Mr. Chairman, -(Interruption).


THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member,  I thought you really have made your point.  What you are saying is that when it is the change of  political system,  the percentage for such a change should be at this level.  I think that is the point you have made.

MR. KAGGWA:  I am seeking a clarification from hon. Okulo Epak.  He is pleading for 60 percent to change a political system,  and he has referred to Article 70.  I want to refer him to Article 74(2) where a political system can be changed by hardly 2,000 people.  How can he reconcile that with his 60 percent because clause (2) of Article 74 says,  "The political system may also be changed by elected representatives of the people in Parliament and district councils by resolution of Parliament supported by not less than two thirds of all Members of Parliament upon a petition to it supported by not less than two thirds majority of the total membership of each of at least half of all district councils."  If I make a simple calculation that would be at any rate less than 5,000 people.  I would want him to reconcile that possibility of changing a political system with the 60 percent he is seeking for.  I thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I think I already explained what the hon. Member is seeking clarification for.  That is another procedure,  and I am saying that since even in that procedure we begin to prescribe percentages in this particular procedure which we are employing immediately,  why not prescribe a percentage?  In fact, I am justifying the argument that the prescription of percentages and figures seems to be necessary where decisions affecting change of political system is involved.  That is the principle on which I use Article 74.  He is using a totally different principle,  and the colleges there are those which are prescribed by the Constitution.  The electorate here is prescribed by the constitution to be universal adult suffrage and I do not think we should be wasting time not understanding very simple matters like this.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, let us have people speaking for or against it,  please.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Lukyamuzi,  remember we are debating this amendment,  and we are not going to discuss the principles of the Bill,  which we have already disposed of.  We are deciding whether -(Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr.Chairman, I am not going to meander.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Lukyamuzi,  when I am talking you should sit down.  That is the procedure.  We are going to discuss whether or not to accept the amendment by hon. Epak.  Proceed.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Briefly,  I stand to support the amendment.  The percentage which is proposed - 60 percent - by hon. Okulo Epak,  is in my view very justified. For the simple reason that we are subjecting fundamental human rights to a referendum and our Constitution,  Article 20 affirms that fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are inherent and are not granted by the State.  Because of that,  when you subject scrutiny over those fundamental freedoms, you must have very strong reasons for doing so.  
The purpose of the amendment is to discourage politicians who are fond of introducing the politics of referenda for their own gains.  Today in the world, countries like Italy and Switzerland which were fond of solving problems using referenda are shunning away from it.  So the percentage proposed,  in my view,  tallies very well with Article 69 sub section (1) of the Constitution of Uganda which proposes that a well organised general election, free and fair,  can also enable Ugandans to choose a political system.  There the concept of a referendum is seen as an alternative.  So I would like hon. Members to support the view that in proposing 60 percent we are trying to -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Mine is reading 70 percent.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Okay, 70 percent.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Correction,  Mr. Chairman.  In reading, I amended it.  I said not less than 60 percent,  after consultations with some very good hon. Members here, -(Laughter)-they advised that we should say "not less than 60 percent".

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Finally,  I would like to bring it to the attention of hon. Members that Uganda has already ratified the O.A.U Charter where the freedom of association is a fundamental right.  Uganda has also ratified the United Nations Charter on Human Rights.  That is evidence that we have already committed ourselves to the protection of those fundamental rights.  When we apply a referendum which interferes with those rights, we must have a justified cause.  That is why I support hon. Okulo Epak's submission.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Can we have somebody to - one has spoken for the amendment,  let us have somebody who wishes to speak against it,  if any.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I wish to refer to Article 68(5).  It says very clearly that: "Subject to the provisions of this Constitution an issue for determination by a referendum shall be taken to be determined by the majority of the votes cast at the referendum."  The amendment suggests a majority of 60.  If I get a majority of 59, it will still be a majority.  So under this Article,  how will you disregard the majority of 59?  In other words, there are many majorities and this Article is permitting all the majorities,  whether they are small majorities or big majorities.  If you fix a figure of 60 and you get a majority which is less than 59 percent,  how will you disregard it and not violate Article 68(5) which deals specifically with matters concerning a referendum?  

My second point concerns the spirit of this Constitution,  because it has grappled with the issue of majorities contextually.  For example under Article 74 we specified the majority required as the hon. Member mentioned.  Under 74, they say not more than half of all Members of Parliament.  So where they wanted some specific majorities we are specific.  If you read Article 88 of the Constitution,  the majority is specified. If you take Article 59,  when you are dealing with amendments of the Constitution,  they want specific majorities and they are specified.  The point I am making here is that where you wanted specific majorities,  they were concretized in the Constitution.  But where it was not then you simply said a majority which obtains under 68(5).  If you fix any majority and get any other majority lower than that fixed,  you will be violating Article 68(5). 

I would like to ask the distinguished Member who is making this amendment to withdraw it so that we may retain the spirit and the content of this Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  I wish to put the question that after the word referendum, the following be added in clause 6. "(a) A referendum shall be taken to be determined by 60 per cent of the votes cast at the referendum;  (b) When no side gets 60 percent of the votes cast,  the Commission shall put the question to rest pending the results of the Presidential elections which elections shall then determine the political system."

DR. OKULO EPAK:  My amendment starts with an addition which apparently I have not heard you read and which says:  you read the entire provision as it is but add at the end, "save that for the referendum on change of political system, the following shall apply".  

THE CHAIRMAN: There is no difference between what you are saying and what I read.  I really used fewer words for the introduction but I went on reading exactly what you want to be added after the expression "referendum".

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I am obliged, thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wait a minute, I think you have a point with regard to the main body of your amendment.  Add at the end of the sentence in clause 6,  the following words:  "Save that for the referendum on change of political system, the following shall apply."  This is in reference to change of political system only.  "(a) The referendum shall be taken to be determined by 60 percent of the votes cast at the referendum; (b) When no side gets 60 percent of the votes cast,  the Commission shall put the question to rest pending the results of the Presidential election which election shall determine the political system to govern. 

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 6 as amended,  agreed to.

MR. KIRENGA: Mr. Chairman,  I want to deal with a situation where the two sides tie when votes are being counted.  Let us suppose that those who support Multi-partism get one million votes and those who support the Movement system also get one million out of the two millions.  Each side has got the same number of votes as the other.  What happens?  There are two interpretations.  One would be that if one side has not changed, then the status quo remains.  But another way of looking at it is that the vote should be repeated.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kirenga,  bring in your amendment first. I do not know what it is.

MR. KIRENGA:  This will be 7.  I am proposing the following: "Where the two sides in a referendum get an equal number of votes,  the voting in the referendum shall be repeated so as to get a side with the majority."

THE CHAIRMAN: You are saying where in a referendum the two sides get equal votes or tie,  what happens?  Is that what has prompted you to introduce this amendment?  Is that correct?

MR. KIRENGA: Yes.  It is better to make it clear so that the Electoral Commission knows what to do.  If you leave it to the Electoral Commission and the two sides tie,  the Electoral Commission may give up the exercise, and this will not help. (Interjections) No,  but they did not think of a tie here.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we have your amendment in writing,  please?

MISS. KIRASO:  Mr. Chairman,  I want to be clarified to.  Why does hon. Kirenga think that the sides should be two?  Why should we put it in the law that "where the two sides tie..."?  They can be more than two sides! 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kirenga, this is what the clerk has captured.  "Where two sides in a referendum get equal number of votes, the voting shall be repeated."

MR. KIRENGA:  Sir, I want to deal with a situation where there are two sides only;  not where there are three sides.  Let me explain,  because there is somebody here -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kirenga, can you speak to your motion so that he can continue,  because he has not finished.

MR. KIRENGA:  Why I am bringing this motion is that clause 6 says that if one side gets a majority,  then the issue is carried.  But the way we are going to vote,  will involve some symbols.  One symbol will represent one issue,  another symbol will represent another issue.  So when people are voting,  some will be voting for one symbol and others will be voting for the other symbol.  So when they tie and the question is not carried, then that is not the interpretation I attach to that.  I think I have made my point.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Have you finished?  Have you withdrawn it?  Hon. Kirenga,  you save us.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir,  I am very attracted by this amendment,  because it deals with a lacuna in our legislation.  But I would urge the hon. Member to say, "where there is no majority for a side, the election will be repeated,"  because you do not just envisage two sides;  there might be four.  Let him simply say, "when there is no majority,  then the election will be repeated."  

MR. KIRENGA:  I agree to that amendment -(Interjections).

THE CHAIRMAN:  No,  he is being asked to adopt a certain position with regard to his amendment.  He has not withdrawn.  Have you accepted his modification?  It is your amendment.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman,  I think that the compromise position proposed by the Minister would bring a lot of problems. While he is trying to solve a lacuna,  it will bring a lot of problems because it uses the word shall.  Supposing the side which has been in power says, 'okay now I concede to the other'?  It has no room to do that because you are now forcing another referendum and I do not think that is the case you intend to argue.  So I do not see - in an election where there are three sides - a tie in the first place.  Where you are having one vote,  I do not see the possibility.  But if it were to happen,  then you could say that where there is a tie in a referendum - without necessarily saying side or whatever - then the results of a referendum -(Interjections)- yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, let us understand hon. Kirenga's amendment and the spirit behind it.  Maybe he has not said it the way he should have put it.  He is worried about a situation where there is no majority winner.  What happens?  Is there such a situation?  Do you envisage such a situation?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the principle behind this motion introducing that there should be item seven to provide for a situation where there is a tie. I would also like to appreciate the amendment proposed by the Minister and I would like to repeat that where there is a tie in a referendum,  the referendum shall be repeated.  It should be as simple as that.  If there are two sides, fine;  if there are three sides it is fine.  I would like to propose that this amendment be adopted.  Thank you.

AH HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am seeking clarification in view of what the hon. Minister has read in relation to the amendment.  We have been talking of sides.  Given that we have three sides competing and then there are two winning sides which tie,  what do we do in such a situation?  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  let somebody get us -(Mr. Mayanja Nkangi rose_)- hon. Minister,  please. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, this is why I avoided the words "a tie".  Because if you have got three parties there can be a tie between A and B, but there is majority for C.  This is why we should be able to say that if no side achieves majority,  then the referendum should be repeated,  that is all;  without saying ties between so and so.  

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I do not know whether it will be acceptable if we said that, "where in any referendum no side obtains a majority provided for in either sub section (1) or section 6, the referendum shall be repeated."  It is the same thing but worded in a more professional manner -(Laughter).


THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, that is the language of a draftsman.  Can you repeat it,  we are trying to capture it.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  "Where in any referendum no side obtains a majority provided for in section 6,  the referendum shall be repeated."

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let me read it;  "Where in any referendum no side obtains a majority provided for in section 6 sub section (1), the referendum will be repeated."  

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Chairman,  repeating a referendum could become perpetual.  What do you do if during the repeat you again get a tie?

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I do agree with the amendment proposed by hon. Wapakhabulo,  but my worry is which should be the duration of repeating that exercise?  Assuming the side in power sits down and says, 'I do not have money.'  Should we wait until they tell us when they will repeat it or we should fix a certain period now as we are being guided by the Constitution?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Is that not administrative really?  

DR. KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO:  Mr. Chairman,  on the issue of a tie where you have three sides and there is no majority,  which sides repeat the referendum;  is it the two or all the three?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, you listen to this:  "Where in any referendum no side obtains a majority provided for in section 6 sub section (1), the referendum will be repeated."  I now put the question to that effect. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 6,  agreed to.

Clause 7,  agreed to. 

Clause 7

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Mr. Chairman,  I beg to move that in clause 7 sub clause (1) we insert the words "the final" between of and polling so that it reads;  "The Commission shall ascertain, publish and declare in writing in the prescribed form and under its seal, the results of the referendum within 48 hours from the close of the final polling in the referendum."  The justification for this is that under clause 4 and 3 of the Bill,  it is possible to hold the referendum on different dates.  It has been provided in clause 4 sub clause (3), that where it is impracticable to hold the referendum on the date,  then the Commission may hold a referendum on other dates in the other areas of the country.  The effect of this amendment is that the Commission should only announce after it has collected all the results.  Mr. Chairman,  I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that in clause 7 sub clause (1),  the last but one line,  between the words of and polling the following expression be inserted,  "the final".

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  On clause 7(1) which was just amended, I am seeking guidance from the Chairman on the possibility of the Electoral Commission collecting all the results of a referendum within 48 hours from the closure of the referendum,  knowing the vast areas in some parts of this country and some districts where it may not be possible,  even within the district itself,  to be able to collect all the results from the polling stations within 12 hours,  or within 24 hours from the closure of the polling.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Did you say from the Chairman of the Committee or from the Chair?  

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  I must apologise to you,  Mr. Chairman.  I would like to seek this clarification from the Minister, whether he thinks it is possible for all results to be secured from all over the country of Uganda within 48 hours,  and make a final announcement within 48 hours.  Because I know that in the Electoral Commission Act the provision has been 72 hours which is roughly about three days.  Why do we not put the same?  But before I moved that I wanted to seek clarification from the Minister. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I suppose the question is whether it probable.  If he would like to move to at least about 72 hours,  then I will be prepared for him to move to 72 hours.  He was saying that what is the normal time now is 72 hours.  I am saying that I will be prepared to -(Interruption).

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister that even in the case of Presidential elections as per the Constitution the results are declared.  If you look at Article l03 clause (7); "The Electoral Commission shall ascertain, publish and declare in writing under its seal,  the results of the presidential elections within fourty eight hours from the closure of polling."  This has been done before, and as the Chairman rightly pointed out,  maybe in future technology should improve!  If we could achieve it four years ago,  I think two years from now it should even be easier.  Since we already have experience of doing it, and it has been achieved, I do not see why we should begin to change from a precedent.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  So, can we proceed?  Thank you,  hon. Member.  

Clause 7(1) as amended,  agreed to. 

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  I beg to move that clause 7 sub clause (3) be amended so as to delete the words "under this section" and substitute them with "in the gazette" so that it would read;  "for all purposes of the referendum,  the results published shall be taken to be the official results of the referendum."  The justification for this is that clause 7 sub clause (1) and (2) allow publication in the media.  If this amendment is not affected,  then publication for example in The New Vision could be taken to be the official results of the referendum.  
'Gazette' is defined in Article 257 of the Constitution as the Uganda Gazette,  and includes any supplement of that gazette.  The same definition is given in the interpretation decree.  The gazette is the official publication, it has judicial notice and publications therein are regarded as acts of departments of Government.  In terms of evidence one would have to prove in court that the results contained for example in The New Vision are the results of the referendum.  But this should not be so if it is in the gazette.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:   I now put the question that sub clause (3) of clause 7 be amended by deleting the words "under this section" and substituting with them the word "gazette".

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 7(3) as amended,  agreed to. 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

Clause 9 agreed to. 

Clause 10

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 10 sub clause 2(1)(b) be amended so as to read;  "In case of a national referendum,  at least one tenth of the total registered voters from at least one third of the districts of Uganda."  The justification for this is,  the old 10(2)(b) does not set any numbers.  The justification for this is that if a matter is to affect the whole country,  the issue is of a national character, and this can be determined by support from a big part of the country,  more than a third would however make a demand for the referendum difficult that it will answer the question of it being of a national character.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Before I really react properly,  is the hon. Chairman referring to a referendum using a national question or a referendum for a particular part of the country?

MR. OGALO:  National.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Well,  in that case,  I do not really see a reason for this amendment,  because if the need to be voted on has actually risen and it is going to be voted on nationally, then I think people shall express themselves when they vote.  You see,  a few people in an area might be able to see a need for referendum as long as the thing is going to be determined nationally.  I do not really see any reason why you should say it be subscribed to by so many people.

MR. KAGGWA:  I think the fear here was that a particular district may raise that one tenth and if it is,  the matter is supposed to be national.  Surely other districts must also be equally concerned that there is already precedent elsewhere that we have alluded to,  a third of a district supporting a cause.  So, I would really disagree with the Minister to say that it should be as it is because that would not be national.  

Secondly,  monies are involved.  If everybody is going to come up and raise the tenth and then they call a referendum, I think the Minister of Finance must also be concerned.  It must at least attract a third of the districts of the country.  I thank you.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 10 sub clause (2)(b)(i) as amended, agreed to.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 10 sub clause (6) be amended so as to read;  "The Commission shall verify whether the signatures are those of the registered voters and that section 10 sub section (2)(b) has been complied with."  The justification for this is that if clause 6 is left to stand as it is, it means that the Commission would have to study the information in the petition to determine whether the information is accurate.  The people will simply be applying that a referendum be held on the particular issue.  There is no information to verify whether it is accurate or not.  If for example the issue is whether capital punishment should be abolished, what information is contained there really for the Electoral Commission to verify its accuracy?  So, Mr. Chairman, the reading in the old 6 which requires that the Commission verifies the accuracy of the information, there is really no information which the Commission can use to verify,  hence this amendment.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to propose an amendment to clause 10 sub clause (8).  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed.

MR.OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you.  Sub clause (8) reads; "The Commission shall also,  within 14 days,  call the certificate to be published in the gazette."  I am proposing that the word "also"  be deleted, because it is irrelevant.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you are saying it is redundant?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  It is redundant for the draftsman.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 10 sub clause (8) as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Thank you so much,  Mr. Chairman.  I hope that every hon. Member has this sheet circulated.  I am proposing that the present clause 11 be deleted and be amended in the following way which I have indicated.  Then we substitute this one I am now proposing as an amendment.  So,  I should report the first one,  11 sub clause (1).  "Subject to the Constitution and to this Act,  any person or group for persons is free to canvass for support of any side in a referendum and may form a referendum committee or a similar structure,  for the purpose."  

MR. OLUM:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I would like to add another word after "group of persons",  between "persons" and "is" put "organisation or organisations."

THE CHAIRMAN:  Or organisations?   

MR. OLUM:  Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN:  "Subject to the Constitution and to this Act, any person or group of persons or organisations is free."  Can you speak to it?  Can you justify your amendment?

MR. OLUM:  Yes.  Mr. Chairman, these groups can be formed by individuals, but there are other organisations which do exist in this country like civic organisations -(Interruptions).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Can you allow him to finish, hon. Members?

MR. OLUM:  Yes,  the Minister did tell us here that the political parties have been preserved.  These are organisations,  and I would like them to be included because they are organisations.  Although they may not campaign under the political parties,  they can actually form themselves into organisations as we heard during the IPFC when they can come together and form an organisation.  I do not see anything wrong with that,  Mr. Chairman.  I think we should find a way of having organised groups that do exist and call them groups of persons or organisations that do exist.  It will do no harm if we include the word organisations here.  I would like to move,  Mr. Chairman.

MR. KIRENGA:  I would like to oppose this amendment because it does not conform with the provisions of the Constitution.  In Article 270,  it is stated -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, we have an amendment on the Floor by the hon. Minister,  and we have the hon. Member for Nwoya county also coming up with an amendment.  Which amendment do you oppose?

MR. KIRENGA:  I am opposing the amendment by hon. Zachary Olum,  because as you will note,  Mr. Chairman,  in Article 271(2) of the Constitution,  it is stated: "Two years before the expiry of the term of the first Parliament elected under this Constitution,  any person - I want to emphasise any person - shall be free to canvass for public support for a political system of his or her choice for purposes of a referendum."  The word person actually means a person,  it does not mean include an organisation.  A person can include a body corporate,  a body corporate is a person,  but an organisation like a political party is not a person,  unless there is a law making it a body corporate;  but that one has not been passed yet.  To pass it now when those political parties are not persons will be contrary to this provision.  Although if the other one had been passed,  I would have no objection to it,  Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  The Constitution as it is gives the hon. Member what he wants.  It defines person to include persons,  and incorporated political parties or organisations are a group of persons.  If he wants them to form committees,  there is no bar against that.  Where does he now want to put organisations?  He is not adding anything to it, I do not know.

MR. OLUM:  Mr. Chairman, I will be very happy if the Minister thinks that adding the word organisation will not add anything, I would like to suggest that let it be put there so that he expands the meaning and people understand it better.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister,  it is suggested that in light of your response, you could as well have organisations added.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  If the hon. Member is really worried about the organisations saved under Article 270 of the Constitution,  then I will be prepared to say "and organisations as under Article 270 of the Constitution."  

THE CHAIRMAN: "Organisations as under Article 270 of the Constitution."  The hon. Member for Nwoya, are you happy?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Sir, hon. Ongom wants me to read this Article.  It reads as follows:  "notwithstanding the provisions of clause 2 of Article 72 of this Constitution,  but subject to Article 269 of this Constitution,  the political parties or organisations in existence immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall continue to exist...."  These are the organisations I am talking about.

MR. OLUM:  Yes, I will be very happy if it is included.  Thank you (Laughter).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Clarification?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Yes. Thank you.  I support the amendment by the Minister,  but I am seeking clarification on amendment 11,  clause 11 sub clause (2),  the last, oh, we are still on one.  Sorry -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member,  we have not pronounced ourselves on this.  We have two amendments on the Floor:  the one moved by the hon. Minister in respect of sub clause 91) of Clause 11,  and then the amendment by the hon. Member for Nwoya county.  I get the impression that the Minister has no objection to the hon. Member's amendment.  Can we have it properly -(Interruption)- the hon. Member for Nwoya,  what is your amendment?

MR. OLUM:  My amendment is only adding words to the Minister's amendment by putting "all organisations."  It will read;  "subject to the Constitution and to this Act,  any person or group of persons or organisations...."  So the amendment is inserting "all organisations" between the words "persons" and "is".  

THE CHAIRMAN:  But you will recall that you gave your consent to the Minister's modification when he said organisations under Article 270 of the Constitution?

MR. ONGOM: Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I am wondering why the Minister wants to subject that particular clause of the Constitution when in fact, -(Interruption). 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister,  take interest in what he is saying.

MR. ONGOM:  I know he is campaigning against political parties being put in,  but I just wanted to ask why the Minister finds it necessary to subject a particular clause to the Constitution when in fact the clause already starts with "subject to the Constitution."  Why do we want to quote a particular part of the Constitution?  Mr. Chairman, if it is for avoidance of doubt, is it the intention that political parties are completely put out of this?  This seems to be the concern of these Movement people here.  This seems to be your concern that you expressly exclude political parties.  What is it that is worrying you?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Ongom,  let us do this.

MR. ONGOM:  Mr. Chairman, it is the hon. Members who are not controlling themselves who are asking me directly.  That is why I am answering them directly too.  If they want to behave,  I shall behave.  May I be protected from hon. Nsadhu?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Ongom, I want you to keep your cool and I will protect you to the bitter end.  You can rest assured I will protect you until you make your point.  So ignore any heckler,  and I will deal with the hecklers.  Proceed.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I merely wanted to ask for clarification from the Minister why he wanted to subject it to a particular clause in the Constitution when we have already subjected these at the beginning of the Constitution.  The Minister wants again,  in the middle,  to subject it to another part of the Constitution.  I am saying it is not necessary,  it is already subjected to the Constitution.  

MR. KUTESA:  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  First I would like to understand what the Minister has in mind when he talks about a referendum committee or a similar structure for the purpose.  What similar structure?   And my worry is that he has subjected this to the Constitution and what hon. Zachary Olum proposes,  and it seems to me hon. Ongom is saying that even political parties should be allowed.  I am not so sure that we are by adopting the clause the way is defined,  whether we are not either complicating the interpretation or really deceiving hon. Olum.  Because he will not attain what he wants.  

When you say "subject to this Constitution,"  the Constitution already for example prohibits parties from having branches.  That is,  you have subjected this clause to the Constitution and yet in the same breath you are saying you can have a committee or another structure,  which could be a branch or whatever it is,  are you not really confusing?  Because if you subject it to the Constitution then you will not achieve what he is talking about.  You either want him to participate as a party or you do not want.  And if you do not want,  do not include organisations.   If you want,  be clear and say, 'even parties can participate."  But once you subject it to the Constitution,  which we already know for example prohibits political parties from forming branches, then I think this clause is going to be in conflict with the Constitution, if you add other structures.  A branch can be another structure.  

I wanted clarification from the Minister what he has in mind.  If he wants hon. Zachary Olum to have his clause permitted and political parties are allowed, then do not subject this Clause to the Constitution.  The moment you do so,  the other provisions of the Constitution that prohibit political parties from having branches will apply.  So, let us be candid.  Either you want to give them or you do not want and if you do not want, say so.  Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The clarification I am seeking is related to -(Interjection)-  the argument which has been made in the recent past,  that we should not have passed this Bill without passing the Political Organisations Bill.  The clarification is as follows:  Mr. Minister,  you are mindful of the fact that when Article 269 suspended some of the activities of political parties,  it did not imply that the political parties are dead,  or they are removed from the Ugandan scene?  The Constitution itself recognises that the political parties do exist,  that Uganda shall not be a one party State.  I want also to maintain and to submit that we all know that among the most -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Lukyamuzi,  you are opening debate on general principles.  You confine yourself to these amendments.  There are two amendments on the Floor,  the amendment by the Minister,  and the amendment by the hon. Member for Nwoya County.  This is what we are talking about.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Yes,  having said what I have said,  why does the Minister not realise that political parties are stakeholders in this game of the referendum?  They have special interest and we should not mince words.  They should be directly addressed as people who should participate in canvassing votes for the referendum.  

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Chairman,  sometimes I wonder why people sort of  - this is as expression - you take a dagger and stab themselves.  If you take the last question or clarification being sought,  "does the Minister not know about 269, does he not know that parties exist?"  If the hon. Member had read Article 270, this specifically saves certain political parties,  it is complaining about that.  Why?  I am prepared,  in fact I will take cognisance of hon. Ongom's question saying, "if you are talking about Article 270 and then you say,  subject to the Constitution,  why do you say subject to the Constitution because Article 270 is part of the Constitution?"  To that extent I am prepared to delete the words "subject to the Constitution and this Act",  and start it with "any person".  

I am saying that I prepared to delete words "subject to the Constitution and this Act",  because he is saying if I mention Article 270,  it will be a repetition.  I was referring to Article 270 to be more specific,  to try and meet the objection.  If they want it to really be left hanging,  my objection to the amendment as moved by hon. Member is to say that the organisation is too wide.  If I read his mind,  I could say and incorporated organisations.  Otherwise, I do not see why he wants every organisation in this country,  including foreign organisations,  to participate in the referendum.  

For hon. Kutesa's,  since there is likely to be confusion,  some Articles are for certain parties,  others are against the parties.  This is our problem now.  He is saying,  "subject to the Constitution,"  but which sections,  which Articles?  This is why I was particularly specifying Article 270.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member,  do I understand you to mean that you are withdrawing this amendment and you are substituting it?  Because you say you are not starting with "subject to the Constitution and to this Act."  If I heard you well,  you were saying you want to start with "any person or group of persons,"  and then you want to proceed with "all organisations under Article 270 of the Constitution are free."  Is that it?  If so can we have it?  Because I do not see what you we are talking about.  You see,  the hon. Minister has an amendment,  I would like him to give us his amendment so that hon. Members can pronounce themselves on it.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I think,  Sir that in view of what hon. Kutesa has pointed out,  some Articles of the Constitution say, yes, the others say the opposite.  I think it is better to say, "subject to the Constitution,"  and whatever it is,  you have to apply a particular Article when you come to interpreting this one.  So,  better leave it.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Where is it?  Let us have this thing written down, please.  We are moving forwards and back wards.  Are you saying therefore that your amendment reads as follows; "subject to the Constitution and to this Act,  any person or group of persons is free to canvass for support of any side in a referendum and may form a referendum committee or similar structure,  for the purpose."  In other words are you going back to your original position?  We start with hon. Olum's amendment.  His amendment is that the expression "or organisation"  be inserted between the words "persons" and "is". That is his amendment. 

MR. OBIGA KANIA:   Mr. Chairman, before I address my mind to the importance of the amendment moved by hon. Zachary Olum, I would like to get another clarification from the Minister.  And this is important,  because I may be pre-judging the other provisions he is making,  particularly 11(2).  He is talking of a referendum committee in 11(1) and another referendum committee in 11(2).  If those are two different committees,  it means when the Minister agrees to introduce any organisation, then the organisations are going to have so many committees as in (1).  

Then there is another committee provided for in (2).  So, I would like to get clarification from the Minister whether the two committees are different or they are the same.  If they are the same for the three sides he has specified in (2), I do not have a problem.  But if they are two different committees,  I have a big problem because every organisation,  whatever the nature of that organisation,  will be free to form those referendum committees and I am wondering how many committees we are having; and whether all those are considered to be the "sides" in the referendum question.  That is the clarification I want from the hon. Minister.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Further more, if you look at Article 257(10)(a), it says that words referring to natural persons include reference to corporations.  So the words used in Article 271(2) which the Minister is quoting,  if you see his proposal in 11(2),  refer to any person being free to canvass for a public support for political system of his or her choice.  That also includes corporations and organisations.  But if that then is the case and since it is covered in 11(2) of his proposal;  apart from introducing a lot of confusion in 11(1) which now not only talks of a referendum committee but of similar structures for the purpose which is a proliferation of so many other committees which will be formed by so many other organisations,  and since we have moved and made wide consultation;  could he withdraw 11 (1) please?  In fact, 11(1) is totally redundant.  It is so repeated throughout the text of this Minister's proposal.  

The thing it does,  it introduces a lot of confusion,  because there are two sides.  We want to create one committee or one secretariat for the Movement system and another committee side for the Multi-party system.  But 11(1) is now creating a proliferation of so many of them that the Electoral Commission will be so confused in knowing exactly whom to deal with.  This will make render the purpose of the referendum a nullity and an impossible exercise to engage in.  I am appealing to the Attorney General and to the Minister to withdraw this 11(1).  It is actually superfluous.  Then later on maybe he should accept our amendment,  which he seems to have incorporated.  Consider our amendment,  which will take care of what you actually intended to introduce in 11(1).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, my understanding of the situation here is that the Minister is talking of sides,  alright?  That is the most important thing which is reflected in 11(2).  He says these are sides formed by persons,  group of people who support Multi-partism,  the others Movement.  So if you capture that,  then I think the Minister is now attempting that those sides are the ones which will have referendum committees;  not the various organisations.  It is those various organisations which have coalesced into a side described as supporters of Movement or Multi-partism,  right?  In fact I am trying to say that it may be true that 11(1) may have some problem.  

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Mr. Chairman,  my understanding was that 11(1) addresses referenda generally.  Because we are having an omnibus legislation.  It is dealing with the referendum under Article 270(1),  referendum under 74,  and also when the people have asked for a referendum.  So, 11(1) handles that.  But because we are carried by a referendum under Article 271,  the debate is now proceeding as if that is the only issue.  So 11(2) is,  in my view,  handling this other section of the sides under 74 and under the forthcoming referendum.  

The question arises whether amending one as proposed by hon. Olum, is a reference to the referendum for purposes of governance?  Or is it just for a referendum generally, or (2) being more specific excludes (1) which is being proposed?  Because under the interpretation of the laws,  where you have a specific provision,  it excludes generality.  This (1) is for general,  (2) is for specific.  Is hon. Olum intending to amend a general one or the specific one?  Maybe he could tell us.  At the same time I wanted to raise one question:  should this canvassing be open to everybody who comes to Uganda or is it only for Ugandans? (Laughter) (An hon. Member rose_).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, hon. Minister.  No, first of all hon. Olum, there is a clarification which is being sought.  

MR. OLUM:  I am interested in the specific one,  especially under (2),  for these people must also be given a chance to participate,  under (2).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Then why do you not also tackle (2)?  If you are interested in the specific, then amend what refers to the specific.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Chairman,  considering that this is quite new and it is so long,  if we slept over it and the Legal Committee did make an input - together with the Minister - and they brought us something which is complete,  might we not make more progress? 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Well,  hon. Minister?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Knowing the time involved,  I have no problem with this amendment.  The hon. Chairman of the Committee has not expressed any problem with these amendments,  and I really think we should proceed as we have been proceeding. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Sorry, I did not hear you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I am saying that the hon. Chairman of the Legal Committee from what I see, has no problem with the amendments I am proposing.  So there is no need to call for us to have a conference so as to talk about the amendments.  So I am proposing that we better proceed the way we have been proceeding.

THE CHAIRMAN:  We will go back now to hon. Olum's amendment where he says he wants to add the expression "or organisation."  Have you withdrawn it?

MR. OLUM:  Yes,  I am withdrawing that amendment,  Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that sub clause (1) of clause (11) be amended to read,  "subject to the Constitution and to this Act, any person or group of persons is free to canvass for support of any side in a referendum and may form a referendum committee or a similar structure for the purpose."

(Question put and agreed to)

Sub clause (1) of clause (11) as amended, agreed to.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman,  hon. Members,  please look at the second one,  (11) sub clause (2).  I want to point out that Article 271(3) which would have been the first line,  is actually mistyped.  Now I read,  "for purposes of the referendum under Article 271(3) of the Constitution,  the sides shall consist of individuals and groups who subscribe to the Multi-party system or the Movement system,  or to any other political system,  as the case maybe.  (3) The Electoral Commission shall supervise the formation of a national referendum committee for the respective side and each committee shall be a supreme organ of a side.  (4) It shall be the duty of a referendum committee to organise the canvassing for its side,  and to appoint agents for the purposes of canvassing and voting. (5) A referendum committee shall be free to organise at national and local levels until the referendum is held."  

MR. WACHA BEN:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I have circulated an amendment for clause 11(2).  I am sure the Chair has a copy.  It reads that;  "For purposes of section 25 of this Act,  supporters of the Movement political system, and a Multi-party political system may canvass for support for their sides in the referendum as individuals,  organised groups or organisations."  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I understand this amendment is circulated.  So we have two amendments to sub clause (2) of clause 11.  The first is by the hon. Minister which has already been read, and the second one is by the hon. Member for Oyam North,  which has also been circulated.  

LT. KINOBE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a third amendment to delete "and" between "individuals" and "groups".  Put a comma,  and add -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Which line?

LT. KINOBE:  "For purposes of the referendum under 271(3) of the Constitution,  the side shall consist of individuals."  Delete "and" from "groups and organisations." Insert "and organisations."  That is the addition to the third one, Sir.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us get it right.  We have three amendments, hon. Minister,  I was just going to guide the House along those lines that we have three amendments,  and let us start with the most recent one.  That is the one moved by the hon. Kinobe which is as follows - in the second line of sub clause (2) -  the hon. Minister for Environment and the hon. Minister for General Duties,  Office of the Prime Minister,  this is in your interest as Front Benchers.  In the second line of sub clause (2) of clause 11, after the word "individuals," you delete "and," substitute it with a comma then after the word "groups" you also add the expression, "and organisation."  Are you with me?  That is the amendment.  Let us dispose of that one first.  

MR. NYAI DICK:  Mr. Chairman, if you can indulge me?  Whereas that is a proper amendment,  in my consideration,  that amendment and the one introduced by the Minister are very close to one another because they all involve the Electoral Commission.  I would therefore think that the hon. Ben Wacha's amendment which has nothing to do with the Electoral Commission would be the furthest one,  and we would start with that.  That is what I was thinking.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member,  let us dispose of this one.  It is a very simple one,  then we can tackle hon. Wacha's.  Hon. Kinobe,  you have moved an amendment but you have not justified it.

LT. KINOBE:  Mr. Chairman,  I have been persuaded to withdraw the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Ben Wacha,  hon. Lt. Kinobe's amendment having been withdrawn.  We now proceed to deal with your amendment.  

MR. WACHA BEN:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  First of all I want to draw the attention of Members of the House that section 25 of the Act.  If it were to be passed,  it would actually mean holding of elections under Article 271(3) of the Constitution. In effect,  parts of my amendment and that of the Minister are almost in agreement on all four.  My amendment however seeks to establish identifiable sides in the referendum,  under Article 271(3).  I want to establish the side of those who believe in the Multi-party political system and those who believe in the Movement political system.  I am not touching the other political system because as it might appear later,  it was considered by the Committee that it could not be established under the Referendum Bill.  So, we have only two sides.  I want that one to come out clearly for purposes of identification during the canvassing at the elections of the referendum.

My amendment also makes it possible for the two interested sides to quickly assist the Electoral Commission in matters related to the canvassing in the referendum.  I have had discussions with prominent Members of this House and in a way with the Minister,  who sort of believe that the Electoral Commission should establish machinery for canvassing.  I think this is going to be cumbersome.  It is going to be very,  very difficult for an Electoral Commission which is going to be burdened by  administration of holding of a referendum,  to be subjected to organising groups which should be canvassing.  We are talking here,  Sir,  of groups like political parties which have established machinery for elections,  and organisations like the Movement which has established machinery for holding of and canvassing for the elections.  If we agree on this and we set the ball rolling,  these ones will assist the Electoral Commission in identifying their agents,  identifying institutions which should help in canvassing for the elections.   

I am also mindful of the fact that if we were to leave this matter in the hands of the Electoral Commission, elections being what they are, we could end up with dirty trick departments formulating groups claiming to be certain group, while in effect undermining that group.  I think we should be mindful of this. It happens,  and it is not about to stop happening.  So,  Mr. Chairman,  this is a very,  very simple amendment.  It seems we agree with the Minister on the first half of the amendment.  Although I do not agree with him on the second half of the amendment,  because of the matters I have stated.  I beg to move,  Sir.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman,  I want clarification from the Mover of the motion,  hon. Ben Wacha,  on what magic he sees in the two expressions groups and organised groups.  What does he have in mind about organized groups?

MR. WACHA BEN:  Let us be clear on this matter,  there is nothing to hide about it.  When I talk about organized groups, I mean political parties.  Under our laws, there is no way the present political parties,  which have been saved under the Constitution,  can call themselves organizations because they are not registered.  But as groupings of like minded  political individuals,  they are organized groups and that is what I meant.  Recently we passed a law,  the Movement Statute,  which made NEC a corporate body and therefore an organization under the law. 

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose this amendment here.  I am opposed to hon. Ben Wacha's amendment because basically it is very well taken care of by the Minister's proposal.  You will find that whatever he has said here is in 11(5) and 11(4) of the Minister's proposal and it is also covered in 11(2).  What is in hon. Ben Wacha's amendment for the purposes of section 25 of this Act,  we have not even reached it yet.  But even then,  it is a miscellaneous provision.  When you look at it, it has nothing to do with any of the things that hon. Ben Wacha is bringing out.  I could read all of it and find absolutely no relevance to whatever he is talking about. 

As far as I am concerned,  this is not a quality addition as a motion because it is completely taken care of.  Except,  the only word that I think is to be achieved in this is the word organization,  and I think we have already dealt with that.  The hon. Member for Katikamu proposed it.  Then by understanding the feeling in House he withdrew it.  But if hon. Ben Wacha wants us to vote on a motion which is really about the organization,  I think we have dealt with it,  because Article 247(10)(a) tells you that individuals are corporate organisations,  so that is also covered.  I would just like to oppose hon. Ben Wacha's amendment so that we can go ahead and deal substantively with the Minister's proposals.  Thank you.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I would like to seek clarification from hon. Ben Wacha.  He did make reference to a dirty tricks department where you may find that the side is composed of people from one side.  Would he be happy if instead of saying that,  "the Electoral Commission shall supervise,"  we say, 'the Electoral Commission,  in consultation with political parties referred to in Article 270,  and other civic organisations in respect of a side for Multi-party political system,  and with the Movement Secretariat in respect of the Movement side..."  So that we are clear,  and there are no dirty tricks.  The Electoral Commission will summon the Chairman of the Movement to go and consult and then it will consult with hon. Olum in his other capacity,  and hon. Ben Wacha so that we set up the two sides without dirty tricks.  Will that help? (Laughter).

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LUWERO TRIANGLE) (Mrs. Nankabirwa SSentamu): Thank very much,  Mr. Chairman.  I had an almost similar observation to that of the hon. Member of Parliament for Mbale Municipality.  Hon. Ben Wacha's amendment is suggesting that we are carrying out a referendum to side on which party to govern,  that is my interpretation.  I envisage a situation whereby party A will go to the people to sell its objectives and then party B will also go there to solve its objectives,  and then the people of Uganda will lose.  But we want them to understand clearly the Multi-party political system and the Movement political system,  so if those organizations do not unite,  they might not stand.  As you are aware,  if you are not united you do not stand.  If you are divided you are bound to fall. So that is the observation I envisaged.  We might end up confusing the people.  I thank you.

MR. BIRIMUMAASO:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman. I want hon. Ben Wacha to clarify to me the difference between group of persons and organized groups.  Which is the difference?  Because in the amendment to be moved by the Minister to 11(5),  any person or group of persons is provided for,  and hon. Ben Wacha's amendment talks of individuals as organized groups.  What is the difference?  I want to get it clear because I have just learnt of a small conspiracy  between hon. Ken and hon. Nsambu that,  'we have agreed that after the amendment by hon. Ben Wacha and James Mwandha has been defeated,  we walk out.  It will be bad to tell the people that we did not do anything when our freedom  -(Laughter)-(Interruption)-  Mr. Chairman,  I just want that clarification so that they really do not walk out.  Thank you.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Order,  please.

MR. WACHA BEN:  I wanted hon. Birimumaaso to be clear as to what he wants me to clarify.  Does his point of clarification also include those ones which were with some private communication between two Members -(Interruption).      

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, let us debate hon. Ben Wacha's amendment and take a decision.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman,  is it in order that while we are here thinking about the future of our country,  planning for it's serious trend of political development,  some people in the House engage in dirty tricks?  As referred to already,  hon. Ben Wacha is trying to stage a planned sabotage of the planned organized political developments in our country.  Is it in order, especially as evidenced by a statement which has just been read?  It says, 'hon. Nsubuga Nsambu,  we agreed that after the amendments by Ben Wacha and James Mwandah - spelt with an h at the end - have been defeated, we walk out.  It will be bad to tell the people that we did not do anything when people's freedom were being marshalled.'  Signed K.E.N,  which would mean that it was written by a person whose identity would be K.E.N reading Ken.  Is it in order;  such a thing? (Interjections).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, if you cannot listen to the Chairman,  who else are you going to listen to?  -(Interjections)-(Mr. Lukyamuzi rose_) Hon. Members,  I want you to keep quiet,  please, and listen!  First of all a point of order has been raised and I would like to rule on it this way.  If there are such people in our midst,  it is regrettable and it is very unfortunate,  because I think we are not here to waste our time and the tax payers' money.  We are here to dispatch the national duty and that is what we should be doing.  If there are such people,  they are definitely out of order.  But then the people who will judge,  the ultimate judges are elsewhere,  not ourselves.  We are debating the hon. Ben Wacha' s amendment and I think let us restrict ourselves to that.

MR. NYAI DICK:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Chairman.  I stand in support of hon. Ben Wacha's amendment for the very simple reason that we are going in for a referendum for the greater people of Uganda to make a definitive choice as to whether the majority of them prefer the Movement political system or they prefer the Multi-party political system.  These are choices which must be made when the people who advocate for either political system are the ones in charge of persuading, they are the ones in charge of putting their case to the people of Uganda.  I find it very strange that the hon. Minister would like to embroil the Electoral Commission,  which acts as a referee at all times,  in the setting up of these sides. 

We are saying,  the Multi-party political system side knows who their first eleven are.  Let them constitute that first eleven.  The Movement political system knows who their first eleven are.  Maybe captained by the hon. Member of Parliament for Mbale Municipality,  or he can borrow another coach elsewhere,  but each political system must put its best foot forward in convincing the people before the people make their choice.  And I think it is only democratic that two sides constitute those teams.  I think it would be unnecessary and it would be honestly pretentious of us here to say, 'because the Constitution has already hamstrung political organisations therefore when we are going for this referendum,  let us continue to hamstring them.  I think it is not being honest to this country.  

We want the people to make a choice.  Let the people in the Multi-party, who have been vilified so much go and tell the people of Uganda what they stand for;  how they believe their system of governance is the best suitable for this country.  Similarly let the Movement people field their first eleven to say how they are the best suited.  Then at the end of that contest,  Mr. Chairman, Uganda will have arrived at a free and fair decision.  There will have been equal competing forces or at least each side will be confident that we fielded the best we had and we lost.  But to allow the Electoral Commission to start constituting a side for me -(Interjection)-(Mr. Wapakabulo rose_) No, Mr. Chairman, you protect me.  Hon. Wapakabulo's seeking of clarification from hon. Ben Wacha,  I do not think amounted to any amendment and I am not treating that as such.  But for other people now to want to treat it as such,  I think is deplorable. (Interjection)-  No.  As I am speaking of this,  somebody is whispering loudly that the Electoral Commission will do this in consultation.  That is not part of the amendment. 

Let us allow Ugandans to have a very clear choice. Let the opposing teams constitute their first eleven and we go to the field.  In the end the better side wins and Uganda will be happy. I am quite sure,  Mr. Chairman,  that all these hon. people are very fair minded people.  They will see a lot of merit in this motion -(Interruption).

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Dick Nyai.  The text of the Minister says, "the Electoral Commission shall supervise the formation of a national referendum committee for the respective side,  and each committee shall be the supreme organ of the side."  It says the Electoral Commission shall supervise, it does not say it shall constitute the sides.  Those forming the sides are the groups and individuals on that side.  But what the Electoral Commission is coming in to do is to supervise the process of formation and to know who these people are.  

Then it goes on to say that each committee shall be the supreme organ of that side.  In other words,  that shall be the first eleven,  the supreme organ.  I want to know where hon. Nyai has a problem,  because the thrust of his argument seems to suggest that it is the Electoral Commission forming the sides.  It is supervising the formation of the sides,  and I want the clarification from him.  

MR. NYAI:  The clarification hon. Kutesa is seeking,  other than being diversionary,  i do not see its end.  When I supervise - like our very good son of Uganda who is the Army supervisor,  the Ministry of Defence supervisor,  the supervisor gives orders.  So why do we start pretending?  If I supervise I will be able to tell you, 'this is right and this is wrong.'  Precisely if the Electoral Commission is going to supervise the referendum,  that is in the performance of their duties as Judges,  they are right to exercise decisions of that matter.  But for the Electoral Commission to interfere on how I form my first eleven,  it is unnecessary.  

I am quite sure the National Political Commissar and the great Directors of the NRM Secretariat will tell you that they are competent on forming their side.  What do they need the Electoral Commission for?  Why do we not leave the Electoral Commission out of this?  Allow the sides to form their teams,  Mr. Chairman, so that every body knows what they are voting for.  I thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Hon. Members,  I am glad that the chairman has not put the question now.  I think the majority is going to determine the issue.  First of all,  let me acknowledge that my proposed amendment is really a synthesis of what we had ourselves as a Ministry and as Government.  And hon. Karuhanga,  hon. Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu,  and hon. Lt. Kinobe,  circulated our proposed amendment.  Since it is like this,  I am really surprised to see that we are debating as if this is the first afternoon we have talked about these issues.  I have been put to task by almost the very people.  When I meet them,  I have been asked, 'who is going to form the sides?  We do not know the sides,  they are amorphous.'  I have said that Article 270 preserves certain groups.  Should I mention the DP, UPC and so on?  This Article saves certain organisations, be they incorporated ones,  be they specifically existing parties as at 8th of October, 1995.  

I have gone on to say that Article 271(2) speaks of persons who may canvass. 257(10)(b) defines it to include persons,  but not corporations.  I have said this can now go within those groups,  and the organisations or organised groups under 270 are, as of now,  incorporated groups.  Having said all this,  I am again put to task,  'we do not want all this now,'  they say.

I have specifically said,  if you do not know who is going to shepherd you, do you know how to form a side?  A side shall consist of groups or individuals.  The word, "supervision" is from the Latin equivalent, seeing from above "supelavido".  It does not really mean to control.  However,  if someone was objecting supervision,  I am prepared to take the amendment of hon. Wapakabulo,  because he is talking about consultation.  My interest,  the Government's interest is,  let anyone or anything with something to say about the referendum say it,  that is what it is.  We are saying so in many terms here. 

Hon. Wacha;  I like his amendment because it is brief.  But brevity is not always the soul of it.  You see,  ordinary people - shall I say in Kalungu,  in Kinkizi or wherever - they might not really understand this short thing.  So, we expand it.  What is the problem of expanding?  I have here specifically talked about a referendum committee for the Multi-party system,  a referendum committee for the Movement system,  and I am more constrained to add on any other system.  

This amendment of hon. Wacha keeps off the Electoral Commission.  As far as I am concerned,  and I am really open on this one, if some organised groups feel that by going anywhere near the Electoral Commission,  it will be prejudiced,  keep away.  I for one,  and I think the Government too,  we have no problem.  If you want to keep off the Electoral Commission,  do so.  If you want to canvass by yourself, do so, provided you do not complain you have been stopped from canvassing.  We put this there for purposes of facilitation.  This is why I put in the Electoral Commission.  If you want to run away from them,  keep them away.  But I am saying it will not help,   many people will not understand.

Lastly on this, hon. Wacha says, 'groups or organisations.'  If I am to understand him well,  I must say that by organised groups it is really concerned with organisations as under article 270.  If that is so,  why does he want to add, "or organisations", which ones?  If he is adding organisations to include also cooperated organisations,  that would take the whole thing out of Article 271(2).  It talks about natural persons and groups of persons.  As long as political parties of now - those under Article 270 - are merely incorporated organisations and groups of people,  then I would I appeal to him to forget organisations, unless of course he says,  and incorporated organisations.  But I am asking to remind him that even malwa groups are such groups.

I want to say this that I think if hon. Wacha and whoever else is concerned about canvassing does so with little hinderance,  but he wants to do it away from Electoral Commission,  I am prepared to say, 'alright, keep them away from the Electoral Commission because they are suspicious of it,'  is it not?  Incidentally we also talk about the Movement NEC.  NEC is a corporation,  and that corporation is also excluded under Article 271(2).  They are making no exceptions for Movement or others,  we are Government,  we should be straight.

MR. WACHA:  Mr. Chairman,  a number of issues have been raised.  Let me begin with what I can consider simplest.

Hon. Birimumaaso brought the issue of my concept of group of persons and organised groups.  You will permit me, Sir, to hazard a thought that really this was not what made him stand up.  I think he wanted to bring to the attention of the House some private communication between some private Members.  Because really with all seriousness,  one would not decide to reject or accept this motion on the basis of this.  If he says I should amend it to say group of persons,  I will not refuse.  But my concept of organised groups,  as I said before,  is to bring out political parties as a grouping of people who are not registered under any law in Uganda yet, and it is important that they be recognised as such.  

Hon. Nankabirwa said,  "you are forcing different political parties to start campaigning as different political parties, but we should have them as united entities."  I agree!  There is nothing in my motion which stops these political groupings or organised groups from coming together. But at the same time you cannot run away from choice.  The issue is actually of choice between two established sides.  As to whether the sides which are comprising so many small groupings amongst themselves decide to come together,  that should also be a matter of choice really.

Then to hon. Mayanja Nkangi,  I do not know what to answer because he seems to be saying, 'yes,  your amendment is good, even if it means you do not want this Electoral Commission from supervising your things.'  I was wondering why it has not just been adopted.  He could have saved us time by saying, 'yes,  I adopt Wacha's amendment because it goes to the roots of the issue.'

Hon. Karuhanga;  I have the greatest respects for the hon. Member of Parliament for Nyabushozi,  but sometimes he surprises me.  Honestly when he says that my amendment is taken care of by the proposed amendment of the Minister under 11(3)(4) and (5),  it is an absolute misunderstanding, misconception of my amendment.  Why?  11(3) says, "Subject to the Constitution and any other law, every person shall endure a complete and unhindered freedom of expression and access to information".  The emphasis there, Sir, is "unhindered freedom of expression and access to information".  Here we are not talking about establishment of sides in this referendum,  we are not!  

I want to tell hon. Karuhanga that actually the Minister is now saying, 'having established the sides as per (1) and (2),  those sides will have unhindered freedom of information and unhindered freedom of expression.'  That is all he is saying in (3).  I would have expected a lawyer the standing of my Colleague,  to at least have understood this.  (4) is saying, "The Commission may issue guidelines for orderly canvassing,  which shall be complied with by every committee."  Orderly guidelines.  My motion does not touch anything about the function of the Commission in operationalising the administrative powers in the referendum,  it does not! 

(5) says: "Any person or groups of persons who wishes to canvass for any side in a referendum in any place by way of a meeting, procession or a public address, shall in writing, notify the Chairperson."  That is also another aspect of administration,  of controlling the method of canvassing.  I have not talked about that,  I am still talking about establishment of sides.  Honestly hon. Karuhanga could you not have seen this?

Hon. Karuhanga says my motion is a waste of time because it does not even deal with section 25.  I really wonder whether,  as legal experts,  we pay due attention to whatever we read.  Section 25 (1) talks about miscellaneous.  But may be to make matters easier for my Friend, Mr. Chairman,  I would draw his attention to the marginal note which may not be important to the main body,  but can give reflection as to what the section is talking about.  The section all the same says, "The Commission shall, for purposes of Article 271 of the Constitution ....".  What does Article 271 say?  Permit me not to read that one too.  "...shall appoint and publish in the gazette a date falling between such and such .... on which a referendum will be held to determine the political system that the people of Uganda want."  And we are talking about the referendum in respect to political systems.  And hon. Karuhanga says this motion does not apply?  Are we being serious,  Sir?  
All in all,  Sir, what am I talking about?  We seem to have agreed with the hon. Minister Mayanja Nkangi about the body of this motion,  and now we are actually in touch also with the hon. Minister about the absolute desirability of the other part of his motion.  Can I move that this motion be adopted by this House as presented by me?  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, you have heard speeches for and against hon. Wacha's amendment,  and I think he was winding up.  I think we have really had enough debate,  we do not want to provoke more misunderstandings,  if I may say so.  Hon. Minister, we are not discussing your amendment,  we are dealing with hon. Wacha's amendment which I will now proceed to put the question to.  

The hon. Ben Wacha's amendment is that section 11 be amended by inserting immediately after section 11(1) the following sub section;  "For purposes of section 25 of this act,  supporters of the movement political system and Multi-party political system may canvass for support of their sides in the referendum as individuals, organised groups or organisations."  

                 (Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us deal with -(Interjections)- (An hon. Member rose_) yes, we are coming to that,  or are you ready? Let us start from here then move to hon. Ongom.  The hon. Member for Mbale municipality.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to make an amendment to 11(2) of the Minister's amendment;  I would like to substitute the whole second sentence with the following;  "The Electoral Commission shall supervise in consultation with political parties referred to in Article 270 of the Constitution,  and other political parties that may be formed under any law in the case of the Multi-party side,  and in consultation with the Movement Secretariat established under the Movement Act in the case of the Movement side,  the formation of the national referendum committees for the respective sides, and a committee formed in respect of a side shall be the supreme organ of the side for the purposes of the referendum."  And this is rough,  it can be polished up by those who know better.

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member for Mbale municipality,  would you like to speak more to that or is that enough?  Speak to your amendment or justify it.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I was waiting to be seconded.  But as I said,  -(Interjection)-(Mr. Ongom rose_)- thank you.  I was seconded by hon. Ongom,  he stood up in -(Interjections).

MR. ONGOM: I did not stand up to support -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Ongom, I have not given you the Floor, and there is already a Member on the Floor.  

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank you,  I have been seconded.  As I said, Mr. Chairman,  the language can be polished up,  but it is just approving the idea.  The rationale is first to answer the fears which were expressed by hon. Ben Wacha when he moved his motion.  Hon. Wacha feared that if we left the Minister's amendment as it is, there is danger of dirty tricks being applied whereby the Electoral Commission may be infiltrated and sides formed by people who actually do not belong to those sides.  My amendment is actually to seal that off completely and make it clear that under Article 270 we have the Constitution saving the existing political parties as at the time of the coming into force of the Constitution.  

Those political parties should,  by mandatory requirement of the law,  be consulted by the Electoral Commission as it supervises formation of sides for purposes of the referendum.  And because we have got a Movement Act which sets out a Movement Secretariat,  that should be consulted for purposes of establishing a side for purposes of the Movement believers,  so that the Electoral Commission is not infiltrated.  This has of course the added advantage,  that the Electoral Commission will only be sort of providing good offices to the people who will come there,  who will be known by virtue of Article 270.  I deliberately put there a provision to say, "and other political parties that may be formed under any law,"  because we do not know whether the Political Organisations Bill may not be passed then.  If it is passed,  other parties may come into force before the referendum,  in which case we can get the Electoral Commission to also bring to the table parties formed when the law has come into force.  

That then covers everybody,  both the existing parties,  the parties that may be formed,  and the Movement side.  The Secretariat will only be available for consultation but there will be established committees for the referendum in respect of all the sides.  Those committees will be the supreme bodies in respect of those sides for purposes of the referendum.  Therefore I would like to commend my amendment to the Minister,  to the Chairperson of the Committee,  and to the whole House.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  For purposes of discussing the hon. Member's amendment,  I would like to read it out again.  It is not in the draftman's language,  but it can be put in that language if you so decide that it should pass.  It reads as follows:  "The Electoral Commission shall supervise,  in consultation with the political parties referred to in Article 270 of the Constitution, and other political parties which may be formed under any law in the case of the Multi-party side,  and in consultation with the Movement Secretariat established under the Movement Act in the case of the Movement side,  the formation of national referendum committees for the respective sides;  and a committee formed in respect of a side shall be the supreme organ of the side for purposes of the referendum."  That is an amendment which is being proposed.  This amendment is however partial,  it is not to be substituted for 11(2).  It is part it is subject to the second sentence which starts with, "the Electoral Commission shall supervise,"  that is where it starts. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I for one would gladly accept that,  except towards the end where he says that those committees will be the supreme organs for the referendum -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, no, of the side.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Very good.

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is in your own amendment.

DR. NKUUHE:  Mr. Chairman, I thank you.  I would like a clarification from the  Member for Mbale Municipality,  two clarifications actually.  First of all,  suppose there is only one side,  do the others do come forward to form a side?  That is one question.  

Secondly;  how many sides can you envisage, what is maximum number of sides can you envisage coming forward?

MR. RUZINDANA:  I wanted a clarification from the Member for Mbale whether he would not accept to get rid of the supervision bit of it so that the sides form the national committees themselves,  and file them with the Electoral Commission,  rather than the Electoral Commission being involved in supervision of the formation of committees.  That is not part of its functions laid down by law.  If they file the records and the identity of these committees with the Electoral Commission,  I agree with the spirit of the whole amendment,  rather than the Electoral Commission being involved in supervision of the formation.  The sides themselves should form their committees and having formed them,  file the records with the Electoral Commission.  

MR. KARUHANGA: The problem that I see,  which probably hon. Ruzindana has not seen,  is that if you remove the word supervision then you ought to replace it with another word,  may be observe,  conduct or monitor.  Because if you do not do that,  if the Electoral Commission is absent,  you are opening a very serious problem where -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister in the office of the President in charge of Information,  we are in Parliament,  and you should conduct yourself according to the rules here.  Proceed please,  we are running out of time.

MR. KARUHANGA: If the problem is supervise,  then there are words like oversee,  conduct,  observe.  They ought to be applied at some stage so that no other group will turn up tomorrow,  after this one has come with a name and they have registered,  saying they are not part of it.  The meeting should be conducted for this type of thing.  It should be known that 'the Movement will be sitting in Lugogo,  the Multi-partyists will be sitting in Conference Centre,  the meeting starts at 3.00 O'clock and will end at 5.00,  or whatever the case might be.'  Then at the end of that the Electoral Commission will observe or conduct it and note the name of the committee that has been selected.  To me,  if it was not to be accused that we are constraining the committee so much,  we could even mention the number so that both sides have the same numbers. But that might be going too far.  So,  I just think that the involvement of the Electoral Commission is very important.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Hon. Nkuuhe is saying that supposing there is only one side,  but my amendment is on the second sentence which is preceded by a sentence which reads;  "for purposes of the referendum under Article 271(3) of the Constitution,  the sides shall constitute of individuals and groups who shall subscribe to the Multi-party system or the Movement system,  or to any other political system,  as the case may be."  Mine is following up from that.  If it is just one,  too bad,  because the opening is saying they should be two,  possibly three,  and even more.  But I could not provide for that.  It is just a logical following,  I cannot answer that question.  

The proposal by hon. Ruzindana has been answered by the hon. Member for Nyabushozi.  If the word supervise is not popular,  we can use the word "convene" so that it is "the convener".  But there must be someone around in case there will be the need to summon people or to provide good offices.  I am prepared to be informed.

MR. KUTESA:  I would like to inform the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality that under Article 61 of the Constitution,  one of the functions of the Electoral Commission is to organize,  conduct,  and supervise elections and referenda in accordance with this Constitution.  There is nothing strange.  Actually they derive their authority of supervising referenda and elections from the Constitution,  under Article 61.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I am much obliged to hon. Sam Kutesa for that guidance.  That being the case, I would like to suggest that we remain consistent with the language of the Constitution which gives the Electoral Commission power to supervise.  In fact, wherever we have had elections,  even Presidential elections,  those of us who were representing our candidates say in my region,  we had to appear before the returning officer to agree on a campaign timetable,  to agree on agents,  to agree on all sorts of things.  They convene because they have the power to supervise.  I do not see any problem with us keeping the wording as it is.  I thank you,  Mr. Chairman.

MR. ONGOM:  I am speaking against the amendment by the Member for Mbale municipality,  and let me start with information given to him by hon. Kutesa.  The functions of the Electoral Commission which he is quoting,  are supervising the referenda or elections themselves,  not supervising the formation of whoever wants to contest a side,  speak for a side or contest an election;  that is the business of the people themselves. The Electoral Commission is not going to supervise me to see how I get my agents and so forth.  My duty is to inform it that I have this fellow who is going to stand for me.  That is not the import of this Article of the Constitution at all.  

I am sorry if it is a wrong interpretation,  I am not a lawyer.  Mr. Chairman,  as I said, the function of the Electoral Commission is to supervise the election itself,  or referendum.  We have already earlier on in clause 3 removed certain responsibilities from the Electoral Commission because we did not want them to get involved in matters which could bring controversies of which they might be the Judge later. That is why we had to amend clause 3 to ask the Chief Justice to appoint a panel to draft questions for the referendum.  Now we want to bring them in again to supervise a side!  Supposing there were a lot of problems in the groups that are going to organise a side, are you going to get them involved in the controversies?  That is unnecessary.  
For that reason,  I would have thought that an amendment to the effect of the suggestion by hon. Ruzindana would be correct,  and I wanted to move an amendment to the Minister's - the Minister is not listening - I wanted to move an amendment to the Minister's,  to completely shield the Electoral Commission and let them be free to the effect that the sides themselves will form the referendum committee and then register with the Electoral Commission.  If then there is a problem with each side, let the sides sort it out before they come to the Electoral Commission. I think it would be wrong to really involve the Electoral Commission in supervising even -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Ongom, you are talking of an amendment.  Have you moved it?  When you stood up I got the impression that you were going to move an amendment.

MR. ONGOM: Yes, that is correct but I was still opposing his suggestion.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Ongom, let us understand each other so that I can control the debate properly.  When you stood up, I asked you very clearly whether you were going to speak for or against,  but you started contributing to his motion.  Then half way through you say you want to move an amendment!  That is going to take us too long.  If you want to move an amendment,  let us now listen to it and deal with it.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you for your advice,  Mr. Chairman.  For that reason, may I now move this amendment to the Minister's amendment number 11(2).  My amendment starts after the first sentence.  I am asking that the following expressions be deleted. "The Electoral Commission shall supervise the formation of a national referendum committee for the respective side."  That should be deleted and replaced with, "Each side shall form a referendum committee and inform the Electoral Commission accordingly and ...", then you continue. That would shield the Commission.  I have already tried to justify why the Electoral Commission should not be involved in the formation of the sides,  I beg to move.

MR. WAPAKABULO: I think we cannot proceed with his amendment before we decide the fate of mine.  I would suggest that if the Minister did concede to mine and also concedes to this one,  could he indicate to us which one he concedes to so that we are saved from the problem of having too many amendments on the Floor?  Otherwise,  logically he would have been amending mine.  

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Chairman,  if that is a technically correct thing, then I would like to amend hon. Wapakhabulo's amendment to the effect I have already stated.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but starting from which sentence?  You indicate so that I can ask the hon. Mover of the amendment whether he accepts yours or not.

MR. ONGOM:  His amendment also starts from where I started. All that I am saying is that we start with what I have suggested and stop where I have stopped and delete the rest of it.  Let us start from the beginning.  "For the purposes of the referendum under Article 271(3) of the Constitution,  the side shall consist of the individuals and groups who subscribe to the Multi-party system or the Movement system or to any other political system,  as the case may be.'  We then proceed to delete the next sentence from the words "the Electoral Commission" up to "respective side" and substitute it so that it reads; "each side shall form a referendum committee and inform the Electoral Commission accordingly and each committee shall be the supreme organ of each side."

MR. KUTESA SAM:  Point of clarification on that amendment.  I would like to get clarification from hon. Ongom,  what would happen if any side came up with two committees rather than one,  or failed to agree on a committee?  Because this is not uncommon.  Even in the current organisations,  you have the Rwanyarare wing,  you have the Cecilia Ogwal wing.  If in fact hon. Lukyamuzi was to come up with a wing,  I think it would be very difficult for hon. Nkangi to agree with its membership.  Equally you have the other problems in the Democratic Party between Kaggwa and others. There are more factions there than ever before,  from what one hears from the grapevine.  

There is a possibility that unless someone is in charge of overseeing this committee formed,  it may be possible that eventually the Electoral Commission is confronted with several committees.  What it would mean is that of course it would be in breach of the law,  because we have said each side shall have a committee.  But that does not solve the impasse.  The impasse would be that so and so will come with his committee,  with a list of his agents.  Do not forget that as soon as the referendum is over,  and if for example the people of Uganda were to vote for Multi-party system,  immediately these groups would begin competing for power against each other.  And it cannot be oblivious to their planning that at the beginning when you are forming agents,  you must favour your side,  unless people do not look ahead and I am sure most of these hon. Members and members of organisations do look ahead.  So I anticipate an impasse.  How do we resolve that?  I would like to seek clarification from hon. Ongom on it,  because while the law says you must have one committee,  supposing you do not have one committee,  what would we do?  Thank you.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you.  The clarification is very simple Mr. Chairman.  You see, if we gave the Electoral Commission authority to supervise and they are only supervising, there is nothing to stop anybody from disagreeing with any side and come with another side.  There is nothing to stop,  for matter of argument,  DP from saying,  now we form our own party and UPC says that too.  It is a matter of goodwill between them.  Even if the Electoral Commission is to get involved,  there is nothing that can stop people from disagreeing if they want to.  So I do not see any difference in that really.  My interest is to try and shield the Electoral Commission from possible accusation of siding with so and so in the process of forming the sides.

DR. RWENDEIRE ABEL:  I thank you hon. Ongom for allowing this clarification.  Following on to what has been said that this impasse could happen even if there is this position,  what about this scenario where you organise,  elect and inform people?  Why not continue with that process?  Organise and just meet that day when they are convening and you tell them what you have decided upon.  What is the problem with that?

MR. ONGOM:  I thought he is saying what exactly I was saying. I do not know what the difference is.  But I did not understand your clarification.  

DR. RWENDEIRE:  I think I was very fast,  Mr. Chairman.  I have to be a little slower.  What I am saying is that you countered hon. Kutesa's inquiry on the fact that you could still have an impasse even if the Electoral Commission came to supervise.  Your argument is to allow these Multi-party groups to organise independently,  select their own committees and inform the Electoral Commission.  This is what you are advancing.  I am saying,  what stops these groups to organise - as you are saying - independently,  but at a meeting convened by the Electoral Commission,  tell them that this is what we have chosen?  What is the problem with that hon. Ongom?

MR. ONGOM:  I have no problem with that.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  Hon. Ongom's amendment is attractive but I have some problems with it.  First of all,  there is a process which the Electoral Commission has to set into motion as you move towards the eventual polling.  That process includes - as we are likely to see in 11(4) - giving guidelines for the canvassing period,  then the facilitation and financing.  If we say that the Electoral Commission should just sit there and wait until some people have made up their minds whether they have a team or not,  we may in fact delay the process or interfere with it.  They should have the power to say, 'you people who have been named in this Act,  you political parties which existed,  you new political parties, you Secretariat since we all know that you people belong to the two sides,  can you furnish us with your teams in form of committees?'  Then they shall arrange facilitation,  vehicles,  money so that the sides can take off and canvass.  I do not see any difficulty in that.  And the beauty in my amendment is that it actually specifies who should be contacted.

In fact to me it is much more preferred than leaving a situation where the Electoral Commission will sit there,  hands folded,  waiting to be advised.  And it is possible that at the time when we go through the first half or first quarter, one side has not informed and whenever the Electoral Commission says, 'can you let us know your side?' They will say, 'we are working it out.'  These are delaying tactics.  I would rather we proceed with a certain situation.  Although it is attractive,  I am inclined to oppose it.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  the position is this.  The Minister moved an amendment,  the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality has proposed an amendment to the Minister's amendment,  in particular sub clause (2) of clause 11.  The hon. Member for Omoro has moved yet another amendment - and that is now the third one - on the amendment proposed by the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality.  First of all,  let me begin with the amendment by the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality.  It says,  "The Electoral Commission shall supervise,  in consultation with political parties referred to in Article 270 of the Constitution...."  It is that part of hon. Wapakhabulo's amendment that hon. Ongom seeks to amend by excluding the aspect of supervision.  

When he says that at the beginning of the same sentence insert, "Each side shall form a referendum committee and inform the Electoral Commission accordingly and each committee shall be the supreme organ of the side they both agree."  It is only the role of the Electoral Commission in the formation of the committees for the sides identified.  We have to pronounce ourselves on hon. Ongom's amendment.  If it passes, then that is a different matter.  But if it is -(Mr. Mayanja Nkanig rose)_) hon. Minister, I have not yet even finished my sentence.  If it is rejected, then we shall go back to discuss hon. Wapakhabulo's amendment vis-a-vis the hon. Minister's amendment.  That is the position.  

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Chairman, can I point out one small thing in both amendments?  The amendment of the Member for Mbale Municipality is talking about supervision in consultation with the parties.  The Electoral Commission cannot share the supervisory role with the political parties.  I do not see how supervision "in consultation" can take place.  

Secondly,  the problem with hon. Ongom's amendment is that he is talking of the sides informing the Electoral Commission.  In other words,  they can do so by telephone or do it verbally and so on.  I would rather if he had talked of either file the records of the sides or something.  But both amendments have got a problem.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, but let us deal with them one by one.  We deal with hon Ongom's amendment and we dispose of it, then we go to the next one. -(Mr. Ongom rose_) Hon. Member,  really let me tell you this. We have been here for some time,  we still have a lot to do,  and I think some of the issues that are being raised do not go to the substance of what is being proposed.  You have proposed an amendment,  we would like to dispose of it,  now what is the problem?

MR. ONGOM:  I had no problem.  I merely wanted to say that I have no problem with it.  Instead of saying "inform the Electoral Commission", we should say "file with the Electoral Commission." 

THE CHAIRMAN:  And file what?

MR. ONGOM:  Sorry.  "Each side shall form a referendum committee and file the names of the committee members with the Electoral Commission accordingly." 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes,  it seems you are getting nearer,  your minds are meeting.  Can we give you an opportunity hon. Members?  I want to give you an opportunity to stand over this provision so that you can synchronise it,  is that alright?  So we shall have the Minister,  hon. Ongom,  and hon. Wapakhabulo to deal with sub clause (2) of clause 11,  and then we move on to sub clause (3).

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Mr. Chairman,  can I suggest you go to the next clause while hon Ongom and I -­(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is exactly what I have said,  and we will proceed please to the third clause. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  May I beg for you indulgence,  Mr. Chairman, that in the second line of this clause,  before we move to the third one,  I am prepared to put the words "organised groups" so that -(Interruption).


THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, I have said that the hon. Wapakhabulo,  you, and the hon. Ongom,  sit down and synchronise everything.  I am standing it over so that we may proceed. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Right, Sir.  I propose another amendment which is 11(3).  "Subject to the Constitution and any other law, every person shall enjoy complete and unhindered freedom of expression and access to information in the exercise of the right to canvass in a referendum."

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  I would like to seek clarification on what "complete and unhindered freedom" is.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Furthermore,  I too want clarification on what is meant by access to information in the exercise of the right to canvass in a referendum.  You know,  Mr. Chairman,  we have not yet come up with a law on access to information.  Some information is secret,  some of it is security information;  information is categorised.  Parliament is supposed to pass a law on access to information,  and Parliament has not yet passed it. I would like to get an explanation of what this means,  and what it entitles me to,  as a citizen. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Before the Minister answers,  hon. Karuhanga, supposing after information you added the expression, "information necessary for the exercise of his right to canvass in a referendum,"  that would tend to qualify the type of information you are seeking.  Anyway,  it is the Minister's Bill.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Is the information relevant to canvassing, or necessary;  because anything can be necessary!

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, necessary for that purpose.  Hon. Minister. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  You know under the law as I understand it now,  you may not have access say to security information.  That is what it is now,  even if you do not have another law,  after the Constitution has been promulgated.  This is why we are saying,  "subject to the Constitution."  We know that certain information may not be accessible,  even if it is necessary for you to canvass,  because again canvassing is being subjected to the security of the nation.  This is what it is.  If anyone is asking me what this information is,  subject to the law or the Constitution,  it may be any thing.  You can get the information you want,  but not that information which the Constitution does not allow you to get,  that is all!

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Karuhanga,  are you satisfied with that information?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes, I am satisfied provided that the word "necessary" is included,  so that at least there is some kind of relevance.  You just do not go to Mukasa Muruli and say, 'I want to know the reason why you retired Lt. Kwiringira and Lieutenant so and so and put them as assistant to Kakembo.'

MRS. NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I thought that there has always been freedom of expression and access to information in Uganda.  I do not know why we are putting it here,  unless we have been talking about it and it has not been existing.  For avoidance of doubt -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  I think the most important thing is this subjection of this accessibility to information to the Constitution and any other law.  That really seems to qualify the accessibility to information.  But,  hon. Obiga Kania?

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  But,  Mr. Chairman,  the Minister did not comment on this.  However,  in view of the subjection of this freedom to the Constitution and any other law,  I do not know whether the words "complete and unhindered" are really necessary.  They give to me a very contradictory impression although the Constitution,  of course,  supersedes this particular law.  I would have thought that if you deleted "complete and unhindered" you will still have the same effect.  So, you would say; "Subject to the Constitution and any other law, every person shall enjoy freedom of expression and access to necessary information in the exercise of the right to canvass in a referendum."  I beg to move. 

MR. RUZINDANA:  In this sub clause there is a variation which I do not understand.  Elsewhere the Minister says any person or group of persons,  here it is only any person.  A group of persons has been dropped.  May I know why?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Sir,  I am indebted to hon. Ruzindana.  That was really an omission.  You should add "or groups of persons."

THE CHAIRMAN:  So we start with the amendment of hon. Ruzindana; is there any objection to it?  Instead of every person or group of persons -(Interruption).

MR. KARUHANGA:  I thought that this freedom of expression and access to information,  especially freedom of expression,  is an individual's right, it is a personal right.  Is it for a group?  How do you get a group for freedom of expression?  I think you speak as an individual,  according to the law.  Or you think that political parties,  if you become more direct,  that for example UPC may want to issue a statement and they should be protected to do that as UPC.  We should be very clear about that.  If that is what we are looking for,  then yes,  we should accept. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  A group,  as hon. Karuhanga has just indicated,  can have an opinion about something.  As a group it is entitled to express it.

MISS. AKELLO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am taking up the point of hon. Obiga Kania.  I am not sure how far the hon. Minister took it and whether he is going to reply later.  But although I believe in freedom of expression,  I am just wondering why we have to emphasise the "unhindered."  That to my mind  -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister,  I am sorry to interrupt you,  we are still dealing with hon. Ruzindana's amendment.  He is talking of an insertion,  the addition of "or group of persons."  We are still dealing with that one.  Hon. Minister, did you say something about that?  Okay.  I now put the question that sub clause (3) of clause 11,  after the expression "every person" should be added, "or group of persons."  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us deal with hon. Obiga Kania's amendment,  and then hon. Akello,  the Minister.  Hon. Obiga Kania's amendment is that after the expression "shall enjoy",  you delete the expression "completely unhindered."  He argues that it really adds nothing,  it is just emphasis.  But he says we leave "completely unhindered" there.  Let me put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)
Clause 11(3) as amended,  agreed to 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman,  on 11(4),  I beg to move that this clause be amended in terms which read;  "The Commission may issue guidelines for orderly canvassing which shall be complied with by every committee or agent while conducting canvassing for the referendum under the Act."

MR. KARUHANGA:  I think we should use the same wording as we have been using,  and be consistent.  "The Commission may issue guidelines for orderly canvassing which shall be complied with by every person or group of persons,  committee or agent,  while conducting canvassing for the referendum under this Act."

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes,  is that an amendment you are moving?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes. 

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you very much indeed,  Mr. Chairman.  The only amendment I would like to move is that "the Commission may" implies that it is optional.  I would rather we say, "the commission shall."  Then it is mandatory that they issue these guidelines,  they do not choose to issue them,  they must issue them.  I thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Sir, the conduct of elections is the preserved responsibility,  even discretion to judge situations, of the Electoral Commission.  Supposing they do not have,  for some reason,  a reason to want to guide,  when you say "shall" then they have to find a reason to guide.  Instead we say they may do so,  let them judge a situation and act accordingly!

DR. KIYONGA CRISPUS:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to persuade my Colleague to accept the inclusion of "shall",  because it protects the Government.  Once the law is out,  the Government should not interfere.  If we leave it to the Commission and they decide not to act,  we have no other option.  I want to ask him to accept. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Sir, I accept. 

THE CHAIRMAN:   I should have actually called the Chairperson first.  Chairperson?

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Committee has an amendment to this clause,  the original clause 11(1).  We had proposed in the original clause 11(1),  that we substitute "chairperson of parish council LC II",  with "parish chief."  The justification being that the parish chief is a public servant,  bound by nature of his work to be impartial in the matter.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The amendment of the Chairperson is to substitute "chairperson of parish council" in sub clause (1) of clause 11.

DR. KIYONGA:  I want to persuade the Chairman of the Committee that the parish chiefs first of all many of them are not confident.  They are not confident where they are,  these parish chiefs.  

Secondly, these will be actions taking place deep in the parishes.  You have a parish chief and he has no administrative backing,  for example in terms of Police.  In most cases the Police is at the Gombolola very far away.  But the LC system has sufficient backing and confidence.  You have the chairperson and his committee,  who when it need to convince other people,  has sufficient backing.  If you leave it only to the parish chief,  in some areas we are bound to get some problems.  
I also thought that bringing this now at this stage of introduction of processions,  is going to make administration more difficult.  If someone seeks permission for a meeting,  that is fine;  for a public address,  that is fine.  But at this stage if we say there should even be processions,  demonstrations,  with possible risk of stone throwing,  administration of the referendum is going to be difficult.  I want to persuade the Chairman and the Minister one,  that we should leave the LC II who has sufficient backing through his committee;  and two,  the procession idea should be removed.  

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  I want to inform the hon. Kiyonga and the House,  because what is actually being referred to him mainly regards security of how people should move.  When we were discussing the National Security Council Bill,  this was brought up,  of who should be the person responsible for security.  After a long discussion and what we even passed here,  we said it is the chief who should take the responsibility.  This is because many of the chairpersons have political inclinations depending on who voted for or against them.  

In line with that position,  it would be the same that we maintain the chief.  He is a public servant and he does not have much of the political linings.  And I think for purposes of being fair,  even the LC system is part of the Movement system.  We could include the chief who is a public servant,  and even if he might be having political linings,  at least he is easier to deal with than somebody who is voted in by the people of his area. (Mr Baku rose_).  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you helping us?  You help us out.

MR. BAKU:  I would like to support what the hon. Tumwine has said about the parish chiefs.  I would also like to support the suggestion by hon. Kiyonga,  about processions.  I think procession is not a means of canvassing for anything.  It is more of a demonstration than trying to explain and canvass for a certain position.  I would also support the idea that the canvassing should be done through a meeting or public address.  A procession should be deleted as a means of canvassing for support.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  We have one amendment proposed by the Chairman.  What is the other amendment?  That is from hon. Baku to delete the procession.  So do we have two?

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment to make in the first sentence which says, "any person or group of persons who wish to canvass for any side in a referendum in any place...."  I want to propose that the word "public" be added between "any" and "place"  because if an individual is meeting in a private place say in a home or in somebody's house,  it will not be proper that he should seek for permission,  as long as he is not doing the canvassing in public.  And I think the general rule is that it should always be in public.  So I want to propose insertion of the word "public".  

And two;  I think this one should have been moved by hon. Okumu-Ringa,  to remove the word "also" in the third line after the word "end".  It says, "and also the police officer..."  So I am helping hon. Okumu-Ringa to move that we remove that word "also".  I beg to move.    

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is the third line from the bottom?

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Yes.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I have a very small amendment to make and I hope Members will appreciate the significance of this.  And that relates to the fifth line,  where you have to notify the Police officer in charge of the area.  We are talking of not less than 72 hours,  and I wanted to move a small amendment to reduce the hours to 24.  I have reasons.  If you are saying that people are canvassing freely and they are travelling all over the country,  you may be having a programme and are on the move and not necessarily have time to give in to that kind of time frame.  In the spirit of having nothing to worry about other than freely canvassing,  why can we not reduce 74 hours to 24?

Secondly,  I appeal to people to relax.  And easy does it,  -(Laughter)- if I may suggest,  Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Ongom,  there is no need at this stage,  it is not necessary to second an amendment -(Laughter).

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman,  since I am on the Floor,  I want to really urge Members to support the Chairman's proposal that we have a parish chief instead of chairperson for reasons that my other friends have already given.  I think hon. Kiyonga could save us time by dropping the proposal.  

Lastly,  I support also hon. Kania's proposal of emphasising the public as being the only area of concern where people should notify the police as well as the chief.  Otherwise if people are meeting in homes, we should not really be bothered.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Finally let us have the hon. Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister,  then we will go to the Minister in the Office of the President in charge of Security,  and then Minister of Energy and Mineral Development,  in that order.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Sir,  I can understand the frustration of the House, because we have been sitting for quite a while and the law of diminishing returns is beginning to set in.  A Committee stage is however a very,  very important one and therefore if we do business when we are in that area, we might actually make mistakes.  It is important then that we do business carefully.  The one thing I want to say is to move that the people to be dealt with be Gombolola chiefs.  If you go around,  at least where I come from,  some of the Miruka chiefs,  the parish chiefs,  are the kind of people that may not even have the guts to deal with these organisations.  They are likely to make mistakes.  But a Gombolola chief is a more senior, a more experienced person who can even say no.  He knows the rules of procedure.  If you give him rules to follow,  a Gombolola chief  - many of them can even be graduates - is able to interpret rules and be able to tell Mr. X that, 'Sir, this is not possible.'  When we leave it to these Miruka chiefs,  with due respect,  they may not be able to handle the business.  

The second reason why I think it should be the Gombolola chief, the parish is such a small area.  If we leave these things to parish chiefs,  you are going to get chaos in one area and therefore I think the Gombolola chief is the smallest unit we should be dealing with -(Maj. Gen. Tumwine rose_) I will take the information.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you hon. Member for giving way.  The small information I want to give is that actually the officer in charge of an area is at the Gombolola.  It will be difficult to find him at the parish.  If it is a Gombolola chief,  it will be better.  With his Police officers,  they will be knowing the security situation in the area.  I support him by that information.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, we are getting as many small amendments as there are people rising and we are going to get lost.  We would like -(An hon. Member rose_) hon. Minister, are your proposing new amendments to this?  Are you supporting whatever is already on the Floor,  or opposing it?

MR. KAIJUKA:  I can save time on that one.  Mr. Chairman,  easy does it.  We can retain 72 hours so that we save time on this one.

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  The reasoning behind this amendment of bringing in the parish chief was because he is a civil servant duty bound to be impartial - which also applies to the Gombolola chief.   Otherwise we would not have any problem substituting it with a Gombolola chief.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are we going to refer to him in the law as Gombolola chief? (Laughter)  Can we sort out these ones and pronounce yourselves on them?  Hon. Okumu,  are you proposing a new amendment or you are supporting or speaking against anyone?  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, I was only going to say that we shall include sub county chief and divisions as the case may be,  because in cities there are divisions.  That is all I wanted to say.

THE CHAIRMAN:  These are small amendments to the same sub clause.  Which one came last?  The first one replacing the chairperson of the parish council with the sub county chief or divisional chief.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I also identify hon. Obiga Kania's amendment which is to delete the word "any" to replace it with "public" so that it reads in 'public place."  Sorry.  It is not to delete "any," but to insert "public" between any and place.  
            
     (Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Then we have deleted "procession" so that you only have meeting or public address.  Procession deleted?

  (Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN:  That means you have deleted it.  We have deleted "procession".  Then there is an amendment which is to delete the word "also" appearing in third line from the bottom.

     (Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Any other which I have not -(Interruption).

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Chairman,  the "and" and "also" complicates it.  What if the Gombolola chief agrees,  and the Police officer does not agree?  Why do we not say the sub county chief or the Police officer?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, I do not know what you are talking about.  You have not referred me to -(Interruption).

MR. RUZINDANA:  Sorry,  Mr. Chairman,  I went out for a while.  It had been dealt with.  I withdraw.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay,  you have withdrawn. Is there any other which I have not identified,  which was moved but I have not identified in my passing?  There is none.  That is a new one.

MISS. AKELLO:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  It is only a minor point which is that since we deleted "procession",  then we should also delete it down in "not less than 72 hours before the canvassing meeting or procession."

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is consequential.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Chairman, this is belated,  but I was wondering whether it is not important for us to specify the times when these activities will take place.  The reason why I am doing this is - I can see some Members shake their heads.  The reason why I am saying this is,  as soon it becomes dark, you no longer can control what is happening.  Yes, I have been through elections, in my area we have competed, so I know what competition is all about.  There are those who may have had a very easy time,  they are lucky people but I had a tough time and I know what it means.  Therefore I know that guidelines are not as bidding as a specified law itself.  To me it is an extremely important thing that everybody must know the time in which they are going to operate.  These guidelines,  I do not know,  but if we put it -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  If I may remind you, there are guidelines which shall be complied with.  You said it yourself somewhere.  The Commission shall issue guidelines which shall be compiled with.  Does that help you,  hon. Minister?

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Yes, Sir.  May be the guidelines help.  I am not a lawyer and I do not understand how powerful guidelines issued by a body are,  compared to what is provided for in the law.  As far as I am concerned,  I would rather have a law specify the time,  than depend on the Commission.  At least we are sure after here that we know the Commission are instructed by the law that -(Interjection)-  now if I could finish?  Mr. Chairman,  you were asking me whether I was satisfied,  I am saying I am not.  I would rather have a provision within the law itself,  because these times for operation are so important.  You are not going to control insecurity.  People should even go to jail - it should be specified in the law - for breaking these time limits.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, this (3) -(Interruption)-  why do you not allow me to complete my sentence?  I think what the Minister is driving at is something which should be as close as sub clause (3) which is, "canvassing for a referendum shall cease 24 hours before the date of polling in a referendum."  I think this is to do with timing.  What he is driving at is,  why do you not provide for the time within which this canvassing be to reduce -(Interruption). 

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I do appreciate the concerns of hon. Kagonyera but really if the Commission makes guidelines,  which guidelines of course we have not come to,  clause 29 also provides for the making of regulations for the manner of canvassing for votes.  Then clause 29(g) that the regulations will prescribe penalties up to a final 150 currency points and even imprisonment,  for contravening the regulations.  But I know we have not got there yet,  but I am saying they are really covered both in the Electoral Commission guidelines as well as in the proposed regulations.

MR. KARUHANGA: I am persuaded by hon. Kagonyera that we put it in this clause,  yes,  and he has good reasons.  I have good reasons.  I know that after 7 pm,  in one election I heard a lot of gunshots  where I was and I could have easily been killed.  So let us just put it in as a short sentence;  "meetings at public places shall take place between the hours of 7 am and 7 pm."

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  the idea is definitely good, but there is one argument that the Electoral Commission is going to be empowered,  if you pass this law,  to make regulations by the manner in which canvassing for the referendum should be conducted.  The other side is that let us put this in this law, let us specify the time within which canvassing can be conducted.  I would like us to dispose of this quickly.

MRS. BBUMBA SYDA:  In the last Presidential and Parliamentary elections there was no time prescribed in the Statute,  but the Interim Electoral Commission controlled the timing through regulations,  and it worked very well.  Mr. Chairman,  if we put the timing in the law,  sometimes you may find it necessary to flex it but once it is in the law, we shall have to come back here and there will be no time for changing the time.  I think we should leave the timing to the Electoral Commission.  
THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question that sub clause (1) of clause 11 as amended do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)
MR. WAPAKABULO:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to report the results of our consultations which took place in respect of the amendment to sub clause (2) of 11.  Let me say this that I consulted the legal draftsmen and they say that although it appears 11(1) and 11(2),  those full stops will eventually form sub sections when they come to write them separately.  On that basis we have drafted our amendment.  But before I read it,  I was told by the Minister in charge of the Bill that he had sympathy for the idea moved by hon. Ben Wacha to 11(2) on the second line that reads; "individuals and organised groups shall subscribe to the Multi-party system."  The word "organised" between "and" and "groups" on the second line in (2) of 11,  in fact fits in the scheme of things that we are proposing.  We are referring to the parties which are referred to in Article 270 of the Constitution.  So it makes no difference and I think we can take it.

The amendment which we have agreed on reads as follows;  "The individuals and groups subscribing to the political system referred to in sub section (2) shall,  in respect of each political system establish a national referendum committee and submit details of the committee to the Electoral Commission by such date as the Commission shall be prescribe."  That is the amendment.  The compromise arrived at after floating all these other different ideas.  Hon. Minister.

MR. KARUHANGA:  My problem,  Mr. Chairman,  is that it is all okay if politics was a clean game.  But now what will happen to Mr. Kasujja is that you get two, three or four documents from people who say they organised themselves,  and his hands will be tied.  He cannot even convene them.  To me, we should sleep over this thing and we do more consultations between the two groups convening.  Let the whole text be left out and we conceptualise it tomorrow.  After all,  we have -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Alright, if that is the wish of hon. Members.

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Chairman, I think the new amendment is quite clear.  If it is each side,  I do not see how they will be another Movement side coming up.  I do not see how there can be many sides of the Multi-party system once it has filed with the Electoral Commission,  its own national referendum committee.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think let us do this.  Instead of going forwards we are going backwards.  Let us sleep over this.  Tomorrow we will deal with it in the morning,  or at an appropriate time.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Chairman,  clause 11(2).

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  On 11(2) which is the same as 11(6),  I beg to move that the clause be amended so as to read;  "the person wishing to canvass referred to in sub section (1) shall give the Police officer and the sub county chief in charge of the area such information so as to enable the Police maintain law and order during the canvassing."  The justification for this in effect is that we are removing the word "reasonably" because it is provided here that a person wishing to canvass will have to go to a Police officer,  who would ask him for some information,  as the officer would reasonably require.  

This is a very wide discretion to give to a Police officer.  I can see for example hon. Obiga Kania going to a Police station and saying, 'I want to come here to canvass,'  and the Police officer raising all kinds of questions which to him are justified as reasonable,  but when he means to really stop hon. Obiga Kania from canvassing.  The effect of the amendment is to remove this discretion from the Police officer.  I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Sir, I understand the concern of the hon. Chairman,  but these are matters of security.  Who is going to determine that the information given to this Police officer is sufficient for him to do what you want him to do?  He must judge as to how much information he wants for security purposes.  So I think we better leave the word "reasonably" there.

MR. WANDERA OGALO:  In my view,  the mission why you are going there is for canvassing is known.  I really do not see what other information you will be requiring.  It is really giving too wide a discretion,  and it is liable to abuse.  The mission is known,  that is why we are saying you do not need to give this wide discretion to the Police officer.  The mission is to go to canvass support for your side.  

MAJ. BUTIME:  Mr. Chairman, I think the word "reasonably" is necessary.  Somebody should not just go to inform the Police that he is going to hold a meeting and he walks away.  The Police officer has a duty at those meetings,  the duty of security,  the duty of maintaining law and order,  and making sure that nothing goes wrong at that meeting.  He is likely to ask a few questions which will be reasonable.  Questions like what time will it be held,  who is coming to attend,  who are the speakers,  and so on.  

We should not expect to have a situation where all will be honey,  milk and all rosy.  We may get situations where the sides are quite charged and they are not tolerant of each other,  and we may get a problem.  It is necessary that this Police officer gets a clear picture and then make the necessary arrangements.  If anything goes wrong at that meeting,  he will be the person to question.  The people might blame the Police officer as to why he did not take the necessary precautions.  I think the word "reasonably" will not be twisted to be unreasonable,  or to make somebody answer a whole list of questions aimed at frustrating the exercise of canvassing.  So I do not quite agree with the Chairman that the discretion of asking a few questions should be removed from the Police officer.  Thank you.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Chairman of the Committee.  Members here will agree with me that during last elections,  though we were all Movementists,  once an officer was not on your side,  he will do all sorts of things to bar you from even campaigning.  He would harass you.  So these policemen are going to use the so-called reasonable requirement to be unreasonable.  I think that this reasonable clause should be deleted.  I thank you.

DR. KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO:  I would like to oppose the amendment by the Chairman.  The Police officer in charge of an area would like to get information,  for example if the head of the side is the one to coming,  he would like to know how much of his force he should deploy in an area.  Security will not be the same when different groups are coming.  Therefore this information he is requiring is for the good of the people coming to canvass,  and also for the population which is within the area.  Why do you not allow this person who normally keeps order in this area to get that reasonable information so that he knows how to act?  I oppose the amendment.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  I know the attitude we have about the Police.  You do not go in good spirits when going to the Police.  In many situations that is where we should be going when we need help,  but because of the reputation,  sometimes no one would like to go to the Police.  The words "reasonably require",  in my opinion,  are actually to protect the person going there.  The Police officer could decide to be unreasonable!  He would require things which are unreasonable and would start asking questions like, 'who is your mother,' or, 'who is your wife?'  Then there you could have the right to say, 'this is not reasonable,' in view of the elections of the referendum.  

I think the word "reasonably" is to protect the person going to the Police rather than to create problems for the person going there.  That means he is supposed to ask questions that are relevant.  This is a guide to the Policeman so that he does not ask unreasonable questions to the person asking for the permission.  I oppose the amendment.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA:  I wanted to inform hon. Maj.Gen. Tumwine that Police itself is not reasonable.  Largely speaking,  it is not reasonable.  Some of us have had many problems during campaigns -(Interruption).

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman,  the Uganda Police - I am not referring to any other Police - the Uganda Police has the responsibility of keeping law and order,  and whatever bad Policemen have done cannot lead to saying that the Police is unreasonable.  Individual Policemen in the course of their duty,  would be unreasonable,  but there is no way you can say that the whole of the Police is unreasonable.  Is the hon. Member in order to put a blanket description that the whole Police is unreasonable?

THE CHAIRMAN:  No.  I think that type of blanket accusation is unfair.  There are individual Policemen who are doing very good work for this country.  If you isolate specific examples,  maybe that would be different.  So the hon. Member was not in order.  Hon. Minister,  can you help us out with the way forward?  Let us dispose of this and then we see how to proceed thereafter.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, let me read the proposed amendment by the hon. Chairman.  He is saying "the person wishing to canvass and referred to in sub section (1), shall give the Police officer and the parish chief in charge of the area such information so us to enable the Police maintain law and order."  In what he is doing,  he is himself judging,  he is making the person to judge how much it is necessary to keep law and order.  How can we give that person information?  You are taking away the officers' power to keep law and order.  You are giving it to the person informing.  This is what it says here.  How can we give him such authority to judge what is necessary for the Police officer to maintain law and order in the area?  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  there are two amendments in the Chairman's proposal.  The first one is whether we should have the chairperson of the parish council,  or replace him with sub county or division chief.  But that is consequential.  I think we should now pronounce ourselves on this.  The variation is the deletion of the idea of the Police officer being allowed to get information which he may reasonably require for his job.  The other one says that information is needed to enable the Policeman maintain law and order during canvassing.  This is what you have to agree on.  

I will put the question on the Chairperson's proposal which is that clause 11(2) be amended as I have already said,  to replace chairperson of the parish council with the sub county chief or division chief,  and that the following words be added in the same sub clause, "the person wishing to canvass and referred to in sub section (1),  shall give the Police officer and the sub county chief or division chief in charge of the area such information so as to enable the Police maintain law and order during canvassing."  I now put the question.  I want you to capture it properly.  That is the amendment of the Chairperson that I have read out.  I want those in favour of that amendment to say "aye," those against "no."  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN:   I now propose the question that sub clause (2) of clause 11 as amended be part of the Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  we still have a long way to go,  and I can see nature is not with us.  I am proposing - I want to be democratic although I have the power - I want us to finish clause 11 without what hon. Karuhanga was objecting to.  Can we finish those?  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman 11(7), "canvassing for a referendum shall cease 24 hours before the date of polling in  a referendum."

THE CHAIRMAN:  Which clause are you referring to?  Have you disposed of 11(6)?  What about 11(5)?  What about 11(7)?  Not yet?  11(7) be amended to read as follows "canvassing for a referendum shall cease 24 hours before the date of polling in a referendum."  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)
 
THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question that sub clause (7) of clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, 11(8).

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, 11(8) "Any person who contravenes sub sections (5), (6), or (7) of this section commits an offence,  is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 25 currency points,  or imprisonment not exceeding three months,  or both. 

 (Question put and agreed to)

Sub clause (8) of clause 11 as amended,  agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the whole House do resume,  and the Committee of the whole House do report there to.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses 6 to 11 of the Referendum and Other Provisions' Bill, 1999 and has passed them with some amendments.  I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR. KARUHANGA:  While we were discussing section 10, hon. Okumu Ringa and I observed that there was a small omission in putting the question on approving section 10 as a whole.  So we  -(Interjection)-  Yes,  it was not done,  it was omitted and we did not know how to bring it out.  We thought we would let you know but if we now say that it was considered and passed it would not be true.  Maybe it could be announced now and we pass it,  or will it be done tomorrow? 

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): I have just been reminded.  Something has been stood over,  as on 11.  I have reported that 11 has also been passed,  but part of it has not been actually passed.  So we can say  -(Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but then in your report you can exclude that except -(Interruption).

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Okay, except clause 11(2).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga,  I did not quite get you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  What happened was that while we were in the Committee reporting,  we pronounced ourselves on the amendments and clauses on 1, 2, 3 in section 10,  but we did not pronounce ourselves on the whole section.

THE SPEAKER:  The whole clause?

MR. KARUHANGA: The whole clause 10.  So I wanted the Minister to report up to 9 and then tomorrow,  as a formality,  put the question on 10 and then move on to 11.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are suggesting that the Minister should accept that so that we deal it tomorrow?

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister has made a report.  Let him accept 10 and 11 (2),  then we will deal with it tomorrow.  Can you repeat it,  please?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Yes.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker,  I beg to move that the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses 6 to 11 and has passed them with amendments except clauses 10 and clause 11(2) of the Referendum and Other Provisions' Bill,  1999.

MOTION  FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report as just made.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have been here for quite some time and as usual I am grateful for your zeal and devotion to national duty.  I adjourn the House to 10 0'clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 8.25 pm and adjourned until Thursday 1st July 1999 at 10.00 a.m)
