Thursday, 6 June 2013 

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. Serena Conference Centre, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION 

THE SPEAKER: WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a session of Parliament shall be held at such place with in Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may, by proclamation, appoint;

AND WHEREAS the Third Session of the Ninth Parliament will commence on 6th day of June 2013;

AND WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda is required, under Article 101 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, to deliver to Parliament the State of the Nation Address at the beginning of each Session;

AWARE that it is expedient that we receive the State of the Nation Address from the President at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 6th day of June 2013 at 1400 hours to receive the State of the Nation Address from the President.

FURTHER, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act, Cap 258, and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including its forecourt, the yard and the gardens be precincts of Parliament for the aforementioned purposes. Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala this 4th day of June 2013. 
Rebecca Kadaga, the Speaker of Parliament.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Museveni, and Mrs Janet Museveni; your Excellency the vice-President, Mr Edward Ssekandi; my Lord, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Speaker of EALA; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business; the Deputy Prime Ministers; the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; the honourable ministers and ministers of state; the Judges of the Supreme Court; the Judges of the Court of Appeal; the Judges of the High Court; honourable Members of Parliament; members of the diplomatic corps; the Chief of Defence Forces; the Inspector-General of Police; the Commissioner-General of Prisons; leaders of political parties; religious leaders; distinguished invited guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Your Excellency, it is my greatest honour and pleasure to welcome you today to Parliament to perform your constitutional duty of delivering the State of the Nation Address as directed by Article 101(1) of the Constitution. I want to take this opportunity to apologise sincerely to the following: the honourable Leader of the Opposition, the honourable Cabinet ministers, the honourable ministers of state, the Judges of the Supreme Court, the Judges of the Court of Appeal, the Judges of the High Court for an omission on the card inviting them that did not indicate their arrival time. I want to remind the civil servants that those cards are important because they enable the invitee to know what time to come here. So, I hope this does not occur again.


Your Excellency, the Session which has just ended is one that had some sad moments. We lost four of our colleagues: hon. Oromait, hon. Nebanda, hon. Kategaya and the honourable Dr Mallinga. We pray for their souls and wish them eternal rest. We are comforted that they carried out their duties to this country as leaders and left a legacy.

I also wish to report that some of our colleagues are not present today because they are indisposed and hospitalised and cannot therefore be present. Let us continue praying for them to have a quick recovery. On behalf of Parliament, I wish to register our appreciation for the financial and material support that Government has extended for the medical treatment of all these members.

We have just concluded the second year of our term and in my view we have registered a fairly good performance. Parliament has continued to exercise its legislative, representative and oversight roles despite some challenges.

During this Session, we have been able to enact 16 Bills; we have considered 44 reports; passed 24 motions, some of which were to authorise Government to borrow for programmes of Government; and we have received and considered 15 ministerial statements. We also received and got answers for nine questions for oral answer. I think that is one area where we have not done well. We have also considered petitions and concluded them. 

By the time we prorogued Parliament on the 23rd of May, the following Bills had been completed and were ready for second reading:
1. 	The Public Order Management Bill, which is partially handled and will be concluded in the Third Session;
2. 	The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009. It is now ready for second reading;
3. 	The Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill, 2011, which is now ready for the second reading;
4. 	The National Population Council Bill, 2011, which is also ready for the second reading.

Our proposal is that immediately after Parliament has received the presentation of the Budget for FY 2013/14, plenary should commence deliberations on the Bills, which I have said are ready. I wish to report that many other important Bills are at various stages of processing in the committees. If they are disposed of in the committees, we shall consider them in the plenary. So, I wish to urge the chairpersons of sectoral committees to ensure that they give priority to the consideration of the Bills in their sectors for expeditious passage and later implementation. I want to remind the members that the tasks before Parliament are enormous and expectations of the voters are very high.

I hope that in this Third Session we will be able to record better performance and, therefore, this will require complete commitment on the part of the honourable members, the line ministers, and the whips who play their roles in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. I do hope that there shall be quick consultations across the political divide to generate consensus both in the committees and Parliament so as to improve the speed at which work is concluded.

I wish to request the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business that work which is presented relating to the manifesto of the NRM Government should be presented as quickly as possible. Any other members who have policies and programmes that they wish to be considered and which are vital for the good governance of this country should present them. I want to pledge that once this is done, we as leaders of Parliament and staff shall act as guided by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure, so that we ensure better service delivery which the population is looking forward to.

I also wish to report that the Uganda Parliament is a centre of excellence within the African region. We have received several delegations from other Parliaments who have come here to benchmark. In the past four months alone, we have hosted 23 parliamentary delegations and I think for me it is an achievement. I wish to commend the Parliamentary Commission, the chairpersons of the committees, the Members of Parliament and the staff for exhibiting good parliamentary practice so that other parliaments are coming to learn about, especially the issue of the committee system. Please keep it.

We have supported and continue to support the East African Co-operation. We have just hosted the First Session of the Third EALA, which concluded yesterday. We shall also be having the Nanyuki Series at Serena Resort, Lweza starting from tomorrow. This is an annual fora, which brings together the East African Legislative Assembly and the five assemblies of the Partner States. I wish to report that the Parliament of Uganda enjoys a really good working relationship, and with the establishment of our Committee on East African Co-operation, this collaboration is going to improve. 

I am delighted to introduce the Rt Hon. Margaret Zziwa and the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. I would like to invite them to stand up for recognition. (Applause) The members of EALA, you are welcome and thank you very much for attending. I also want to recognise Dr Richard Sezibera, the Secretary-General of the East African Community. Dr Sezibera – I do not know where he is – and all the other guests from the Community’s Secretariat, you are welcome.

Honourable members, you may recall that when we prorogued Parliament, the business which was pending was saved and this means that there is work which can be immediately handled by Parliament. In order to facilitate this, I want to ask all the whips concerned to assign members of various committees in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. As is the practice, the assigning of independent Members of Parliament to the committees is vested in my office and I have already required all those concerned to register with the Clerk with the proposal for the choice of the committee where they wish to serve. The Clerk has already issued a circular to that effect.

Once those whips have designated the members, we shall judiciously approach the same in the plenary so that they can take places as expected and will be able to do work on behalf of the Parliament. Your Excellency and honourable members, I thank you very much for your kind attention. (Applause)  

Your Excellency, it is now my singular honour and pleasure to invite you to address the nation and deliver the State of the Nation Address as you open the Third Session of the Ninth Parliament. (Applause)

3.21
HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency the Vice-President; the Rt Hon. Speaker; His Lordship, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; the Rt Hon. Margaret Zziwa; the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly; the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition, if he is here this time because sometimes he is not here -(Laughter)- honourable ministers; honourable Members of Parliament; honourable Members of the East African Legislative Assembly; members of the diplomatic corps; ladies and gentlemen.

I greet you and thank you for all the positive things you have been doing since I last addressed you on 13 December 2012, at the special sitting of Parliament when I was talking about the oil industry.

My main concerns, as you may by now know, apart from peace, are socio-economic transformation of our society and economy, and the integration, economic and political, of the African continent. In the battle for socio-economic transformation, I have identified the 10 strategic bottlenecks that I have been repeatedly talking about. Even yesterday, I repeated them to the East African Legislative Assembly. Those bottlenecks are: 
1. 	Ending ideological disorientation;
2. 	Building the state pillars to ensure that the state is capable of defending the people and governing them; 
3. 	Developing the human resource through education and health for all; 
4. 	Promoting the private sector, which is a more efficient vehicle for enterprise identification and growth rather than persecuting them as it used to happen in the past; 
5. 	Developing the infrastructure, especially electricity, the railways, the roads and ICT; 
6. 	Modernising agriculture;
    7. Modernising services; 
    8. Integrating the African market to assist the private sector; and
    9. Ensuring democracy.

As you can see, integrating the African market is part of removing the strategic bottlenecks that I normally talk about. The East African Community broke down in 1977 because of the incompatibility between the principled Mwalimu Nyerere and Idi Amin. Investors, however, cannot invest if they are not sure of the market. As soon as we had a chance to lead Uganda, along with President Mwinyi and President Moi we revived the East African Community in 1999. The EAC does not only aim at economic integration, it also aims at political integration leading to the creation of the East African Federation. This is a commendable step.

The revival of the Community is one of the strategic achievements our people have scored. Rwanda and Burundi have also joined the East African Community, thereby expanding the union. Uganda is also a member of COMESA and we are working for a common market of the whole of Africa. A federated East Africa will belong to those wider markets as one political unit. Therefore, on the bottleneck of fragmented markets on account of colonialism, we are moving well. We are reversing that trend of fragmentation to a trend of integration. We could have moved much faster but, nevertheless, this is good enough.

Since 1987, we started tackling the issue of the human resource development when we launched universal immunisation with vaccines against six preventable diseases. Those were measles, polio, tuberculosis, tetanus, whooping cough and diphtheria. We have recently broadened the list to eight vaccines by adding the Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine and the Pneumococcal Vaccine (PCV). The additional diseases to be prevented by immunisation are pneumonia, diarrhoea, meningitis, Human Papilloma Virus, etc.  

If the Ugandans, individually and collectively, could add hygiene, nutrition and personal discipline like avoiding umalaya (Laughter) – umalaya means living a loose life, for those who do not know our language - alcohol, smoking and obesity – the rich people are dying from too much food - the total disease burden eliminated would be 80 per cent. If we could do those things, we would eliminate 80 per cent of the sicknesses. We would only remain with 20 per cent of the diseases and traumas to deal with.

Nevertheless, that residual percentage of diseases and traumas include accidents. These accidents are caused by reckless driving, which contributes 20 per cent to hospital cases. I do not know where the waterborne diseases belong. Do they belong to hygiene or do they belong to their own category? The Ministry of Health will have to help me here. These waterborne diseases contribute 20 per cent of the sicknesses. Therefore, a continued programme of providing safe water is a crucial element in disease elimination.

The district of Mukono recently came up with a good idea of buying its own borehole drilling equipment. (Applause) This would enable them to make a borehole at a less cost compared to the money they spend when they hire contractors. Even before borehole water is available, let everybody boil all the water that they use. It is as effective as borehole water. As you know, some of us lived in the bush for quite a number of years and we had no boreholes there but I can assure you, we were quite healthy in the bush because we were boiling all the water we were using. 

In 1996, we introduced Universal Primary Education (UPE), in 2007 we introduced Universal Secondary Education (USE) and we have now introduced free education for A’ level as well as for vocational schools. In the coming budget, we are going to introduce the student loans scheme on top of the free education for the top 4,000 best performers admitted to Government universities. The challenge then will remain, first of all, the diligent implementation of these schemes, and eliminating all the corruption, especially the enforced collection of school fees. If you want voluntary contribution to the school, let the community contribute to the building of the school through labour and then those who are able to contribute in cash voluntarily could do so. None of that should affect the students’ attendance.

The issue of lunch should also be handled in a voluntary manner, although my preference has always been for the parents to provide lunch for their children through entaanda or what we call peke in some of our languages. That is packed lunch instead of money. 

The second challenge with universal education is giving the students vocational skills – technical skills as well as science education. One issue that is still lagging behind as far as the human resource development is concerned is maternal mortality; it is still 438 per 100,000. It must be brought down. What are the causes of this level of maternal mortality when we have got a health unit at every subcounty? 

When I was growing up, in the entire district of Ntungamo plus Rwampara there were only four health units at Kinoni, Rubaare, Rwashamaire, and in 1959 Rwenyangyi or Kitwe, as I hear the present groups calling it, was added.  So, in that whole huge area, we had only four health centres - the whole of Ntungamo District plus the whole county of Rwampara.  In spite of these huge distances, I was born in the hospital in 1944 at Mbarara -(Interjections) – Well, if you dispute that then you can go and do - My sister, Dr Kajubiri, was born at Rubaare in 1949. 

That same area now has the following health units: three health centres IV, 11 health centres III, 25 health centres II - I do not count these health centres II because we have not facilitated them fully; I am more interested in the health centres III and health centres IV - plus Itojo District Hospital. All these total to 40 health centres in Ntungamo alone, which in my time had only four health units.

Therefore, the hardware facilities are there – the physical points where maternal issues can be dealt with – but what is not adequate are the software facilities such as full staffing, although this was dealt with the other time. We put 19 staff at the health centres III and 39 at the health centres IV. So, that should have been addressed by now. 

Another problem is male midwives, instead of having female midwives delivering women on account of our culture. The idea that a man can be a midwife is not well understood by our people. So, those men could do something else - (Laughter) - and we will ensure that we get women midwives. Because of this, I am told many women do not go to the maternity centres; they do not want men who are not their husbands to handle them. So, the Ministry of Health, the people who are concerned and the local governments should handle this.

Underage marriages and pregnancies that turn children into mothers prematurely is another problem. We should inform everybody that somebody is not supposed to be a mother until she is 18, biologically. Let the Ministry of Health sensitize the population on these issues using the radio programmes instead of spending endless time talking lies. The radio programmes could be used positively to educate the people about some of these issues.

The remaining big health challenge is malaria. Malaria accounts for 40 to 50 per cent of outpatient and 20 per cent of the inpatient deaths in Uganda. We must get rid of mosquitoes. There is the effort of bed nets distribution. This is good however the real answer is to get rid of the mosquitoes through the use of larvicides. Our scientists are working on this.

I am, therefore, proud that the NRM has expended quite a bit of energy on the issue of human resource development, – education and health – the very low base we started with notwithstanding. It is remarkable to see where we started from; it was a very low base. Let everybody else do their assignment and results will be much better. However, even with the failure of some of the actors doing their assignments, the results are good. That is why the population has grown from 14 million people in 1986 to 35 million now. That is why you can hardly see a youth or child below the age of 26 years crippled by polio. These are not mean achievements. (Applause)

The other big bottleneck is infrastructure - electricity, roads, railways, waterworks and ICT. The issue of the underground and undersea cables has been handled. Telephones should become cheaper in time. We had a problem without the undersea cable from Mombasa or from Dar es Salaam, but now it is there and we have also got the underground cable to the ocean. So, telephone calls should be cheaper now, especially the international calls. 

We are working aggressively on electricity, the railways and the roads. Karuma will be built. (Applause) There is even the possibility that we may get good and cheap funding for it, so that we can switch our own money to something else like the roads. Karuma will give us 600MW. Ayago will be built and it will give us 600MW. We have got very good investors for all these power stations. There is another site called Oryang, which will be built and will produce 392MW. Kiba – another site – will be built to give 288MW. Isimba – the Indians offered to handle this one – will be built and will produce 188MW. We have got good offers for all these areas.

The railway will be built. We have got good offers from some reliable financiers. Besides, we have trained the UPDF Engineering Brigade to build the railways. Some of the roads will be built by the use of our own money and others by financing from outside. The Minister of Finance in her Budget Speech will give the details. I am, however, very confident that the infrastructure envisaged in the 2040 vision will be built. (Applause)

There is our oil and gas. It has taken long because we have been haggling with the oil companies. Our plan is clear and unequivocal – it must include a right sized refinery of 60,000 barrels per day, built in two phases, according to the dictates of the market. When more reserves are discovered, provided the internal market so dictates this refinery will be expanded.

Although we did not, initially, have interest in a pipeline, our commercial partners, the oil companies, seem to have a big interest in it as do their financiers, we are told. Their position seems to be based on their failure to understand the new dynamics in Africa and what was previously called the third world.  The groups in the West should know that this category of people categorised as the third world are an endangered species. In the next 50 years, certainly, Uganda will be a first world country and a middle income country by 2017. (Applause) If you do not want to live in such a good country, then you should migrate and go away. (Laughter) You cannot have a country with 10 million of its children in schools continuing to be a third world country for long. 

On account of their fundamental misunderstanding, they underestimate the consumption level of the Ugandans and their purchasing power. That is why they are desperate for a pipeline to insure their investments. They fear that they may invest and then nobody buys the finished oil products in Uganda, hence the desperation for a pipeline. 

I have agreed to this re-packaging because, whatever the packaging, much of the money is ours, whether it goes through the refinery or through the pipeline. Of course, with this pipeline, the coastal countries deduct some money for transit and there is the fee for the use of the pipeline. Nevertheless, paralysis is also costly. We cannot go on without moving, arguing with the oil companies endlessly. We need the money to build our infrastructure and to do other important things. 

I recommend that we all support the addition of the pipeline, provided the refinery gets the first call on the crude oil if the internal and the regional markets justify it. A number of groups have shown interest in building and financing the refinery. Of course, oil and gas will also contribute to the electricity generating capacity of Uganda. These infrastructure projects will boost our growth and expand our GDP by a factor of nine per cent.

With the battle for an integrated market, for a developed human resource, and for infrastructure going well as shown above, we need to conclude the battle on another front – a conducive atmosphere for the private sector-led growth. I call this “concluding” because we started this battle long ago in 1987 when we liberalised, de-regulated and privatised many activities in the economy. We put in place a code of investment and a one-stop centre for registering and enabling investments to be implemented. The one-stop centre has, however, never worked properly. I will insist that this investment authority becomes a real one-stop centre. I will also bring amendments to the Investment Code to criminalise malicious sabotage of investments in Uganda. 

The achievements and struggles enumerated above will be in vain if we do not attract and retain private investments. Nobody should obstruct private investments out of malice with impunity. A request for an investment should not take more than three days. Why? It is because these processes are well known. They are not new science for most of the time. What does a leather processing plant need, for instance? What do you need to build a leather processing plant? What does a maize-milling machine need? Does it have those requirements or it does not? Uganda Investment Authority and NEMA should have these standard requirements and should be able to approve or disapprove quickly.

While market integration, human resource development and infrastructure development are enablers, the real wealth creation is effected and created by the private sector investing in real estate, services, manufacturing, agriculture, ICT, etc. A road is not wealth; a road is an enabler. Wealth is in the home, in the garden, in the shop and in the factory. If you do not build wealth, even if you have got infrastructure you cannot cause changes in society. 

Everybody must promote this and not obstruct or delay investment. It is the private sector that will create jobs, produce more goods and services for domestic consumption as well as exports, and expand the tax base. The investors may be local or outsiders. They are all, however, doing one job - expanding the GDP of Uganda. 

The ignorant but really subversive talk I normally hear must stop. You hear people talking of “factory y’omuyindi”, meaning an Indian’s factory in our local language, or “factory y’omuzungu”, meaning the European’s factory. When I was commissioning the Coca Cola factory in Namanve recently, I told those present that there is not a single Muyindi or Muzungu’s factory in Uganda. All the factories in Uganda are Ugandan, whether they are owned by Ugandan citizens or outsiders – (Interjections) - That is why you will fail in leadership. (Applause) You have failed in leadership in the Opposition, so you should not aspire to be on this side. I think you should remain on that side. (Laughter) That is where you belong. If you do not know this, then what are you for? You listen to some logic; it may help you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will have an opportunity to debate that address.

MR MUSEVENI: Don’t mind, I can handle these people; of course we can (Laughter) - The Rt Hon. Speaker can assist but these are easy to handle because they have no logic. Now, hear the logic: If a Ugandan African built a factory in India, that factory would not be Ugandan. I am repeating for you; if a Ugandan African, as black as possible, built a factory in India, that factory would not be Ugandan. That factory would be an Indian factory. 

Sometime ago, we had a Ugandan who was getting wealthy, the late Chris Mboijana, and he had businesses and properties in Mombasa, Kenya. Those properties were Kenyan and not Ugandan. To prove they were Kenyan, when he died suddenly, I heard about some wrangles about those properties but I could not easily follow up precisely because they were in Kenya and not in Uganda. Up to now I do not know what happened to Mboijana’s properties because they were in Kenya.

Apart from the small investments that will be attracted by the conducive atmosphere created by us, especially if UIA and NEMA correct their ways, there are big projects that we have for long been promoting without success. There are two in particular – the phosphates factory in Tororo, which will also produce sulphuric acid and iron ore, and the Muko iron ore near Kabale. We seem to have finally identified capable investors who can get these huge projects going. These will add significantly to the size of our GDP and feed into the other sectors of the economy – fertilisers into agriculture, and iron ore and steel into construction, dam building, manufacturing and so forth.

The sector which can reach many Ugandans quickly is agriculture. Let us work on the 68 per cent of the homesteads that were found by the 2002 census to still be in subsistence agriculture. What is amazing is the lack of seriousness by many of our actors. Since 1996, we talked of a cluster of enterprises per household per zone – the 18 zones of Uganda. Where this has been implemented, the results have been dramatic, for example in the Bundibugyo area, in the Kanungu area, in the Kiruhura area and in the Kapchorwa area. However, the other day, when I was in Asia, I heard some of our people talking of the Asian model of one product per village. Maybe that is a good model, but before you go for that model, what about our own model of several products per zone? Where it has been implemented, it has done miracles. Why not implement it elsewhere? Let each home with four acres of land do the following, according to the respective zones:  An acre of coffee, an acre of fruits, an acre of bananas and an acre of elephant grass or other pasture.  

In some variations, you can plant cassava, Irish potatoes or rice instead of bananas or you could have two acres of fruits instead of giving one acre to coffee.  There are some MPs here who have done a commendable job. There is, for instance, the hon. Vincent Ssempijja, I can see him there and you can stand up in case some people do not know you. (Applause) So, while some fellows are “loka-loka”, some are doing something and when the time comes, we shall know them by their fruits. (Laughter)

I am happy with some of those people who are struggling to get planting materials for their areas. I know there are also others. I can see, hon. Lyndah Timbigamba. She has been struggling to get planting materials. In this budget, we are trying to see how much money we can put aside. When we calculated it, the figure was very high, to the tune of Shs 810 billion to get planting materials for the crucial crops that we need like coffee, tea, fruits and the breeding stock. But we shall see how to handle it in phases, to provide planting and breeding materials. 

Some MPs and I, who have been struggling - I know those who are serious and those who just “loka-loka” – “loka-loka” for those who do not know our language means “mudomo pekeyake.” (Laughter) But there are those who are engaged in “tichi”, which means “bitende siyo maneno” and we shall give support to those who are serious. They will help us to ensure that all acres that can be planted will be planted.

At the level of processing, you will then have all those products to deal with. In the courtyard, behind the house, you will then add chicken as layers, pigs – if you are not a Muslim - improved goats, apiary in one corner of the land and fish farming in the valley.  There is one man in Anyara in Kaberamaido who is getting Shs 120 million per annum from fish farming. (Interjections) Oh! You have never heard of a place called Kaberamaido. Sorry. There is an honourable member who has never heard of a place called Kaberamaido. (Laughter) What can we do for such a wonderful honourable member? Kaberamaido is some place in Uganda and within it, is a place called Anyara. (Interjections) Not Anywar. Now, you can see how lost they are. They think Anyara is Anywar. What a wonderful group we have.

There is another man in Busia, who is getting more than Shs 200 million from fish farming. We also have another in Koboko and somehow, Government has helped some of these people because their leaders bring us the issues to handle; we handle as much as we can. So, those MPs who want to work – we are going to re-organise NAADS – (Applause) – when you hear somebody saying the baby is dead, then you know such a person is suffering from “Nyeko”. We are going to re-organise NAADS so that it can concentrate on giving out materials to the people and get rid of this big structure of human beings they had created. (Applause)

Then, there are the six or so cows fed by animal fodder in the shelters - what we call zero grazing.  This will work.  It has already worked in some parts of the country.  

There are two disappointments in the sector of agriculture and fisheries: One is the problem of over-fishing on Lake Victoria and the other is the mismanagement of tick control in Uganda.  

African communities have been specialising in their respective activities over the millennia: Some specialise in crops, others in livestock and others in fishing, etcetera. Normally, these specialised communities develop conservation practices that ensure sustainable use of these resources even in very difficult circumstances. These practices get ingrained in the culture. 

The Banyankore, for instance, being cattle-keepers and crop people, have practices that have preserved certain activities, the neglect and discouragement by the colonial and subsequent governments notwithstanding.  That is why the Ankore cattle, the bananas and the millet, for instance, have been preserved. A Munyankore will, for instance, never slaughter a female young cow - enyena - under whatever circumstances. Even today, in spite of the commercialisation of the economy that has forced Banyakore to sell female cattle, they still sell the middle aged ones – ejigija - and not the young ones, the enyena.  

I was sure that the Bassese and other fishing communities on Lake Victoria had such deeply ingrained cultural practices to preserve the resources of the lake. Who, then, is destroying the resources of the lake by eating the young fish? It is called “mudeeke” in the Lussesse language. In Nakasongola, they call it something - who can tell me what they call the young fish in Nakasongola? The Baruuli? Somebody – “machariyayi”. And those from Kaberamaido, what would the Kumam call it? (Interjections) It is not there? You have finished it? (Laughter) The honourable MP does not even know. What do they call the young fish? [Ms Ekwau Ibi: “Oryangolpol.”]. 

So - Dr Omona, the FDC girl says because you are NRM, you do not know the fish. (Laughter) If only you allowed the fish to survive for nine months, it would have laid many millions of eggs. The lake will always be well-stocked. In fact, they tell me that even if you allowed it to survive for three months and it lays eggs, there is no way the lake can be depleted. 

Who, then, is so uncivilised, so unconcerned that he eats the “mudeeke”? I am beginning to get information that the people causing destruction to the resources of the lakes are not indigenous people around the lake but that it is migrants who come from other areas of Uganda or even other parts of East Africa, push aside the locals and inflict such damage on our heritage. One thing I cannot have compromise on is our heritage. Those who do not respect our heritage should not be tolerated. What should we do with this situation? We are going to discuss it in the Cabinet and in the NRM caucus and find a radical solution. (Interjections) Well, I do not belong to the Opposition, so, can I discuss it in the Opposition? Where can I find you? (Interjections) I always find you here.  

In the meantime, the 21 factories we attracted on Lake Victoria are closed or are operating far below capacity. This is not acceptable. Our earnings from fish had gone up to $ 196 million in 2005/06 per annum. They have now declined to $ 142 million in 2012/13 because of these “parasites”. I call them parasites. This is not acceptable. 

The Banyakore have a superstition regarding preventing lightning strikes – “enkuba” or what is called “eladdu” in Luganda. It is called “okugangabura”. When the lightning damages something, the most indigenous resident of the area is the one that can perform the ceremony and rites that will stop the lightning from causing damage again. The African communities had very clever ways of how to integrate but in a peaceful way. Like when lightning strikes something, these people will go and look for the most indigenous person. That means that although people would migrate, they would respect the people they found there and their practices.
Riding rough against indigenous practices can sometimes lead to serious mistakes. We should all assist the hon. Minister, Nankabirwa, to solve this problem. It is a big shame; it is a type of suicide. It is as if people are committing suicide. I do not eat fish myself, as you know, but I am fighting for the fish. (Interjections) Well, I am comfortable with some other protein, so, I did not find it necessary to eat fish but our people eat fish and we must protect it for them. To kill these fish because of this greed is a type of suicide. 

Polluting the lakes must also stop. People who dig gardens up to the edge of the lakes or the rivers should be stopped. The Minister of Environment should ensure that. I flew over Luzira Bay the other day in a plane and the whole lake is full of algae; a sign of pollution. This should also be addressed by the Minister of Environment.

The other bad phenomenon is drug resistant ticks because of the laxity of the Veterinary Department. There are four categories or classes of acaricides. These are Pyrethroids, the Amidines, the Organophosphates and the Coformulations. Each class kills ticks in specific ways. The correct thing is to change to a different class after three years. Unfortunately, the technical staff never told us about this. We, therefore, ended up, including myself, using the same class of drugs for up to 15 years, in my case. When the ticks became resistant to the drugs, recently, the cattle started dying.  

The good news here is that the Ankore cattle and the other indigenous cattle are still immune to tick-borne diseases. One of my cattle – Kiremba - was found with 154 drug-resistant ticks and it was still up ticking and kicking. Anyway, I have moved from pyrethroids to the amidines and all the ticks have disappeared. We have instructed the Veterinary Department to sensitise farmers on this issue. 

I went to Ireland in the United Kingdom, specifically, on this issue and the drug manufacturers have solution to these drug- resistant ticks. In any case, we are also working on vaccines with other African countries, such as Kenya and Malawi.

But you can see the laxity of the staff. When I asked the veterinary people, why didn’t you tell us about this? “Oh, this was liberalisation.” That is what they told me. The sector has come up, there were three million cows in 1986, they are now 14 million. So, do not go on pleading for those people; covering them up.

Yesterday, I read the malicious self-deception of The Daily Monitor. I am told that the so-called The East African, which is a sister to The Daily Monitor, was similarly jubilating that Museveni will have a hard time making the State of the Nation Address this year, because the things he talked about last year were not fulfilled. Those are in common cahoots with The Daily Monitor. (Interjections) Birds of the same feathers flock together. I wish you good luck with The Daily Monitor.   

Of course, not all the things I talked about last year have been fulfilled because many of them take time and, in any case, the resources are limited. (Interjections) Does The Daily Monitor and The East African papers and some Members of the Opposition in the Ugandan Parliament think that Ugandans cannot understand that? You think Ugandans have not read the Book of Genesis to know that things take time? Even God took six days to create the world. Why didn’t He create the world on Monday? (Interjections) Some of them are not even Christians or Muslims. 

Mao Tse Tung once said: “It is still better if the enemy attacks us wildly and paints us as utterly black and without a single virtue; it demonstrates that we have not only drawn a clear line of demarcation between the enemy and ourselves but achieved a great deal in our work.” When the enemy attacks us, we are happy because we know that we are right. When you hear the enemy praising you, you should be suspicious. (Laughter)  There must be something wrong with you. You should check your ways. When I am attacked by an Opposition like this one of ours, I know I am absolutely right. Otherwise, they would not have attacked me. Therefore, it is a compliment when The Daily Monitor and The East African papers attack us because it means we are right.

However, unfortunately, for the anti-NRM groups, Uganda is moving forward. The performance of the economy this year has been as follows:
    i) GDP rate of growth is 5.1 percent; that is a bit low - it is not as high as we would like it but it has gone up from where it was the other year.
    ii) Inflation rate is 3.6 percent; very low.
    iii) Foreign exchange reserves are now at the highest, they are $ 3.3 billion; you have never had so many dollars in your reserves.
    iv) Export earnings are $4.9 billion. This does not include the remittances from Ugandans abroad who send in an extra  $ 767.26 million;
    v) The total size of GDP of Uganda is Shs 54.7 trillion;
    vi) The total size of GDP is $ 21.2 billion, exchange rate.

This is reasonable given the difficult situation created by the past mistakes caused by the anti-NRM elements prior to 2011, when inflation went up to 30 percent. 

I said that the difficult situation will be reversed and it has been reversed. You remember two years ago, when the inflation was high. I told you that it would go down, you said it would not. Now, it has gone down, what do you say? Who was speaking untruth? We are also resolved to resist firmly those who block investment programmes, delay development and when difficulties arise, they turn round to criticise us.  

The bottlenecks are clear to us.  They will be solved partly using our money, partly using money from our partners outside or through a sovereign bond, using regular financial sources because Uganda’s credit rating is good at B+. Besides, our oil money is not very far off. We can even borrow money for these programmes, from the open financial markets. They are actually coming and offering but we are cautious. We say, “No, let us continue to borrow from the concessionary windows.” Besides, our oil money is not far off. 

The evil of corruption is being handled.  You saw what happened to the officers who were accused of stealing money in the Office of the Prime Minister and in the Ministry of Public Service by holding ghost seminars, in 2011. In the past, NRM has handled bigger problems than bunches of thieving public servants. (Interjections) These are easier to handle.  I promise to give a special address on corruption. You wait. You will hear the expert in fighting corruption and criminality. That is why you are just amusing yourselves. If we did not fight criminality, you would not be doing what you are doing now.

Madam Speaker, it will be recalled that the Second Session of the Ninth Parliament commenced on 7 June 2012. As at 14 February 2013, Parliament had been able to transact business as follows:
    (i)  Bills passed - 11
    (ii)  Motions passed - 12
    (iii) Reports considered and concluded by Parliament	 - 6
    (iv) Petitions considered and concluded by Parliament - 5
    (v)   Ministerial statements presented to Parliament - 13
    (vi) Other statements - 2
    (vii) Questions for oral answer presented - 3

Among the Bills which Parliament has passed are the following:
    • The National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010;
    • The Finance Act, 2006 (Amendment) Bill, 2012;
    • The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012;
    • The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2012;
    • The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012;
    • The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2012;
    • The Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill, 2012;
    • The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012;
    • The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012;
    • The Accountants Bill, 2011;
    • The Geographical Indications Bill, 2008.

In the coming session, the government will present a number of other Bills which the Prime Minister will communicate to you in time, including the Anti-Money Laundering Bill - (Applause) - because if you want to fight corruption, that is a crucial one. Then also, the Public Finance Bill and other Bills that the Prime Minister will communicate to the Speaker. 

With these few words, it is my pleasure to thank all of you for coming and, except for a small group, behaving very well. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, I thank you for fulfilling the requirement of Article 101(1) of the Constitution by addressing the nation.  

We have listened to the progress made in the last financial year, we have heard the plans and programmes that are in the offing and as well as the legislative business which will be coming. As soon as the Office of the President avails me with the copies of the State of Nation Address, we shall be able to place it on the Order Paper for debate.

We are also aware that the State of the Nation Address normally comes close to the Budget Speech. Parliament is looking forward to your presentation next week of the Government’s budgetary proposals and estimates of revenue and expenditure for 2013/14 and compare it with the proposals you have made in the State of the Nation Address. This will be debated by the House in accordance with the Constitution.

Your Excellency, this is one of the few times that we have an opportunity to interact with you. We want to take a group photograph with you on the steps of the Parliament Building at Serena Hotel and thereafter, we invite you to attend our reception where also all the distinguished guests are invited. We want to thank you for completing this function. 

Honourable members, tomorrow morning, we are invited to a prayer breakfast by the Inter-Religious Council from 6.30 a.m. to 9.30 a.m. at Imperial Royale Hotel. 

The Members of the following committees are also invited for a workshop on Bank Loan Utilisation and Etiquette for Members of Parliament. We shall start with a few of the committees and another set will be done later. The committees are:
a) 	Budget Committee;
b) 	Committee on the National Economy; 
c)	Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic  Development;
d)	Committee on Trade and Industry;
e)	Committee on Natural Resources;
f)	Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

The second set of committees will be handled at a later stage. I now adjourn the House until Thursday, 13 June 2013 at 2.00 p.m. at this same venue. Please, do not forget the group photograph before you attend the reception. I thank you, very much.

EAC Anthem

National Anthem

(The House rose at 4.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 June 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
