
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 10TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Friday, 24 June 2005

Parliament met at 10.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  You are welcome.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE WAREHOUSE RECEIPT
SYSTEM BILL, 2005

10.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE (TRADE) (Mr Nasani Igeme Nabeta):  Mr Speaker, I beg that the Warehouse Receipt System Bill, 2005 be read for the first time and I will lay it on Table with the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Bill.

THE SPEAKER:  The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of parliament.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION
(AMENDMENT NO.3) BILL, 2005

(Debate Continued.)

THE SPEAKER:  Let us proceed with the honourable member from Kyenjojo district, followed by hon. Nyendwoha, followed by hon. Ruzindana and members for Kasese and Kiboga. I will give you seven minutes because I want to allow as many as possible to contribute today so that on Monday we can also do the same.

10.26
MRS HARRIET KAGABA  (Woman Representative, Kyenjojo):  Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the government for having thought it fit to appoint a committee to review our constitution at this point in time. We are living in a global world with things changing day and night. I think as they change, it is necessary that the constitution also changes. I would also like to thank the Chairperson of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, together with the members for the work well done. I am sure that they were approached by many people, with different ideologies and comments and it was not a simple thing. I am sure they went through a lot and I thank them for having come up with such a report.

Mr Speaker, I am going to comment on three issues: the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs), dual citizenship and opening up of Article 105(2). We have many Ugandans in the diaspora who are contributing a lot to the economy of this country. Some of them went there simply because, they did not have what to do, while others went there during Amin and Obote’s regimes, and while there, they were forced to seek citizenship and therefore, could not get a chance of coming back to Uganda.  

If they are accorded this chance of dual citizenship, this will act as security for them and I think they will contribute more because they will be able to invest in this country and outside freely. Therefore, I think it is important that we support this dual citizenship. 

Mr Speaker, I think it is important to also support the idea of having CAOs appointed by the Public Service. There are many local councils which have suffered due to CAOs. They have swindled money, but the councils have not had the chance of disciplining the CAOs. I will give an example of Kabale district. The CAO of Kabale district was supposed to be disciplined and when she found out, she turned around and sued the council. The outcome was that the council ended up spending a lot of money on her. 

If, however, they are appointed by the Public Service, they will be subject to discipline by the Service and this will help us minimize mismanagement of the funds in the districts. Also, these CAOs have no chance of being promoted, simply because they have worked in the same districts for a long time and yet many of them are senior CAOs. They could be promoted to under secretaries and many other positions, but because they are appointed by the district they do not get that chance.  

I hope that we shall be able to liberate them so that they can have a chance of promotion to higher positions. Mr Speaker, it will also help us to have people from different areas working in different places. As it is, a CAO serving in a particular district, usually hails from that particular district and he does not get a chance of going to other districts. The end result is to become a king of that area to whom no one can say anything. 

Choosing CAOs from the center will also help us get people from different areas and so perform better. I will give an example of Kabarole district, Mr Speaker. In Kabarole district, they got a CAO from Soroti and he is performing better than previously when there was a lot of confusion in Kabarole  (Interruption) 

CAPT. BASALIZA:  Thank you for giving way and thank you for having been a Councillor in Kabarole district before we split.  Honourable Speaker and members, I am the one who brought the CAO to Kabarole.  You remember when I had a conflict with the chairman, Mr Kayonga. It was all because of bad administration and because they are not appointed. 

After the former CAO Rujumba went to Kyenjojo, for almost four years, the next chairman Augustine was using people as puppets. I thank hon. Retired Maj. Kinobe and his committee for sacking and arresting the two CAOs who were even executive officers. Hon. Kagaba is totally right and I thank you for that contribution.

MS KAGABA: Thank you for that comment. Mr Speaker, lastly Iwant to comment on Article 105(2). Mr Speaker, I support the repealing of 105(2). I say so simply because I think the people of Uganda should be given the chance to gauge the character and potential of our leaders. I think Ugandans are able to identify a good leader and a bad one because of where we have reached. 

Mr Speaker, people are saying that if we open term limits, we shall have dictators. I think that a dictator does not need to rule for more than twenty years before he becomes one. Rather, dictatorship is inborn. For example when Amin took over power in 1971, he put in place a very good executive, and the cabinet was commended by many people including outsiders. He had Dr Gesa, Abu Mayanja as Minister for Education and these people were so powerful; they were contributing a lot and advising him but within three months, he had started executing them and so many people ran away. Therefore, it is not a matter of time that one becomes a dictator. 

Mr Speaker, people have been commenting and threatening us that if we do open up term limits, we shall be answerable to our children and our grandchildren. But I say that history will reveal itself. When our children are studying the history of this country, they will not start from 1987. They will go as far back as before the colonialists. They will read of what happened when the colonialists came, what happened when they handed over power to the first leaders of Uganda like Obote, what happened in 1966, up to 1980 and then they will compare notes with 1986. 

If anything, I think they will even blame us more if we do not open up term limits, after having compared these phases of our history. I appeal to my fellow colleagues to open term limits. The ballot paper will be the one to decide who is a good leader and who is a bad one.

10.36
MR JONATHAN NYENDWOHA (Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the good job they did. I want to answer some of my colleagues. Everybody has their own ideas but some of our friends seem to think that they monopolize ideas. We in the teaching fraternity, believe that when somebody develops an attitude that they know it all, we begin to think you are out of date because learning is continuous and everybody should have an open mind. 

Mr Speaker, I would want to dwell on two issues because of time, that is Article 105(2) and then the Chief Administrative Officers.

Mr Speaker, the people of Buliisa support the lifting of term limits for the president. They say, if a good leader is willing to serve his country, then he should be given an opportunity to present himself for as many times as he possibly can until the time when the people say, “you are no longer suitable for this post.” All Ugandans want a peaceful and smooth transition. Some of us who support the opening of term limits have gone through the upheavals of this country and would want, at this particular moment, to see a smooth transition. 

It is true that the name of President Museveni has been pegged to this article but this article focuses on all future good leaders. The pegging of President Museveni’s name is because of the nature of our political parties, which are characterized by quarrelling, continuous reshuffles, intrigue, bickering and fighting. Because of this, the Ugandan people are scared. These fellows are fighting among themselves. If given power, can they really steer this country to prosperity? Some of us had a little faith in these parties but this has disappeared completely. 

Mr Speaker, I want to allay the fears of our colleagues who are opposed to this amendment. I want to tell them that Ugandans today are more politically literate than they were in 1960’s and 1980’s and this was so even when my friend hon. Aggrey Awori contested as a presidential candidate.   

Today, there is no way that any president can manipulate this country for long without being brought to a halt. I feel there is an effective mechanism built in the Constitution to stop anybody from becoming a dictator or a surrogate king in this country. (Applause) We can impeach the President, we can censure ministers and we have timely elections. Sincerely, what more do you want?  

I urge my colleagues in this House to support this amendment so that if, one day, my friend hon. Mabikke becomes a President and he is very good, he can continue. However, I appeal to my colleagues that when the time comes to make electoral laws, we make sure that we make very strong laws to ensure that elections are free and fair. If we can do that, then that will be another mechanism to put a check on possible dictators.

Mr Speaker, I have heard a lot of argument about the CAO being appointed by the centre, and some of the reasons given are that the CAOs are very corrupt and that they do not get promotions. However, I have not been convinced. I think if the CAOs have been corrupt, they have been so with full knowledge of the centre or in collaboration. It is unfortunate that some of us have not been in the civil service. Those of us who have worked there know that corruption actually originates from the centre and then goes down.

I think what would be best is to improve the quality of work of the councils by raising their academic standards so that they can effectively supervise the CAOs. Also, they should improve the quality of work of the public service.  If this is improved, I am sure they will appoint the right people for the job.  

Also, Public Service Commission should set standards for the CAOs. This is because there are many officers at district headquarters so if only CAOs are promoted, what will happen to the others and don’t they also want promotions? Further more, will assistant CAOs also be subject to appointment by the centre?  

Personally, I think we need to review the Constitution as regards the services of the CAOs, instead of proposing that they be supervised at the Centre otherwise decentralization will lose meaning. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Before we proceed, honourable members, in the visitor’s gallery this morning, is a group of Voluntary Service Overseas trainees who are here on a tour of the parliament building and to learn how the Ugandan parliament operates. Voluntary Service Overseas is a voluntary organization that has been supporting a number of local organizations in the country, particularly with capacity building. On behalf of parliament, I want to welcome you to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

Honourable members, the arrangement of contributors was disturbed because some of you did not come in time, and so I had to readjust names. But I will definitely give you an opportunity to make your contribution. For now it is hon. Ruzindana to be followed by hon. Loyce Bwambale. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I do not know when I will talk because I see the order has been rearranged. I wonder whether I will get a chance this morning.

THE SPEAKER: You will be accorded an opportunity. It was changed because yesterday, I mentioned the order but people did not come on time, so I slotted in those who were around.

10.47
MR AUGUSTINE RUZINDANA (Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. We have an important bill and I have prepared a written presentation because of its importance. I am going to make it if, Mr Speaker, you will give me the time. 

Mr Speaker, I did not make a contribution during the White Paper debate and I have combined both of them, with your permission?

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Speaker, the oath of the president, ministers and members of parliament enjoins us to preserve, protect, defend and uphold the Constitution. These oaths are part of the Constitution. I have not heard anybody suggest that we amend them. We all swore to uphold, defend and preserve the Constitution. Now, the Constitution is amendable but not unnecessarily and this is what we are doing now. We are amending the Constitution unnecessarily.

Mr Speaker, I take the oath I swore seriously. This is my starting premise. I took an oath of allegiance, an oath of office, and the President took an oath -(Interruption)

CAPT. BASALIZA: Mr Speaker, I do not like giving my senior brother a point of order but I think I am obliged to give it because of his careless statements. Mr Speaker, hon. Ruzindana though seated on the front bench is saying we are amending the Constitution unnecessarily. Mr Speaker and honourable members, is the honourable member in order to assume that the Speaker seated there in his rightful chair and the member from Masindi, hon. Mutiti Nyendwoha having been called a prospective President, are doing no work, is he really in order? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: No. I think the point, which the honourable member is making is that it is not necessary, as far as he is concerned, to go through this exercise of amending the Constitution. As to what part of the Constitution he is referring to, I think he was coming to that. Although we have the mandate to amend the Constitution, he does not see good reason for doing so. I think he is entitled to state his case then we can assess it.  

MR RUZINDANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The second aspect I want to comment on is the concept of the proposed second Movement Constitution, the first being the 1995 Constitution. The first phase of the movement rule was the youth stage. This was the period when government action was the guide and there were ideas and ideals that led thousands of people to resist dictatorship and many died in the process. 

The ideals were of democracy, respect for human rights and the rule of law. Then, public interests were uppermost in the minds of the leaders. This period has long gone and has been replaced by the project of personal interest to remain in power indefinitely and for life at any cost.  

The first phase is the period when the economy was growing, human rights were respected and the President still carries the reputation acquired during that period. However, this period is no longer there. The first phase generated a largely democratic constitution with strong provisions for separation of powers, clear checks and balances, emphasis on the protection of human rights and the rule of law and constitutionalism.  

However, there were unfortunate anti-democratic provisions in the Constitution. These are the ones becoming prominent now. The proposed amendments do not only want to create a life president, they also want to eliminate checks and balances, the separation of powers and the installation of a sort of direct democracy. This anti-democratic tendency has always been there in the Movement, but it has become the leading tendency now. We now have personal rule, characterized by patronage, nepotism, cronyism and corruption. That is why there is emphasis on the President succeeding himself rather than his party.

Mr Speaker, what do the people of Uganda want from us as their members of parliament? They want us to resolve the constitutional issues before us in such a way that Uganda becomes more democratic, socially and economically prosperous, and a peaceful and harmonious country. They expect us to give them a constitution that does not lead to conflict caused by economic factors, demonstrations, cultural factors or even land factors. 

They expect us to give them a State that inspires a shared sense of identity among the diverse people of this country that ensures the participation of all groups in its affairs as well as equity in the sharing of its resources. They want us to give them a system in which ethnic entrepreneurs, that is those who seek to mobilize and capitalize on ethnic differences for their personal or political gain, cannot succeed in disempowering and marginalizing other groups.

Mr Speaker, the people want us to give them a real democratic system. For a system of government to be considered democratic, it has to have three essential conditions.

1. Meaningful competition for political power among individuals and organized groups.

2.  Inclusive participation in the selection of leaders and policies through free and fair elections.

3. A level of civil liberties sufficient to ensure the integrity of political competition and participation.  

While democracy can take many forms, no system can be called democratic without a meaningful level of both.

Mr Speaker, our current system has none of the above on a meaningful level. The amendment of the Constitution must therefore be for the rectification of these shortcomings.  If not, then the amendments are meaningless and possibly harmful.

Mr Speaker, I ask for a little more time.

THE SPEAKER: As I see, you have just covered two points. I think you had better summarize.  

MR RUZINDANA: I will cover two points, one on militarism and the other on Article 105(2). Mr Speaker, we are in a system in which militarism is a serious governance problem and a serious threat to the possibility of achieving real democracy. What are the characteristics of militarism?  

1. The use of the military and other security forces to resolve essentially political problems.

2. The regimentation of society and proliferation of security organisations.

3.  Adoption of confrontationist methods and lack of compromise so that every dispute or difference is regarded as a dispute with an enemy, hence the adoption of absolute and final solutions. 

4. The concept of security as being based on maximum armament and being the supreme consideration.  

Mr Speaker, the amendment of the Constitution must deal with the issue of militarism, that is, the UPDF must become a national institution, non-partisan and impartial. Its representation in a political institution like parliament must come to an end. In fact, to show that UPDF is non-partisan, its members of Parliament must abstain on matters which are partisan like lifting presidential term limits. The lifting of presidential limits, is a party proposal of the NRM/O. If UPDF representatives vote for or against it, they will be partisan. They must not be partisan because they are not an NRM/O military wing.

Mr Speaker, let me go to Article 105(2), which most people seem to talk about, but which is not the essence of the amendment. Repealing Article 105(2) at the moment is very dangerous because this is being done for the only possible beneficiary, the current president, and possibly his political party, although both are identical.  Constitution amendments are never made for an individual or for political purposes. Article 105(2) has not yet been tested and where term limits have been tested, for example, in Tanzania or Kenya, it has caused no harm, but rather it has resulted in stability.  

In addition, we need political and constitutional convergence in East Africa if we are to be serious about a political federation in East Africa. I hear that the beneficiary of the lifting of term limits may want to lead the East African Federation. How can the other states permit the rule of Uganda to be extended to the whole of East Africa?  

Mr Speaker, the intended repeal of this article has already caused enough problems. It has ended long established relationships, has split the Movement, is splitting the country, has led to the abuse of elders by youngsters, has led to the abuse of religious leaders, the law and parliamentary rules have been amended. It has also led to the promise of innumerable districts and regional tiers, and above all the depletion of the national budget. 

Worse is yet to come; increased politically motivated violence against opponents of this turn of events and violence in the forthcoming campaigns and elections. If all this leads to the success of the life presidency project, then we shall see the installation of a full-fledged repressive, undemocratic state. It has to be repressive if you consider the other attendant proposals regarding Parliament, the Judiciary, the Army, that is, the removal of checks and balances and separation of powers.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, let this House support all the manipulation going on knowingly. Please go ahead and amend the Constitution expeditiously well knowing the result of those amendments. There used to be a newspaper column, which used to end with, “Just go on, it is alright.” Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.04
MRS BIIRA BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker (Interruption)
THE SPEAKER: Let us stick to seven minutes, please.

MRS BWAMBALE: I will try my level best, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for the opportunity to make my contribution on this very important bill on the amendment of the Constitution. But before I do that noble duty, Mr Speaker, allow me to say something small. I would like to use this opportunity to commend and welcome the appointment of a female politician in South Africa to the second highest position of office. Let me welcome the appointment of Her Excellency, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka as Vice President of the South African Republic. (Applause)  

Mr Speaker, this has been done to emulate Uganda, we have done it before and we shall do it again in future. We have more heads of state in Africa embracing this principle of gender equality, and we say this is a victory for democracy in Africa.

Having done that noble duty, I now turn to the constitutional issues. Mr Speaker, I was a member of the Constituent Assembly and hon. Ruzindana was also a member.  He has made a very important contribution as a historical cadre of the Movement. I am making my contribution as a product, not a historical member of the Movement. As a product of affirmative action, I would like to move forward and dispel threats of violence, by members of this House, who have stated that if we lift term limits there will be violence. 

I want to state, categorically, on behalf of the people I represent in Kasese and the women of Uganda that we shall not be with you in that move of violence. I call upon the women of Uganda to be politically alert and shun any politician who is going to call for violence, because when there is armed conflict it is the women and children who suffer rape and internal displacement, so we are not going to support that. Instead we have been given an opportunity to participate in political decisions so that we may create peace, stability and development for the women and men of this country.  

Mr Speaker, the Constitution of any nation reflects the political culture and dynamics of its people. Ugandans have had a violent history and this is the time to make up our minds on how we can proceed by improving the Constitution.  I have already said that I was part of the Constitution making process of 1995, and in my opinion and that of many people, ten years down the road, we believe that this was a very good and gender sensitive constitution. That is why we have been able to attain the development that we have had.  

If you look at the constitutional institutions that we have put in place, they are over 11 commissions, which include authorities, and a parliamentary commission. Honourable members, if you tell me that this is a backward step and that this was a bad constitution, then we are representing ourselves, and not the people who sent us here.

Mr Speaker, the committee made a very important and excellent political analysis of the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill. Allow me to respond to one or two issues. My first response is on the human rights issue on page 11. The committee ably observed that Government should support the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission because in the Constitution, Article 32(2), the principle of affirmative action was entrenched.

Over 11 constitutions have been established as, I said before, but the Equal Opportunities Commission has been neglected. Therefore, I want to go along with the committee in proposing that this commission be constitutionalised. Many gender activities and marginalized groups have asked for a fixed period in the Constitution for this commission to be established and I hope Government will take this one on board.  

My second area of observation is on the institution of Parliament. Mr Speaker, I think Parliament should retain the powers, as the Constitution states, of a high court. That is when the Parliament will be able to check on unlimited terms of the presidency. That is to say, Parliament will be able to form its committees and impeach the President, censor ministers and make laws and regulations that will regulate the good governance of this country. I believe that a strong Parliament is what we should aim for. 

Also, I want to look at the composition of Parliament.  Article 72 of the Constitution directs that after 10 years the participation of marginalized groups in Parliament should be reviewed. I want the committee and the executive to clarify whether, during this amendment of the Constitution, we are also reviewing Article 78(2)?  This is because the Constitution directed that, in reviewing this article, we should think about whether special groups should be retained, increased or abolished.  

This is the tenth year and in the committee report and position of government, we are supposed to be making this review. When are we going to do this, and which article, amendment and recommendation are going to work on that?  I am not happy because for the last ten years, we have not made any impact assessment on the performance of affirmative groups, which include the youth and the women. Shall we review these groups in the forthcoming parliament? I assert that the Parliament will become stronger if during this process we review (Interruption) Can I have one more minute and I wind up?

THE SPEAKER: Perhaps, honourable member, you may need explanation on that article. I am the one who moved it and the reason was that, if we did not give it at least two terms, it would have been possible that after one term, the affirmative action would have been done away with. That is why we fixed a period of ten years, after which we shall make an assessment and find out whether there is a need to bring in other people.  

The assessment will come at the end of the term of the second Parliament after the making of the Constitution. It was really made to protect these groups so that they are not done away with, after the first Parliament. I hope that will help you to understand why we put it there.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, for that useful information. I know that now, the marginalized groups of Uganda are sure of the way forward.  

In my final submission, I would like to state clearly that the people of my constituency support the lifting of the presidential term limit and they have got reasons for it. It gives them the opportunity to participate in checking bad presidents as fast as possible. It also gives them an opportunity to thank the person of His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. I want to be very clear about that because the Rwenzori region had been undergoing recurring conflicts, which previous governments had failed to handle. 

The NRM government came and brought stability and peace in the area. Because of the fact that now we are enjoying stability and development, we feel that leaders such as the President and others who perform, should continue in office where necessary. We are a product of the British system by history and they have not limited their term. Therefore, we should not be in a hurry to limit ours since we have seen it done before.  

I want to quote one American who made an observation during the Constitution Convention in America. He said,“ Elections are for getting rid of politicians who do not perform. Term limits, on the other hand, are for eliminating politicians who are performing.” (Applause) I feel that when a team is playing well and is winning, that team should be allowed to continue. This quotation should be – Can I be protected from hon. Aggrey Awori?

THE SPEAKER: I am watching him.

MRS BWAMBALE: Yes, please, thank you. He was challenging the quotation which is well entrenched in the report, which I could lay on the Table, entitled, “The report of the Commission of Inquiry, Constitutional Review.” If hon. Aggrey Awori did not read it, I would like to donate mine so that he can go and read it. 

My point is that, the people of Kasese are not interested in having term limits for the NRM government and for its leadership. They have done it to me that since 1989, they have not put any term limit on me and that is what gave me an opportunity to represent this country in the Pan African Parliament. I would not like any other aspiring leaders in this country to be limited. Let the limitation come through elections, so that if the people of Uganda, after five or so years, feel that they want you to be removed, there is a mechanism for that. 

Honourable members, this parliament has been empowered, and I think this provision is going to be retained, to impeach a president. So why are we worried? Instead, we should strengthen the rules that deal with impeaching a president,  censoring ministers, and laws that are so weak that voters are manipulated, instead of focusing on an individual.  In my opinion, Mr Speaker, I think the onus should lie on having a strong parliament. This is the point I have made.

Empowering the people and on having commitment by the leaders to enforce and put in place institutions –(Interruption)

CAPT. BASALIZA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Kibanzanga to call Kasese on that phone when hon. Loyce Bwambale is contributing?

THE SPEAKER: What has he said? I did not get you. What was the point?

CAPT. BASALIZA: Mr Speaker is it in order for hon. Kibanzanga to keep calling Kasese while hon. Loyce Bwambala is contributing – can Sergeant-At-Arms find out what is happening?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have to verify the facts before I can rule on that. 

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, honourable member, for drawing hon. Kibanzanga’s attention to my contribution. It is in his interest that the presidential term limit be lifted. He has a stake in this and if he is not aware, I am here to promote his stake. 

Finally, the different political parties are struggling for power. The NRM Party is struggling to retain and sustain the good achievements that were made during the Movement governance. While the other upcoming parties are also struggling for space to compete for Presidency, but we in the NRM Party are saying, let us engage in dialogue. Let us try the political culture that we have established in this country where men, women, people with disability and the youth are also participating; where there is free expression by the Press; where there is decentralisation and equitable distribution of the national cake and national resources. Where there are any differences, let them be postponed to the future. [Mr Lukyamuzi: “While you are sitting on others?”] I therefore support the lifting of the presidential limits. (Applause)

11.20
MRS JULIET RAINER KAFIRE (Kibuku County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good work presented to this Parliament. The amendment before this House is very important. If the honourable members tamper and wrongly make a decision on these amendments, the people out there are watching. I would like to comment on the presidential term limits and the dual citizenship. 

I oppose the lifting of the term limits regardless of who is in power. I believe that Uganda today has capable citizens who can succeed President Museveni. Moreover, Uganda has highly educated and motivated citizens who can run this country regardless of circumstances. 

Mr Speaker what surprises me is that many of us are telling the people out there that His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni has never indicated to this nation that he is interested in the extension. Why do you put your words in his mouth –(Laughter) You think he is not mature enough to decide what he wants? He is capable of asking this nation in time and telling us that he is interested in the extension. I am surprised hon. Mary Karooro has just said she speaks for His Excellency; who are you? (Laughter) 

With regard to dual citizenship, many of our daughters and sons ran out of this country in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. To get back these people who eventually got the citizenships of other countries, I would support dual citizenship. I support the Committee’s suggestion to let the next Parliament look into it in details. I ask my fellow colleagues to be careful. 

Let us look at our country as a team. Do not consider your individual interests for the next position. Let us look at the citizens of this country. Some of us would like to be seen to be performing in this House. However, are you performing for the good of this country? Are you performing to get this country in the right direction? Are you really looking at the peasants? Finally, I urge you all not to open up. Thank you very much.

11.27
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me an opportunity to contribute to these amendments. The people of Uganda jubilated when one of their leaders was toppled. 

No sooner had they jubilated than they started moaning the activities of a bad leader.  History repeats itself; in 1971, Obote was overthrown, people jubilated; in 1979, Amin was overthrown, people jubilated; from 1986 when Lutwa was overthrown the people of Uganda jubilated including Pallisa when His Excellency Museveni came into power. 

Since 1986, the people of Uganda have seen the transformation because of good policies, which have been formulated and implemented. What do the people of Uganda want?  I am even happy to present in this House after the honourable Member of Parliament from Kibuku has presented her views. 

 The voting pattern in Pallisa district is very clear. In the last elections, Kibuku County was number one in the votes His Excellency got, followed by Budaka, Butebo and finally my constituency.  This is an indication to this House that Pallisa people support the Government programmes and have no problem with the lifting of term limits.

Some Ugandans are opposed to opening of term limits.  I am going to focus on the demerits of term limits. Term limits create massive tendencies of leaders to exploit the economy and acquire wealth through corruption when their term is ending. 

Mr Speaker, the term limits make the government programmes move sluggishly because when a new leader comes, it takes him a long time to be acquainted with the demands of the new office.  When I talked about the White Paper, hon. Mallinga interrupted me on point of order. Hardly two weeks passed, the same hon. Mallinga surrendered to the Movement. That was an indication that what I presented in the White Paper was the truth and good for the people of Pallisa district. 

I support the constitutionalising of the office of the Prime Minister. I urge the members to clearly state the role of the office of the Prime Minister so that we do not put the office in place without specific terms of reference.

I support the amendment to centralise the appointment of the Chief Administrative Officer. A well performing Chief Administrative Officer is not liked by District Councillors. Wherever you find the Chief Administrative Officers unpopular that means he is principled and genuinely accountable to the programmes in that district. It will also enable the Chief Administrative Officers to be promoted to higher ranks. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of a national language, most people suggested that it is not urgent issue. I urge the members of this House to take the issue of official language as a matter of urgency. This will facilitate economic and political integration. Since our entire sister countries use Kiswahili to communicate; in Uganda, we should also adopt Kiswahili as the second official language to help us communicate with our neighbouring countries in East Africa.  

The people of Africa are moving away from the term limits. It is only yesterday when the Parliament of Chad lifted the presidential term limits. They considered the transformation, qualities of a good leader and power given to the people of Uganda to vote for the leader of their choice.  

In 1996, the people of Pallisa County voted against the President and voted overwhelmingly for Ssemogerere. This is a sign that Ugandans can vote for a leader of their choice and therefore, I urge the members of this House to open up the term limits so that we provide continuity, testify and consolidate the rural transformation of our people. 

People have forgotten what transpired in Uganda in 1980.  There was a lot of merry making and singing of party slogans. These brought Uganda to a standstill. There was no rural development in the countryside; now the Movement has moved from merry making,from party slogans and we are now undergoing structural development and economic transformation. Therefore, I urge the Members of Parliament to support the opening of term limits, the constitutionalising of the Prime Minister’s Office, and the adoption of Swahili as the official language. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR EKANYA:  Mr Speaker, hon. Opange stated that the people of Chad voted for lifting of term limits. Theirs was through a referendum, not Parliament. So for purposes of Hansard, the fact should be corrected.

11.34
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the Committee for the reports they made to this House about constitutional amendments.  I am going to deal with three issues; the most popular one, Article 105(2), voting for President, Members of Parliament and Local Government Councils on the same day and then Kampala City as Capital of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that the important debate of lifting presidential term limits has not received the treatment it deserves, simply because it has been overshadowed by the person of Yoweri Museveni, other than the principal.  Those who are opposed to lifting term limits are basing it on the individual. The arguments made here all focus on an individual, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. We are not even sure whether he is interested since he is tightlipped about the matter. We have not considered the merits and the demerits.

He has not made his position very clear on this matter. The back of all my minds, all of us have Museveni. We know that if we open up, Museveni will come back; if we do not open up Museveni will not come back. This has been the case with our voters in the villages. 

My people in Kiboga would like Museveni to continue. He is their man, they fought with him, they know him and he knows them personally. What else do you want in Kiboga?  Therefore, when we asked them, “What do you think about the term limits?” they said, “If Museveni is there, what problem do we have? Let him continue. Let him manage the transition.” But when you ask them, “Should we open up for a person like Obote?” they say, “For Obote, no.”

In my opinion, the most important thing is who should be given the power to change leaders. Should it be a provision in the Constitution or should it be the voters? If it is the voters, what does the Constitution say? It says that the people have the power to change their leaders. These people are the voters in a general election or in a referendum, provided those elections are free and fair. This Parliament is obliged to make a provision for a free and fair process for the voters.

This Parliament can enact laws to ensure that the elections are free and fair, so that our people can exercise their power to choose their leaders. I am convinced, Mr Speaker, that this Parliament is empowered to do that. There are so many things, which have changed since the making of the Constitution.  

The Constitution does not allow the President to sit here in Parliament and that was a very important matter. The Constitution does not allow the President to dissolve Parliament and yet Parliament can censure the President together with his Cabinet.  The process of the elections also ensures that the elections can be free and fair. This violence, which characterises our elections, can be eliminated by a proper legislation.  Commercialisation of politics can also be avoided.  

Therefore, if we put all these laws in order and empower our people, provide them with civic education, then there is no need to put a provision in the Constitution limiting terms because the people will exercise their power to choose the type of leaders they want.

Mr Speaker, for the people I represent, lifting term limits is not a problem. Let us lift term limits and make sure Parliament puts measures in place to ensure that we have free and fair elections. This will enable the voters to make their right choice.  

I have a problem with the elections of the President, Members of Parliament, and of local government councils on the same day. This is because if we carry out local government council elections after we have opened term limits, I envisage a situation where villages will be swarmed with people campaigning. Think of fifty or so parties fielding councillors, chairmen of districts, chairmen of LC III, MPs, Presidents, 52 of them or 56 all going in! Even the Electoral Commission would be overwhelmed. 

Therefore, it is better if Presidential and Parliamentary elections are held the same day, and local government councils are elected separately, on a different day.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, it is good that Kampala be administered directly by the Central Government, but I hope the principles of democracy will be adhered to. I have heard people say that the Government will just handpick leaders in the Capital City to administer Kampala. I suggest that the principles of democracy should apply when Kampala is taken over by the Central Government.  I thank you.

11.45
MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report, which was very good and had several issues. I want to zero on only one and I will take only five minutes. 

Lifting term limits is where the fundamentals of our democracy lie. The rest are just procedures, that we can easily deal with. 

I want to appeal to Mr Speaker and honourable members not to break the promise. We should not assist someone to break the promise.  We are not only dealing with the constitutional provision of term limits, but also with helping an individual to break the several promises that we made at one time. (Interruption) Mr Speaker, I need protection from my yellow colleagues. 

When we waged the liberation struggle in 1981, we made several promises. That is why hon. Jim Muhwezi is interested in my contribution. Some of the promises, we have honoured, others we have flouted.  The significant promise that has remained is this one.  

During President Museveni’s swearing-in ceremony after the 1996 elections, he said, “We are here for only four years, after which we shall hand over government to a free and fairly elected civilian government.” We have flouted the promise.  

During the 2001 elections, he promised the people of Uganda that that was his last term. I want us to help President Museveni – [An. Hon. Member: “Information.”]- I have all the information about this kisanja business so I do not need any - to respect this promise because it is not good in the management of society for leaders to continue breaking their promises. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, we are debating a bill. The debate should be on the bill.  This is not a day for nominations. (Applause) We are not doing a nomination exercise. You are not the only one doing this. Let us deal with the principle of the bill. Please do not turn this into a nomination exercise.  

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  However, as the previous presenter said, the timing of this term limit is pushing us so much to the corner that we cannot separate the nomination and the incumbent. I do not know who brought this at this particular moment.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, my honourable colleague said, “The people of Kasese have said.”  Well, “the people are saying,” but as a leader, you should give what is right for the country, for the people of Busongora South, the people of Kasese and the people of Uganda. Concerning the lifting of term limits, if tradition and practice cannot tame the dangerous ambitions of individuals then the written code of conduct is the only solution.  

Since independence, the tradition and practice of our party politics have not given us an opportunity to see a person occupying the Presidential seat leave office peacefully.  What does this mean?  It is not yet our practice, it is not yet our tradition, it is not yet our culture and men and women in this country will respect that.  Therefore, what we need now is to limit these Presidents by law so that one time the people of Uganda may have an opportunity to see a president handing over the office without being forced.

I have heard several of my colleagues in this House say that it is an abuse of fundamental human rights for a constitution to be made to limit individuals. I am not a lawyer, but at least I know that the law is about limiting individuals; limiting people’s freedom if they are using it to threatening the rights of others.  

I should advise my honourable colleagues to put another limitation on age, to show you that the issue of limits is very important. Deal with the age now, because as you lift this limitation, you will find the limitation of the age so that in the near future, you do not come back to disturb this Parliament and the country about the Constitution infringing on some of your people’s rights.  I would rather advise you that you do it for the last time. [Hon. members: ”Information”] Honourable members, I am well informed about Kisanja, do not waste your time.  Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you see a promise is a promise. We should keep our promises. You promised you would use only five minutes. (Applause)

MR MBALIBULHA: As I conclude, Mr Speaker, so that I do not break my promise, I have some few seconds to go.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR MBALIBULHA: Mr Speaker, limitations have been used as a yardstick so that when one clamours to change those limitations in the Constitution, it is the only time you know that he is obsessed by power and his time is up.  I thank you very much, for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.54
MRS ANIFA KAWOYA (Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to add my voice to my colleagues’ to thank the Committee for their good report. I will simply emphasise honourable Loyce Bwambale’s presentation.  The women of this country are not prepared to sit and watch people threatening their political rights to participate in their country’s political decisions. 

Many of my colleagues who are opposed to lifting term limits have used threatening language. They assume they have the right to threaten others, and I want to assure you that the women of this country under the able leadership of the Women Members of Parliament in this country, are not going to sit down and watch these things happening.  

This Bill has got about 93 clauses, but we are faced with one important clause, that is Article 105(2), lifting of term limits.  There are two pertinent questions: whether amending this Article 105(2) tantamounts to abrogation of the Constitution, to unconstitutionalism, chaos, havoc and manipulation as my colleague has said. 

 Another pertinent question is whether the current Constitution has been tested or not. To that I have only this to say: the nature of a constitution depends on the character of the country for which this constitution is intended.  Whose purpose it serves and with what success, depends on its flexibility to allow positive changes. And we who participated in its making in 1995 were aware that it has to be flexible.  It is a flexible, and an all-inclusive constitution, which has women, the youth, the disabled and everybody else on board. That is why I am standing here to defend it.  

We are not here to take away the Constitution; we are here to defend it and make improvement on it.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to refer to our Constitution, Article 3(2).  I have listened very attentively to all the speakers who caught your eye, and what has been going on throughout the speeches, especially among those who are opposing the haphazard amendment of the Constitution provision. They emphasize that we must be careful when amending the Constitution.  

The impression I get from hon. Kawoya is in one way a threat to those who have reasons for desisting the amendment.  In light of that and what the Constitution says, and I would like to read this provision verbatim, “Any person who singly or in concert with others, by any violent or other unlawful means, suspends, overthrows, abrogates or amends...” meaning if you amend the Constitution haphazardly, you have a case to answer.  In light of that provision and assertion, is the honourable member in order to make us believe that those who are opposed to a haphazard amendment of the Constitution are treasonable?  

We have a right to criticise the provision or any attempt, which endeavours to amend the Constitution haphazardly, and it is exactly what we have been doing.  Is she in order to create that impression, threatening us, and stopping us from interacting with the process as citizens of Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: First of all, I do not know whether what we are doing is being done haphazardly.  Under the Chair of the Speaker, I do not think we can allow the process to be done haphazardly.  But I think her case was that those who want to use violence when a process has been constitutionally done would be resisted.  So I see nothing out of order in making that statement.

MRS KAWOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the good ruling; and I wish to refer my colleague, hon. Lukyamuzi, to chapter one of the Constitution, Article 3(1), “Defence of the Constitution,” and I am saying that the women of this country are prepared to defend this Constitution.

Those who participated in the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution were aware of the following: that the Constitution they were putting in place would move with the times and by the times; and that the Constitution would take into consideration its citizens’ needs and aspirations.  

Mr Speaker, those who were in the Constitution making were aware that a good constitution works towards the views of the majority, and it should satisfy and take care of the minority divergent views.

The majority of my colleagues have said Article 1 gives guarantee of sovereignty to the people of this country, which is very important; and the sovereignty is that they have the right to participate in the public affairs of their country.  Hence retaining Article 105(2) is denying the rights of the people to participate in their affairs.  

Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees equality before and under the law in spheres of political life and outlaws political discrimination.  My honourable colleague, hon. Kibanzanga, said that Article 105(2) is not discriminatory.  But it is discriminatory in that all political offices are free. 

Hon. Bwambale Loyce said that people have their right to choose, to elect and bring into power those they want to lead them.  If the electorate has got the right, they are capable of putting into place the right political leaders from the lower levels up to Parliament.  Why is it that my colleagues think these people do not have the right to elect, to put in place a President of their choice whom they want according to the rights that have been given to them by the Constitution?

Mr Speaker, I strongly oppose retention of term limits, and this is strongly opposed by all the Members of Parliament from Sembabule District.  As a Woman District representative, I am here to state that the people of Sembabule, represented by hon. Sam Kutesa, hon. Ssekikubo Theodore, and me Kawoya Anifa say that we should ensure that term limits are done away with, because they are discriminatory, limit people’s sovereignty, and political rights, and limit people’s ability to participate in their affairs.  

Mr Speaker, the whole thing is amorphous; it has no meaning or no sense.  

As I conclude, the late Mzee Nyerere said that those who think that living under Obote as being in a frying pan, should know that living under Amin is be in the fire. So I also wish to say that those who think that living under the good leadership of Yoweri Kaguta Museveni is being in a frying pan, those anticipating to live under any untested leader will be in fire.  I thank you.

12.05
MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the life of any Parliament there is always one or two very important historical tasks and I believe that this task of amending the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is history. So, we must all stand up to be counted. In the book of Revelation chapter 3:16, John, writing to the Church in Laodicea says, “So, because you are lukewarm - neither hot nor cold – I am about to spit you out of my mouth.” In this amendment of the Constitution we must all participate in a hot manner, we must not be lukewarm, we must not be indifferent otherwise the people of Uganda should spit us out. 

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 was written and promulgated by the people of Uganda. I would like to quote verbatim from the preamble and it says:

“We the people of Uganda … exercising our sovereign and inalienable right to determine the form of governance of our country, and having fully participated in the Constitution making process;

Noting that a Constituent Assembly was established to represent us and to debate the Draft Constitution prepared by the Uganda Constitutional Commission (which was headed by hon. Justice Odoki) and to adopt and enact a Constitution for Uganda;

Do hereby, in and through this Constituent Assembly solemnly adopt, enact and give to ourselves and our posterity, this Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, this 22nd day of September, in the year 1995.”

The people of Uganda participated and they were consulted. They participated through the Constituent Assembly delegates and they had to report what the people wanted to pass as a Constitution. 

In the year 2001 Prof. Ssempebwa again went to the people, they were consulted and their views were given back to us here. The Government, having read the views of the people, brought out a White Paper and with this White Paper we again consulted our people. They gave their views and those views were debated here and were reported in this Parliament. I challenge anybody who is going to stand against the wish of the people who made this Constitution and now wish to amend it; let him say that he is going to stand against the wish of the people and I can only say that he is lukewarm and he should be spitted out by the people of Uganda. The people have made their views known and we are reporting and we are debating them and we have to agree to that. If the people of Uganda have said that we lift the term limits, do it. The merits and demerits have been given to us and that is why we have to go and vote knowing what the people have said. 

We shall vote knowing what the people of Uganda want, what the future of Uganda is, what is happening in the region and what is happening in Africa. So, to say that people who were in the CA are now eating their vomit is tantamount to saying that the people of Uganda who made the 1995 constitution are eating their vomit, which is a very big insult to the people of Uganda, and whoever says that should be vomited out by the people of Uganda. 

Those who are talking about violence, in case any position that is stood for by the people of Uganda that they would go into violence, they should be vomited out. Mr Speaker, we stand here to represent the people of Uganda and we must represent them effectively and efficiently as we do so, but not to go to violence because a certain position has been agreed to by the representatives of the people of Uganda. If it be “majoritalism”, let it be after all that is what democracy is. But to say because the majority has decided on a particular position, therefore, you should resist it is –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, you are running out of time.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the second thing that I would like to talk about is on the issue of Swahili, which is being proposed to be the second national and official language of Uganda. I think it is right and fitting that we should pass it now. The East African states of Kenya and Tanzania already have Swahili as their official and national language and we are going into the political federation of Eastern Africa and it is only right and fitting that Uganda should also go into that. 

In the Pan African Parliament the fifth official language is Swahili. So, the African continent has already also gone ahead to adopt Swahili as an official language of the African continent. 

My point No. 3 is on the issue of dual citizenship. The people of Uganda, ten years down the road, would like to see that the people in the Diaspora who are Ugandans can enjoy the benefit of dual citizenship. Every year from the remittances of Ugandans in the Diaspora we get over US $600 million, and this is a very big benefit to the economy of Uganda. So, it is only right and fitting that we amend this particular part of the Constitution and we accept dual citizenship. 

Finally, on the issue of holding elections for three offices on the same day: presidential, parliamentary and the Local Council V, I do support it and my people do support it too. However, I would like to get a clarification from the committee chairman as far as Article 103(3) is concerned, where it says that the election of the president shall be held during the first 30 days of the last 90 days before the expiry of the term of the president. That means the new president will only be sworn in after two months. In this particular case this will be in May 2006. 

If that is the case, what happens to the Members of Parliament who would have been elected in March and some of them who would have lost and the new ones who would have come in, how would we handle that particular situation? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.12
MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this important and historic debate on the amendment of our Constitution. I was privileged to have been a Member of the Constituent Assembly and I know our Constitution very well. I would like to speak as a historical Member of the National Resistance Movement –(Applause)- since many people have stood up to speak as historicals. I hope my credentials are not doubted - I can speak authoritatively. 

This Constitution needed amendment for various reasons. There are many areas like federo, dual citizenship, national language - Swahili as some here have said - and so many other areas that needed amendment. Therefore, I would like to pick out a few of them since I do not have a lot of time. 

Let me begin with dual citizenship. I support dual citizenship for Uganda because out of the history of this country, our people found themselves in foreign lands where they acquired citizenship. But we should not deny them the right to have or to retain their citizenship in the country of their birth. There are also people who are living in Uganda and many of them are investing heavily in Uganda. If it is their wish to become citizens of this country and to participate fully in this country, they should also be allowed to do so. 

The second point I want to talk about is the issue of regional tier. I fully support regional tier especially for cultural considerations. I am fully convinced that there are people in this country who cherish their cultural identity and they should be allowed to live together, to live in a particular administrative and geographical area. So, I support regional tier. 

I do not believe that unity cannot exist where there is particular cultural identification. The case in point is Buganda. We know that the Baganda have consistently and continuously demanded to live together and we should allow them to do so. I, therefore, support the regional tier, which fully allows them to remain together and at the same time allows unity of Uganda. 

I would like to say, however, that where there is a regional tier and some of the facilities available like hospitals, schools and so on, those districts that are not in the tier should be given the same facilities, if the tier is going to affect them. 

I have heard of many people organising a tier also. My view is that we should not hurry. We should take our time to see how it is working elsewhere and if it is in our interest we should also take it up. I do not think it is a fundamental problem.

I would like to address the issue of lifting the term limits, which is the topical issue. As I said, I was in the Constituent Assembly and I know we debated this point. I have to mention that unfortunately most of these constitutional provisions were based on what was prevailing at the time. That is why it has become quickly necessary to amend it. In fact some of us said that we should make a Constitution for all times, but we made a Constitution for only that time; people are now attempting to amend the Constitution for today, which is a big mistake. We should amend the Constitution to provide for us today and for generations to come.

Lifting of the presidential term limit; I have heard debates for and against this and I am of the opinion that if you limit the presidents’ terms, you are actually legislating in order to get rid of a good president, yes -(Applause)- because a bad president will be voted out of office even during his first term. In fact he can even be impeached by Parliament if he is bad. But a good one, even if the people want that person to continue, the Constitution may bind him to leave -(Mr Lukyamuzi rose _)- my time is short hon. Lukyamuzi. 

I know also that because we were operating under a broad based system of Movement, it played a lot on our minds. It influenced the provision on the term limits and the situation over time. We are now saying that we should open up the political space and allow other political organisations to compete with the Movement. If that is the case, then we should revisit Article 105 to allow these other people who may want a candidate, a person who has already served as a president to do so. But also it will allow any person who wants to participate in spite of having not served as a president before, since we are in a new dispensation. 

I, therefore, like the people of Rujumbura, support the lifting of the presidential term limits. (Applause) This is because it is fair to all, it is fair to a president who has served before to stand, it is fair because it allows that person if he or she wishes to stand, but it is also fair for even those who do not want him to stop him through elections. 

What is very important and what my friends on the opposition should concentrate on is to make sure that there are free and fair elections, but not to say that a president who has served should not stand again. That is not fair. As I said, it discriminates a person and the Constitution should not be discriminative. We should concentrate on having free and fair elections. So long as we have that then everybody can be treated fairly. 

The arguments all the opposition members give are the things they should say during the campaigns to convince more people not to support the President, if he stands. That is why I would like to talk about a kisanja, what has become kisanja. Since I am a historical let me talk about it. 

I know the President has not said he wants to stand. The kisanja was a creation of the opposition. We are lifting term limits for all presidents of all time. That is what we were saying. They turned around and said, “You are lifting them for this President”. And the people picked on that and said, “Actually, come to think of it, we want this President”. One day I was quoted to have said that the President is sweet, by the press. I was misquoted. I was not talking about the taste of the President but I want to go on record and explain what I said then. 

I gave an example. When we are drinking our local brew in a pot, which is opaque because the people of Uganda have seen many bad Presidents and have seen one very good President, it is like when you are drinking in that pot and you are coming to the residue, then you shift the straw looking for juice. When you get where it is you do not shift it. You stay there and drink –(Laughter)- until you exhaust it. If you move you can look for the juice again and you do not find it. 

That is what I meant and I want to go on record that the people of Uganda are genuinely right to think twice. If there is an opportunity to keep this President, I can tell you the people are genuine in demanding that President Museveni continues ruling. That is the truth -(Interjection)- when they change their mind they will do so through free and fair elections. So, let us open up and allow the people to exercise their rights.  

I want to express my unhappiness at some of development partners, that is, all foreigners who attempt to unfairly prejudge our commitment to the liberation of our country. We are on record to have fought a liberation war where we paid through toil, sweat and blood. We should not be doubted by anybody on whether we mean well for this country. We mean well, we are on record, and our history tells it all. 

We should also know that our friends have been bosom friends with countries where democracy was never an issue in their dealings, our example is our neighbour here in Congo, where Mobutu (may his soul rest in peace) for over 40 years ruled without any form of elections, and they were the best of friends. 

My humble request is that so long as we are operating within the confines of our laws of Uganda, nobody should doubt our commitment. The people of Uganda who have invested heavily in the liberation of their country ought to have the freedom and the right to determine their destiny. I, therefore, think that this Parliament should allow the people of Uganda to decide what they want, as the Constitution says. They have the power and this Parliament should not get in their way.  

I want to conclude by talking about people who are sounding violence; it is easier said than done. As someone who has fought a war, do not - what did Church Hill say? He said, “To jaw-jaw is always better than to war-war.” We are talking here but what we say here can actually cause violence around the country. So, let us be careful with what we say here. 

I want to assure you that if violence comes, the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces is there and we are there. You remember I am retired but not tired and if you raise it, I think we are more experienced to deal with you; so be careful. This is a joke, but I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity.

12.30
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important motion. The Constitution history of our country is almost as turbulent as its politics. 

All of us in this House are aware that nearly every regime since independence has been writing its own Constitution. When the colonialists were leaving they left us a Constitution. By 1967 we had changed that Constitution into what become the pigeonhole Constitution. In 1972 when Amin took charge, he threw away the 1967 Constitution and ruled Uganda by decree. When Obote returned in 1980 he reinstated the 1967 Constitution and by 1995 we had written a Constitution. Ten years down the road we are undergoing a process of changing this Constitution. To me there are about three issues that I would like to raise, in the interest of time.

First is the issue of giving Kampala a special status. Mr Speaker, we Members of Parliament of Kampala welcome this development but would like to urge government that if Kampala is attaining a special status and is getting under the administration of the central government, we must make a framework that is going to make Kampala to be like other metropolitans. We will not accept a condition where Kampala simply becomes another department under the Office of the President. If Kampala is attaining special status, it must be in tandem with the democratic trends in the country and that democracy will ensue and the leadership of Kampala will be elected. 

Contributing on the most controversial amendment in this whole Bill, Article 105(2), I was to expressly state that the people I represent in this Parliament have actually threatened me with court action if I come to this Parliament and I support the lifting of term limits. I will face the wrath of the people of Makindye East constituency. I am not talking under fear but I am talking in light of their concerns and I am also talking in light of what I believe in –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, under the Privileges Act you are protected so that would be a misconceived suit against you. 

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the debate on lifting the term limits ever since it begun. I have heard the overzealous yellow girls and boys vehemently defending the lifting of term limits. I have also heard illustrious sons of Uganda vehemently opposing the lifting of term limits. I have concluded that the condition in the Movement, parties, and in this Parliament is just one, fear of the unknown.  

The fact is that President Museveni, silently and even publicly before, went on record in his manifesto and in many other meetings and promised that this was his last term and he has nothing to do with another term in office. Along the way we have seen a change of heart. What was the cause of the change of heart? That is the crux of the debate. We must be honest. We must be genuine. I have listened to the arguments for and I want to give the arguments against lifting term limits.  

The first argument is that this country cannot afford to undo the achievements of the Constituent Assembly. The Constituent Assembly made tremendous strides towards: separating power, and limiting and neutralising the excesses of the person holding the office of the President.

You and I know that President Museveni has been exceptional, he has been different. When you compare him with Obote, he is a different breed; when we compare him with Idd Amin he is a different breed. But he has not been different out of his own volition. He has been moderated by our country’s history. Given our country’s history, there is no way President Museveni would have come and continued with the excesses of the previous regimes.  

Mr Speaker, you are also aware that the President has been moderated by the 1995 Constitution. There were very good safeguards in the 1995 Constitution that could actually clip the wings of anybody in the Office of the President. If this Parliament proceeded with removing term limits we would be undoing the tremendous work and achievements of the 1995 Constitution. 

Let me advance the second reason. I have heard my historical brother, hon. Jim Muhwezi and many other members on the Front Bench arguing that President Museveni is the best president we have had. That is true. I do not dispute that. But I want to tell you that leaders are created by circumstances. Where was this good Museveni in 1980? Have you all forgotten? I was not even mature, I was still a toddler in 1980 when President Museveni stood against hon. Sam Kutesa in Nyabushozi, Rwakitura. What happened then? The people of Nyabushozi in Rwakitura rejected him. They said, “You are unfit, actually Sam Kutesa is better than you”. 

The same Museveni stood with Obote and Ssemogerere in 1980 and the people of Uganda preferred Dr Ssemogerere to Mr Museveni –(Interjection)– yes, in 1980 because the election was rigged but the circumstances later created this very good leader that we have now. 

I want us to have confidence. Let the people of Uganda to have confidence. I want you members of the Movement to have confidence that this country can produce another Museveni. Museveni is not the first nor will he be the last good leader we can have. We can have many more good leaders. If hon. Muhwezi and Adolf Mwesige are not confident, I believe that other parties have got capacity to create another leader. If you all fail, Michael Mabikke will come in and I think he will act.  

What we should be discussing now is not the lifting of term limits but rather how we can put guarantees in the Constitution that will ensure that our leaders can have a peaceful retirement. This is what we must be discussing. We should be creating and building institutions and we should be testing constitutionalism. I will shudder very much if at the end of the day I come out of this Parliament and be branded the Mabikke who was in ekisanja Parliament.

What is the impression we have created in Uganda and outside Uganda? I have had many opportunities to travel. I have travelled to the neighbouring countries, to Europe and America quite often. But what is the impression that people have about Uganda? What impression do non-Ugandans have about Ugandans, particularly on the issue of term limits? Yes, this is your Uganda but I think Uganda is not an Island, which is why we cannot fully raise all the revenue that we require to facilitate our budget. That is why we keep running to other countries to help us. We are living in a global village, and what is the impression we are creating?  

The Parliament of Malawi was faced with a similar situation but they got out of it. They said, “Mr President, you have done a good job, thank you very much, but I think Malawi is bigger than you”. They rejected -(Interruption)- I don’t accept any information. I am a very a well-informed Member of Parliament, I am a student of politics and law. I have got lots of information. I don’t require any information on this particular subject.  

MR ERESU: I am your teacher; can I give you information?

MR MABIKKE: No, hon. Eresu, you are my former teacher in Kisubi but I do not need your information at this moment in time. I am summarising. In Malawi the Parliament rejected this movement; in Zambia the Parliament rejected it; and in Kenya it happened. I would like President Museveni to exit the stage and stand shoulder to shoulder with Presidents Arap Moi and Mandela plus other eminent and illustrious African leaders. But if we do not guide the President, if this Parliament cannot see that what is at stake in future is bigger than the interests of individuals, then he cannot realise that however big a tree is it can never be bigger than a forest.  I think that we are doing a great disservice to this nation.  

Lastly –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: A new point? No.

MR MABIKKE: Yes, lastly, and I am not breaking the promise as I want to end with this, what is the impression that the Ugandan population has of Ugandan politicians? They say that Ugandan politicians speak with both sides of their mouths; that Ugandan politicians never speak the truth. That when a Ugandan politician says “a” he means “b”. President Museveni made a promise; he wrote in his manifesto that he is not standing again. If this Parliament goes ahead and legislates for the lifting of term limits, you will be further discrediting the entire political class before the populations, that you are not dependable, are unreliable and liars.

I want to wind up by urging Parliament, by begging you honourable members; I can even go on my knees. Yes, I, Michael Mabikke, Member of Parliament for Makindye East, I want to urge that we should not attempt to lift term limits. We should not attempt to tamper with Article 105(2) of the Constitution of Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome pupils and teachers from Namungalwe Primary School, Kigulu North constituency, Iganga District. Unfortunately the member is not here but you are welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

12.45
MRS MARY OKURUT (Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will start with the words of English people. They say, “It is only fools and dead people who do not change their minds.” A fool does not have much to change anyway and dead people do not talk. So when people talk of promises and broken promises, we are saying it is only fools and dead people who do not change their mind. Can I be protected from my honourable brother who has been threatening war? I have not mentioned him.

Having said that, I am urging hon. Members of this House to give direction to this country, to give a message of peace. It is a tragedy when people get up and start threatening violence and it is on record that, “if the Article 105(2) is lifted, we shall take up arms,” they state with pride. How can you state with pride a tragedy? “Oh! If 105(2) is lifted, there will be a coup.” Some people are asking that, “Is there going to be a coup on Tuesday?” We tell them, “No, rest assured. We have our UPDF full back on, there will be no coup”. So, we should be guiding this nation. People who are talking of violence and threatening violence; saying there is going to be another war of liberation, there was only one war of liberation. 

For us Christians we know and believe that Jesus was crucified only once. He will not be crucified again when he comes back. The second coming will not be about crucifixion; the second coming is when he has come to take us home. So there was only one war of liberation and there will never be another one. That is daydreaming -(Interruptions)- I never said that Museveni is Jesus. Do not put words in my mouth. But it is true that he is a messiah. Messiah means somebody who delivers and he delivered this country from so many things. (Applause)

You see we have a problem of people misquoting us. I want somebody to stand up and say when President Museveni ever said that he is the only Ugandan with the vision for this country. I was his press secretary when he was supposed to have said it, but he never. He only challenged people and said, “What is their vision? Bring your vision.” Then people stood up and said, “Oh! He has said he is the only one with the vision”. He has never said so. Many people have visions but we are saying if you can allow for instance my brother hon. Aggrey Awori to stand unfettered, unchained for so many times, why should you tie the hands of the President? And he is standing again if he so wishes. This time I will contribute to his helicopter. So why should you tie the hands of the President? That is the major question. 

If people were talking about history, if you had an Idd Amin, would he have respected term limits? That is the joke of the year, he would not have. He would have gone on ruling. So to say that term limits are for bad leaders is a fallacy. 

What is democracy? I want to ask my brothers and sisters who stand up and threaten violence, what is democracy? In the very unlikely event that they took over power, what kind of democracy would they give us? If you can stand here where in the full view of everybody we are being listened to on radio –(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)- my brother, hon. Lukyamuzi, you know I like your spirit but I do not have time for that information, you will give it to me later. 

If we can stand here and threaten violence when we are doing everything democratically in this Parliament, when we are voting democratically, there is a show of hands, there is everything, then you stand here and say, “We shall bring out guns if this Article is lifted,” then you have no tolerance! Where would this country be? Where would we end –[Mr Mabikke: “Information”]- I will appear to be very unfair. I have refused hon. Lukyamuzi so how can I allow you, my former student? Mr Speaker, I am going to keep within time.

The district women Members of Parliament are the mini presidents in the districts. That goes without saying because we hold a large constituency so when we talk we talk with authority. The people of Bushenyi have said that they want Article 105 amended; it was not cast in stone. There are people who say that for instance it should not have been touched. 

I stood for the Constituent Assembly, I did not go through; I am not like those people who go on whining. If you are defeated, get up and walk. Ever since I was defeated in CA, I kept on climbing the ladder of success. So, that Article was not cast in stone and when people say that there are no other capable Ugandans to rule, we have never said that. We are there and we are in the queue but we are saying the time has not yet come.  

What I am imploring us to do, I am imploring everybody in all the parties, please look at your constitutions. The NRM constitution is very democratic. It tells us how we are going to change our leaders and that is what we should all do. As long as you have got democracy in your own party then there is no problem. We shall go to elections.  

I want to end with a Kinyankole saying. Some of our sayings are so traditional and sometimes people think they are vulgar, but they are very fundamental and profound. The Banyankole say that a woman who does not know her lifeline –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you say it in Kinyankole? 

MRS OKURUT: The Banyankole say, “Otamanya kimutungire, eyiba agikwatisa omukono gumwe.”  I will translate it into English: “A woman who does not know her lifeline holds her husband’s member with one hand.” This is a symbol; it really -[Mr Eresu: “Say it in Ateso.”] Can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: You are very much protected.

MRS OKURUT: Mr Speaker, this does not just mean what it says, it means that if you do not know who is in charge; you do not know the fountain of the stability in your home. It goes either way, even for the woman; you do not know who is bringing food; the woman is also bringing food. The late Julius Nyerere came here and said, “If Ugandans are bored with stability –(Mr Awori rose_)- no, no, no – okay, Mr Awori.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow her to finish because it is going to take more time to listen to you?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, is my honourable colleague allowed to use obscene language in the august House?

THE SPEAKER: First of all, she had explained that some people misunderstand it as being obscene and I granted her leave to say so. Proceed.

MRS OKURUT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. The obscenity is in my honourable brother’s mind, not in the saying.  

I said the late President Nyerere said, “If Ugandans are bored with stability under the Movement Government, then let them start opting for war.” We are not bored with stability, we shall go to the people and the people will speak. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

12.57
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question that keeps coming in my mind is, “What propelled the Constituent Assembly to first of all make that Constitution and exactly put in such Articles as 105(2)?” 

We are not the first and last Members of Parliament to sit in this building to legislate for this country. But there are those who were here in the 1960s and almost acted like we are doing now, oblivious to the fact that whatever they were trying to make would have dire consequences for this country. The late Basil Bataringaya (RIP), when he was making one of the draconian laws on this Floor of Parliament was warned and when it came to pass, when the same law he made was dragging him, he went crying. When you are making such laws in this Parliament –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: The honourable member has suggested that the late Basil Bataringaya came here in this august House and made a law. First of all, not a single person can make a law. 

Secondly, he said the same law was used to murder him –(Interjection)- yes, he says he suffered by the same law; I was listening. The honourable member is rewriting history. Fortunately, some of us were alive then and we know how Basil Bataringaya was grossly killed outside any law of this country. Is the honourable member in order to mislead this House and rewrite history and bring disrepute to an otherwise honourable man, the late Basil Bataringaya?

THE SPEAKER: What I see is a question of not recollecting facts and making an error and I think you have given him the correct information. I think he was trying to refer to the Detention Act and Grace Ibingira, and then he mixed up the two. This is a mix up –(Interjections)- yes, and I think those are the facts. 

MR SEBULIBA: Mr Speaker, thank you for your ruling but I would have wished –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: And the information also, because I think you are referring to the Detention Act, which was made by Grace Ibingira as a Minister of Justice and later, the same thing was used against him. But Bataringaya was murdered during Amin’s regime without using that particular law. Those are the facts.

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the information but I have not mentioned anything on murder or whatever but using the same law –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I just assessed your statement as misunderstanding or –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA: I, therefore, oppose the lifting of the term limits because the institutions in place are not going to allow us to have another president fairly elected. Some of us who were here in 2001 have seen what has happened and what has taken place, Mr Speaker. I know that President Museveni has done a good job; he has liberated this country. We know that he has opened up in so many areas but in Luganda we have a saying, “Ajanjaba omulwadde siyamusikira” meaning, that the one who looks after a patient is not the one who becomes heir. 

Everything must have a beginning and an end. The symptoms and signs that are prevailing today will never allow Ugandans have a president who is going to be replaced peacefully. That is why when you look at the preambles behind all the justifications of Article 105(2) in the Odoki Commission’s report and the submissions on the Floor then, in the CA, there is nothing that has changed. In any case the President has been here for almost 20 years. 

Some people are saying that we should not attach this to the President but the writing is on the wall. They are saying, “egaali ekozeko”’ and all other things. When you see a woman who is not pregnant buying dresses and she is alleging, “I am pregnant. I am buying for my baby who is about to come,” do not take that one for granted. Take it with caution –she is buying dresses for herself.  

Whatever we are doing, we are doing it for an individual and this is going to be a recipe for another round of chaos. I am sorry, I warn myself about this because ever since we gained our independence maybe my mind is warped, perverted. We have never had any single chance at any one time to replace a president peacefully. 

You know what happened when Besigye stood, you know what has happened to those people who have tried to oppose the President in this country and even others who have – the Presidents are becoming life presidents. I thought that a time had come when we would be seeing a president parking up his things and handing over power peacefully. But that one is going by the winds. What we are seeing now is preparation for another round of chaos and disorder. 

Members, let us rethink the position we are going to take and the decisions we are going to make today. Whatever we are going to decide on Tuesday, regarding the term limits, I am warning you, if trouble comes in future you are not going to undo it. 

Mr Speaker, you remember the story of the rat? At one time the rats passed a resolution, when the cat was finishing their generation. They came to a resolution that they would put a bell around the cat’s neck such that when it would be approaching they would hear the bell ringing. Everybody was happy but then the question arose, “Who will put the bell around the cat.  What if things go wrong, who is going to tame it?” 

You are talking about the voters, the voters are easily intimidated and you are talking about the institution of the EC. You know what is happening and you know what has happened. I urge members to rethink their decision to forecast further into the future and look at the present signs and symptoms in order to tell the nation whether we can remove a president through what you call free and fair elections when the symptoms are showing the opposite.  

Lastly, on the question of the CAO, may I urge fellow members that we should not even try to tamper with this one? We have been trying to decentralise power; we are trying to devolve power but here you are again concentrating it at the center. You are adding insult to injury by allowing term limits and then drawing power from the people back to the center. Tender boards are already being invited from the districts to the center. 

People are saying the CAOs are being taken to the center because they are corrupt and the policy makers are subduing them. Why don’t we put in place fetters, rules and regulations that can correct the situation rather than bring everything back to the center where corruption is so rampant? 

What are we going to do to the corrupt permanent secretaries or people in higher offices? Are we going to surrender our powers to our former colonial masters because people are corrupt? To me it means that government is going to have a direct hand in the running of the affairs of the districts, which means that they are not going to be independent from the center. Whoever pays the piper calls the tune. That is going to exacerbate the conflict and if anything you have already seen what is happening between the RDCs and the people down there, the policy makers. 

So, if the CAOs are answerable to the Presidency or the central government, the conflict will widen and all the resources will be wasted trying to correct those imbalances. Therefore, if they are corrupt, I still believe if the policy makers are subduing them then we can put fetters to correct that rather than overhauling the whole thing back to where it will not work. 

District chairpersons are going to be paid salaries, which is already overwhelming the Government. The Government is creating more districts, which is an additional load. Therefore, I urge you to look into ways of putting in place and correcting the rules and regulations, which are there and the laws such that the CAOs are left where they are. After all, we are just nurturing a baby that is starting to walk; nothing can work out within ten or 15 years. I was one of the pioneers of decentralisation but you cannot tell me that after ten years you can get results. These are long-term aspects for which you cannot get results in such a short term.

THE SPEAKER: It is time, please, thank you very much.

1.08
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I bring you greetings from the people of Tororo County. They are appealing to Parliament to grant them a district including Tororo Municipality. 

This constitutional amendment process is one of the activities that will go down in history as a challenge to the people of Uganda in this millennium. The issue of election of the President, Members of Parliament and LC V Chairpersons on the same day is not acceptable to some people in Tororo County. They would like to have elections of Members of Parliament and the President the same day, and that is in March. 

There will be confusion because when you can have ten candidates for Members of Parliament, ten for President, and then the Woman Member of Parliament, you will have 30 people plus those vying for the LC V Chairmanship. So, hon. Members of Parliament let us have elections of the central government, Woman Member of Parliament, Member of Parliament and the President the same day and local councils another day. 

Two, the issue of language, sisi tunatoka kwa boda, tunapenda kiswahili. 

The issue of dual citizenship, the Iteso are in Kenya and Uganda. We are asking for dual citizenship.

On the issue of the CAO we are saying that the CAO should be left at the district but we should put in place a law to discipline them.

Mr Speaker, the other issue is about Article 105(2). You are the Speaker of this Parliament and the decisions we are going to take in regard to this Article are quite a challenge. They will determine the integrity of your Office in all the five years, and the way you handled it. You have steered this debate in a very mature way and we are grateful. I would like to appeal to you to take one step further –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Mr Speaker this Parliament elected you Speaker with due diligence and hope and fortunately you have lived up to that. Is it in order for a member to intimidate you that the decisions we are going to make today or in future will put disrepute on your office and performance? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not see how you intimidate the Speaker who just presides over the proceedings and does no vote. I did not take it as an intimidation myself. I leave it as it is.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I respect you and you know it very well. I always consult you and I can neither intimidate you nor have I the capacity or power to do so. 

My request was that as chairperson and Speaker of this House you moderate and I want to request you to take it one step further. You know in this Parliament we have formed positions. There are those who oppose lifting term lifts and those who support it. It seems people are so rigid that we may not arrive at consensus in deciding this issue. And you know it very well that in discussing this same Constitution we are amending the CA and yet most of the Articles were arrived at through consensus. 

I want to appeal to you to find means, use your good office, engage the President, and other leaders of both sides so that we find consensus in concluding this. Because if we do not arrive at consensus, for example when President Museveni one time was asking President Habyarimana, “Please, allow your refugees in Uganda to return”. Habyarimana was saying, “No, I am strong, those are rebels, they will disturb me. I am strong, do not disturb me.” Indeed he was strong! The people who were telling him about the refugees sounded weak but things changed. May God rest the soul of the former President of Rwanda in peace. 

Today these people may be with the minority vote and the other the majority but the points they are raising are fundamental and it needs consensus. I want to give you another example. President Sadaam Hussein was being told to allow inspection by the whole world and he was saying, “No, I am strong”. Instead of being honest and accepting that he was weak, he did not have weapons of mass destruction, he deceived the world that he was strong. So, how do we know that the other side that is saying has the majority really has it?  

They are saying UPDF cannot organise a coup. The army does not inform you that, “Tomorrow we are going to organise a coup.” Amin was a bastard but he managed to organise a coup. In Liberia, Charles Taylor, another bastard, organised a coup and disorganised Liberia. So, I want to appeal to you hon. Speaker, to ask the President to engage in a dialogue or a national conference to find out what peoples’ fears are. Why are people so rigid either this side or the other side? That way before we vote we will find a minimum ground to develop consensus. 

Some people have said there is peace. Indeed I accept there is peace but if you are a head of a home and a-quarter of your children are sleeping hungry and yet you have ten children, three have died in a period of one year and six are sick, what do I mean? 

Mr Speaker, in the Northern part of this country according to report from government, about ten children die every day in camps. That means in the last 19 years if I discount five children dying every day, we have lost 3.6 million people. And if you are a President, you know that in 1996 when Ssemwogerere was campaigning the group that was fighting you supported your position and people in the North voted for the opposition. In 2001 they supported the opposition and even the rebels were escorting them, which means that it might be your staying in power that is causing the people of that region to suffer. 

Therefore, lifting term limits will mean that the people of Northern Uganda are going to be condemned to stay in camps in perpetuity, maybe until God rescues them. That is why I asked you as Speaker of this Parliament to find means of causing a national conference so that we can arrive at a consensus. I am just seeking your indulgence, is there no way?

THE SPEAKER: No. My promise is this. I am going to pray, pray –(Laughter)- so that God guides you to make a proper decision and I appeal to everyone who is here to pray very hard over the weekend so that we make the right decision.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a Christian like you and I believe in prayer.

Finally I want to urge this Parliament, because some of these fears are known, on the issue of elections can we not engage the NPC in serious dialogue with the opposition so that we can resolve issues that cause election violence? Can we not be able to form a government of national unity, Bwana National Political Commissar? 

I know the Movement System was originally the best. Parties are not good but because there is no way you can change the presidency - because of election violence and related issues I say for that matter that let us support parties but I have told the National Political Commissar that at one time if parties do not behave, I, him and others will mobilise and go back to the original Movement. 

I want to tell you that the opposition and some of us are ready to engage government in dialogue if it means retaining term limits. It is okay if we can have the Movement for another five years then engage in dialogue so that during the next election the people who love President Museveni say, “We cannot open for parties and then at the same time surrender our man.” 

They have a point; we should listen to them and that is why I urge the Government that we could sit down and say, ”because you cannot give two at ago, let us retain term limits, have elections under the Movement System then we can form a government of national unity so that the country moves forward.” Mr Speaker, this is my plea and I want to request your Office to engage government in this.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, and again I say over the weekend, please, go to Churches and Mosques and pray for our country so that we make the right decision.

1.20
MR HENRY KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my honourable colleagues for the very good contributions, which have been coming up on the Floor and I would like to assure you that I have been able to learn a lot. I would like to restrict myself to two issues, that is, dual citizenship and Article 105(2).  

Ugandans living outside Uganda have raised hope of being allowed dual citizenship. The advantages of this are great for this country because many of them would like to invest and co-invest with other non-Ugandan partners. The hindrance is that some laws of this country only allow citizens to purchase things like land. They would only be able to get co-investors when they are citizens. 

I have seen on the agenda of the Uganda American Northern Association, which is going to have a convention early October and the bigger item on the agenda is dual citizenship. For their interpretation, they think that the Parliament of Uganda does not want to offer them dual citizenship and that is why they are pushing it to the Eighth Parliament. I would like to appeal to this Parliament to pass it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member I was advised by the chairman that that is not their proposal.

MR KITYO: May I be educated?

THE SPEAKER: No, the chairman who was here yesterday wanted to make a clarification but what you are saying is not what they are saying. Maybe the chairperson can help us. Is this what hon. Oulanyah wanted to say but he did not have the opportunity to say so? In any case this was a proposal by the committee.

MR AHABWE: Mr Speaker, on this issue of dual citizenship I can only make reference to our report and it reads as follows on page 10, the last paragraph: “The committee recommends that owing to the time constraint that this Parliament faces, the proposed amendment to Articles 14 and 15 should be adopted and those other provisions that relate to dual citizenship.” Although we went ahead and said that proposals for the amendment of Articles 16 and 17 could be postponed, these ones relate to formation of the board. The way of acquiring citizenship can be handled. So it is upon you to decide whether we could also suspend those if the other two cannot be handled without these two, it is up to you. Otherwise, the issue of dual citizenship is catered for and very straight. Thank you.

MR KITYO: I thank the chairman for the clarification and I would urge this Parliament to adopt dual citizenship because we stand to gain from it. 

Next is Article 105(2). I would like to urge this Parliament that there is a popular demand among Ugandans to have the term limits lifted. This phenomenon of the dry banana leaves is the outright indication of people demanding for another term.  

The word kisanja originates from Luganda. In Buganda our grandfathers used to marry many women and would sleep with them on heaps of dry banana leaves in turns. They would give each woman days when they would be visited and that was what came to be called a kisanja. The Kisanja is an expression of a popular demand that people are willing to have Museveni for another term. These people who are wearing dry banana leaves are not mad. They are just expressing their feelings and these feelings must be respected. 

Our voters are driving us Members of Parliament and I want to tell those people who are against this popular demand that they face a risk of being dropped because they are not listening to popular demands. That is why since in Mawokota South 90 percent of my voters want another term, I have to accept what they want and endorse the third term. 

I want to tell my friends who are urging for violence that you cannot run violence against a popular demand. When there was a popular demand to remove Obote, I cooked for those who were in the bush to be able to complete the popular demand. There is no way that you will create violence because nobody is going to give you sanctuary.  

To be successful in whatever you are doing, you need a popular demand. I, therefore, urge my colleagues to listen to the people. Be guided by what they want and abide by it. Otherwise diverting from it will create collision with the population to which power belongs. I urge that we remove the term limits and listen to the wishes of Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.27 
MR PIUS MUJUZI (Kyotera County, Rakai): Mr Speaker, Let me first of all thank you for giving me an opportunity to present the views of my constituents. 

I will start with elections. Though people of Kyotera have accepted and were happy that we are going to hold presidential, parliamentary and the LC V elections on the same day, they are skeptical that electing a chairman of a district before the councilors could later cause problems. It could influence the election of the councilors and have the successful LC V candidate’s supporters dominating the council. So, although it saves time and money, it has political implications in the district.  

I want to support the concept of dual citizenship. For long we have been contemplating this and given the advantages it has for Ugandans living outside this country we have been missing a lot of economic, social and political advantages in this country because of lack of this law on dual citizenship. I, therefore, fully support the amendment of this Bill today because it is long overdue.

Thirdly, I want to comment on the election of the LC I and LC II. It is suggested the election of LC Is and LC IIs could continue to be done by open voting. Many people fear this type of voting because it creates lasting enmity among the population. They are of the view that if there could be a way of conducting these elections secretly, it would help them live peacefully after elections.

Then, I want to go to the seemingly controversial issue but which to me is not at all controversial – the amendment of Article 105(2). The people of Kyotera sent me to support the lifting of term limits. (Applause) I also personally support the lifting of term limits for the following reasons:

One, it will be very unfair for a president who has been contesting elections twice and winning to be barred from standing another time when you are allowing the one who has been losing to him consistently to stand again. It is as if it would be a crime for somebody to win elections such that you bar them and allow the ones who have been losing to stand in the winner’s absence. 

Secondly, I am a student of political science and I have come across many definitions of politics including the famous management of society. But one definition that has touched my heart is by Almond. Almond says, “Politics is wealth and wealth distribution, who gets what, when and how”. Now that this government has put in place systems of decentralisation, that is, decentralising wealth, at districts and sub-counties, I see no problem of allowing somebody who wants to be President to stand again and again since the real concept of politics, that is wealth distribution, is already catered for through the other systems.  

I, therefore, give my full support to the lifting of term limits such that the eligibility of somebody to serve is not curtailed. The people are free to choose or not to choose somebody at any given time.

I urge members that these Ugandans have got a right to take decisions even if their decisions may be wrong. Democracy is very funny. In democracy people may not elect the best person but that is their choice. So Ugandans could make a mistake, which they could rectify when the time comes. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, you seem to have indicated to me that you want to adjourn now but let us agree as follows. Let us start our proceedings on Monday at a half past two. I advise the following hon. Members to be here on time to make their contributions: hon. Tiperu Nusura, hon. Ssbagereka, hon. Winnie Masiko, hon. Martin Wandera, hon. Henry Obbo, hon. Aggrey Awori, hon. Kalule Ssengo, hon. Bright Rwamirama, hon. Steven Bamwanga, hon. Grace Akello, hon. Lule Mawiya and hon. Dr Kapkwomu.  

I am alerting these honourable members to be here on time because today I was disappointed yet we had agreed yesterday that you would turn up on time. I appeal to you to be on time and be straight to the point. Use the seven minutes well and then we shall be able to take care of you. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Monday at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 1.40 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 27th June 2005 at 2.30 p.m.)


