Wednesday, 27 June 2012

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

 (The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have a slight adjustment to make to the Order Paper. I want to create time for the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to bring a statement, which was requested yesterday. I also want to permit hon. Kasibante to make a small personal statement.

In the gallery today we have the Lord Mayor of Kampala and members of the Kampala Capital City Authority. They have come here to observe our proceedings but they also have a problem which they hope Parliament will solve.

Yesterday, the issue of the establishment of a committee on subsidiary legislation came up when we were considering items on the Order Paper. The impression had been created that during the amendments, a committee on subsidiary legislation had been approved. However, since yesterday the Office of the Clerk has investigated, listened to the audio recording of the proceedings, and we established that the proposal was rejected. I therefore wish to put the record straight that a committee on subsidiary legislation does not exist. Therefore, we shall not need to appoint any members.

Secondly, hon. Abdu Katuntu yesterday sought clarification on whether the Rules of Procedure were gazetted. I want to report that indeed the Rules of Procedure were gazetted under General Notice No. 356 of 2012 of the Uganda Gazette, published on 21 May 2012. I have the text and I will ask the Clerk to lay it on the Table for those who may want to look at it.

I just want to assure the members that the Rules of Procedure are being printed but as you will appreciate, we have to go through the contracts system under the PPDA Act. We have got a service provider commissioned by the Parliamentary Commission to do this work. Within three weeks, I expect that all the members will have the new Rules of Procedure. 

Typesetting has been completed and they have embarked on printing. However, there are other processes to be done, that is, case binding and publication of the cover and finally pressing of the cover onto the books in the hard form. All other procedures other than typesetting and printing are done manually and therefore need time and more attention. I wish to request for your patience in this regard. I will deliver the Rules of Procedure in three weeks.

I want to remind members that today at 7.00 p.m., we should report to Munyonyo Speke Resort to prepare for the seminar on oil, which is starting tomorrow morning at 8.00 O’clock. So after the session, we all head to Munyonyo. Thank you very much.

2.45
MR MEDARD SSEGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. Which rules of procedure do we use in the mean time, considering that we have already repelled the old ones and the new ones have been gazetted and yet we do not have them? 

Save for that, Madam Speaker, I also thank you for refurbishing the Chamber. I think the Chamber looks good in green.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that the rules were amended but the work we are doing between now and the end of the month is really the ordinary work which does not require new rules of procedure. Let us stick with the old ones.

2.49
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Central Division, Kampala): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I have two issues to present here from Kampala. These are matters regarding the budgetary process that is going on in this country. Whereas vote 122 is meant for Kampala, the issue brewing is that Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) has never sat in Kampala as per section 49 of the KCCA Act to formulate the guidelines and their proposals for the budget. This would definitely invite the minister in charge of Kampala to come out with such a procedure to show us how this came up under the vote.

The second issue is about the number of foreigners in this country, Uganda. The number of foreigners or illegal immigrants in this country is alarming. They come from China, Ethiopia, Eritrea, India, Sudan, to mention but a few. The number is really alarming and we do not know how immigration is handling this issue. We would like the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come out clearly and let Ugandans know whether work permits are even issued to retailers such matooke sellers, charcoal burners and people frying pancakes.

To further inform this country about what –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have made your point.

2.51
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): I rise on an issue of public importance and it to do with this House of ours. It is now a month since the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, broke the news that some of our colleagues had been sacked. Some of them were chairpersons of committees, others were shadow ministers. Can we get the record clear; under what rule does the Leader of the Opposition sack chairpersons of committees who were approved by this House?

Some members have been psychologically tortured, traumatised and stressed because they were sacked. Can we get the record clear about the fate of our colleagues? Some of them are miserable because of what they have suffered.

2.52
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance. Three years ago, the Albertine was declared a planning area. To date, there is no plan on the table. The people from the region are suffering a lot because the short term interests of the investor are not being reconciled with the long term national interests. 

Today, we see the Ministry of Energy running alone as if other ministries cannot help. Just last week we were in Kabale and we saw Ministry of Energy officials overstretching to issues of land acquisition for the refinery and yet the Ministry of Lands should be in the lead on this. The town boards and town councils that we proposed when hon. Otafiire was still the Minister of Local Government are still not there.

The other day I heard of 19 priority roads but the road in Buliisa, which is going to give the economy money to do other roads for the next 30 years, is lined up with trailers to no end. It becomes a big problem when it rains; it is almost impossible to move from Hoima, to Butyaba and to Biiso. I have not heard National Planning Authority saying anything about this problem neither is it in the budget as a priority. 

I want to request that we get a special planning area and bring a comprehensive inter-ministerial plan on table. We really have a problem. I am only speaking for Buliisa but I am saying it is important that this plan came yesterday.

The information I have from Ministry of Lands, in this fourth year since they declared this a planning area, is that there is not enough money even in the next budget. Can we make this a priority? Can we find money? Systematic demarcation of land is not being done and speculators are moving ahead of government. Land conflicts are increasing in the area because Government has not proactively planned the area, acquired it and given the community their registered land rights. Why should the right demarcation be applied in other areas and not in such a priority area? 

A lakeside road connecting all the oil wells from Amuru, Pakwach, through to Buliisa, Butyaba, Kaiso Tonya up to Ntoroko is also lacking. We are still using colonial designed roads which were meant for different reasons. Can we have the Ministry of Works, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife working together? Can they bring to Parliament, if possible in the next four weeks, a comprehensive inter-ministerial plan supported with a budget and we see how Government intends to finance this budget? (Member timed out.)

2.55
MS MARGARET KIOBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on two issues of national importance. In Ibanda District, in Nyabuhikye Sub-County, there are two bridges; one is called Nyabukurungo Bridge and the other Ekirimire Bridge. For over five years, the barricades on these bridges got broken due to a number of reasons. One, the bridges are situated in a sharp corner and there are no road signs to warn drivers that they are about to reach a bridge and therefore they should reduce speed. As a result, by the time they realise that they are entering the bridge they break very fast and end up hitting the bridge barriers and plunging into the river.

Over the years, holes of over four metres have been created thereby creating a leeway for the vehicles as they veer off because there is nothing to stop them. In the last five years, we have lost over 20 people and 12 vehicles have plunged into these two rivers - (Member timed out.)

2.57
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): I represent a predominantly fishing community, that is Buvuma Island. Whereas we have lived with a number of challenges for the past years, including a sharp increase in inputs, of recent we have got another challenge, which is a decrease in fish prices. Two weeks ago, a kilo of fish, Nile Perch, was going for Shs 10,000 but as we talk now, it is Shs 3,500. Whereas my colleagues may celebrate that their constituents will be able to consume fish at a lower cost, unfortunately the locals cannot consume what is produced entirely. 

The cost of a kilo of fish at the stalls where your constituents buy has not reduced. The kilo of fish on the world market is £10 which is above Shs 30,000. So we would like to get a statement from Government as to why there has been a sharp decrease in the price of fish. I am an economist but this fall in prices should come with an explanation –(Member timed out.)

2.59
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): I rise on a point of national importance. Malnutrition has again hit Namutumba District. When it did so in August 2011, Government and development partners came in with emergency relief. This was good because we were able to save 2,000 children from death. However, this is definitely not sustainable. I therefore went ahead and wrote to the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture requesting them to design and implement medium and long term interventions to avoid a repeat of malnutrition in the district. Up to now, I have not seen that.

Last week, 19 children were admitted at Magada Health Centre III. On 22nd of this month, two children died, on 23rd one child died and on 24th, another child died. On 26th, 37 children were admitted and I cannot tell you now how many are going to die. Looking at the rate at which these children are dying - one everyday - I expect seven children to die by the end of this week. 

Cases of malnutrition have been registered in the health centres of Kibaale, Nzize, Bulange, Ivukula and Namutumba. My prayer is that the Ministry of Health again comes in with emergency relief of medicine and supplementary feeding for the children–(Member timed out.)

3.01
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. I want to draw the attention of this House to the continued failure by the KCCA technical team to recognise the political leadership elected to govern this city on behalf of the people of Kampala. 

As we talk now, a KCCA meeting cannot be convened. For a year now, KCCA has not been able to hold council meetings. Recently, to the relief of all stakeholders, they were able to conduct two successful meetings but one meeting was adjourned because they had unfinished business. However, the Executive Director has now disallowed the sitting of the council, which was purposely called to discuss the KCCA budget. 

As we speak, KCCA cannot hold any emergency meetings because the Executive Director, purporting to be acting on the advice of the Solicitor-General, has disallowed any meeting without a notice of 14 days. In the circumstances, therefore, KCCA cannot hold a meeting this month, and the year is closing and they are supposed to lay the budget by 30th June. That means that after 30th June, KCCA will not be able to spend–(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute. This is a matter the Lord Mayor raised to me this morning. Please complete and I hope the Attorney-General is here because I think there is a problem in the management of the KCCA Act.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 27 March 2012, this House was called upon to intervene in the matters of governance in KCCA. Madam Speaker, you properly ruled that the Committee on Presidential Affairs would investigate this matter and for that reason, they would not break for Easter. Up to now, this House has not received a report. 

The Hansard can bear witness that you ruled, Madam Speaker, that if the Committee on Presidential Affairs failed to bring a report to this House by that time - in two weeks’ time - this House shall constitute an ad hoc committee to look into issues surrounding the governance of Kampala. These include issues which have created an impasse in the city and which have seen members of staff in KCCA being dismissed; and also issues that have been rising around the creation of two structures for Kampala Capital City Authority-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, you are now going beyond the issues of the meeting for the budget. That was the matter which KCCA wanted addressed. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Much obliged. Madam Speaker, I therefore request- (Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much and I thank hon. Nambooze for giving way. The information I want to give is that there is no business pertaining to the operations of the city that can go on without the sitting of the council. 

We were experiencing a number of problems; most of the unfinished projects by the time I left the city have not taken off. Some of the money they are supposed to use is from loans, which are supposed to be paid back. All these projects have got time limits. The information I want to give is to stress the importance of the council sitting. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Attorney-General to give us a way forward on this matter? Kampala City Council Authority says they cannot handle the budget because the financial year is ending and they cannot meet because they did not give the 14 day notice. So what happens now?

3.07
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, today was Cabinet Day and we had a small meeting a little bit outside Cabinet, on another matter on the initiative of the Prime Minister. While there, I received a call from Arusha from the Chief Legislative Counsel of Parliament, Mr Pius Biribonwoha, about this matter. I linked up with the Solicitor-General to find out what happened. She told me that they made a legal opinion to the Executive Director of KCCA. I have not been able to fully internalise that legal opinion together with the Minister in charge of Kampala City Council Authority. However, I believe that we can do that during the course of today and tomorrow we should be able to give you an authoritative position on that particular legal opinion, which the Solicitor-General made to the Executive Director.

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow we are sitting at Munyonyo for a seminar. Maybe you could actually get directly in touch with the Lord Mayor because they have been calling me the whole morning to assist them.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, that is possible. Let me link up with the Kampala Capital City Authority leadership, together with the Lord Mayor, and we can harmonise this position. I do not think there is a big deal to make us completely-

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, a number of issues were raised - planning for the Albertine Graben, foreigners in Kampala, the bridges in Ibanda, the drastic fall in the price of fish and the Leader of Opposition will answer his part.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ECONOMIC MONITORING, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The council for KCCA is sitting tomorrow and some of the issues being resolved here are going to be resolved in that council meeting. I am aware and I am in charge.

About other sittings and some of the problems that the Member of Parliament raised - The council has already stated sitting, for example, the last sitting-(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I rise to give information. It is an absurdity for the minister to speak without information. The information I am giving is related to the letter the Executive Director of Kampala wrote to His Lordship the Mayor on 26th June. The last paragraph reads: “As advised by the Solicitor-General and duly brought to your attention, all meetings of the Authority must be called in accordance with the appropriate notice of 14 days.”

Does that mean that such a meeting, authoritative as it is, cannot be held as an emergency? If Parliament can hold a meeting on an emergency, what about the Authority? What are you talking about? (Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I still stand by my words that the council will sit tomorrow. I am saying this authoritatively – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki is the acting Minister for the Presidency. So he is in charge of KCCA.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, yesterday I promised that I would give information about the Clock Tower. I have since done the investigation and I have got an assurance from the KCCA Executive Director that the clock was not stolen. She says that it will be restored and will soon be visible at the Clock Tower. In an earlier contract, they had decided that the clock at the Clock Tower be replaced by a digital clock but because of the historical importance of that clock, it is going to be re-installed.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for preserving our history, and I thank hon. Waira for raising the alarm about the Sawa ya Kwiini. Acting Government Chief Whip, when can we get the answers on the planning of the Albertine Graben? 

We have the children from Baptist High School Kitebi, represented by hon. Lukyamuzi and hon. Naggayi, in the gallery. You are welcome.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mukitale actually raised two issues. One was on systematic demarcation, and he was wondering why this cannot be rolled out to Kibale. We actually had plans to roll this over to Kibale but due to lack of resources, as you are aware, we could not proceed. However, we hope that in the next financial year, we shall be able to move to Kibale since it is one of the priority areas where we intended to carry out the systematic demarcation. 

On planning of the Albertine Graben, I would like to inform the House that currently, 92 square miles of land for the oil refinery, that is in Kabale, has been surveyed and the planning – (Interjections)- Yes, Kabale; there is a place called Kabale. The planning has actually commenced and the consultant is developing a resettlement action plan but this is being spearheaded by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. So, perhaps they will give us more information on that. Thank you. 

3.16
THE MINISTER OF WORKS (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mukitale talked about roads in the Albertine area. I assure the member that some of those roads will be covered under the contractors’ financing which the Minister of Finance talked about. The roads which we shall work on are not picked at random but they are related to tourism, agricultural production or oil. So we have already assessed and we have their circuits. 

Regarding the bridges in Ibanda, I was told that there are no road signs and yet it is at a sharp corner. I want to assure the House that wherever we construct roads, road signage is part of the work. Unfortunately, our people steal the road signs. So I am appealing to the population to stop doing that because the signs are there for a purpose; they give a message – (Interruption)

MS KIBOIJANA: Honourable minister, I want to inform you that those road signs have never been there. As I speak now, I am concerned about the road bars to stop vehicles from plunging into the river.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you. I was just giving the history that we put road signs, they are stolen and we replace them. We are going to put others but I was just appealing to the population to respect the road signs and road markings because they carry a message which we convey to you. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Works in regard to bridges. You will realise that most bridges in the country are old, those in my constituency inclusive. We have many rivers like Mpanga, Rusango, among them. Have you done a survey countrywide to know the lifespan of existing bridges or you are just waiting for a disaster to happen then you open your eyes? 

Secondly, in some countries new technologies, which are even cheaper, like steel bridges, have been explored. Steel bridges are cheaper compared to concrete bridges even though the lifespan is different. However, in a case where your budget is constrained, why don’t you consider using steel bridges or even temporary bridges to facilitate the movement of persons and goods? Thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, if only hon. Tumwebaze had listened to the notes I gave to the country when I spoke about bridges about two months ago. I said that we had carried out a survey of these bridges – about 120 of them – which we inherited at Independence and they need replacement. I also talked about many other places where we want to put new bridges. However, all this has to be translated into money. If I am given money, I can get contractors to replace all of them at a go. Unfortunately, we do not have enough money so we are replacing them gradually. I also said that if I am to do this, I would need about US$ 10 million per financial year to replace the existing bridges in 10 years. 

About the steel bridges, this is nothing new because we know about them. We were using concrete bridges before because it was easier for us who had a lot of cement around. However, if you look at the Jinja Bridge, it is a steel bridge. So it depends on the design. 

THE SPEAKER: What about the fish and foreigners? Is the Minister of Internal Affairs here? 

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, on the issue of illegal immigrants,  I would like to request that I come with a comprehensive statement detailing the nature of this problem - how many are legally here, how many are illegal, how many have been deported, how many  have been arrested and so on.

However, I would like to say that this problem of illegal immigrants is not unique to Uganda. It is a global problem. In our case, we continue to attract a lot of foreigners because of the performance of the economy and the potential to do business here. (Laughter) Otherwise, why are they here? Nobody would come to an area where there is no business. Why are they here? I would like to request that I come here with a comprehensive statement in a week’s time. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Please bring a statement. I also want to remind you that this Parliament has raised this matter many times. We even set up an ad hoc committee on this issue in the Seventh Parliament chaired by hon. Dora Byamukama. So, we have really been concern about it. We hope we can resolve it at some stage.

MR BABA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the price of fish. 

3.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Madam Speaker, I am answering that question using my radar in economic monitoring. Fish is one of the products that constitute a big component of our exports to Europe. Those who see what is happening in the Eurozone can see there is a real crisis there. Their economies are in shambles and because of that, the price of fish, the price of horticulture products like flowers have been affected, and our exports have shrunk between 40 and 60 percent. 

One of the factors that have been contributing to the good prices of fish was because the fish was being bought for export to Europe. Now because those exports have shrunk, the forces of demand have set in. This explains why the price of fish is declining, the price of flowers has declined, and the export for horticultural products has declined – 

THE SPEAKER: There is information from a fisherman.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, minister, for allowing me to give you some information. I do not know whether you are aware that the catch in the lakes has gone down because of over fishing. The supply is far less than what we used to supply before. So, if you go by the law of demand and supply, there is no reason why the prices in Uganda should go down.

I do not know whether, Mr Minister, you are aware that the fisherman buys the boat, he buys the net, he buys the engine, he pays for the fuel and at the end of the day he just gets a fraction of what he puts in. If you are aware, what have you done about it? 

THE SPEAKER: But why don’t you bring a paper for us? My fishing members all want to talk now. 

MR OKEYOH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to provide is that whereas Kenya also exports fish to the European market, the prices in Kenya are far higher. A kilo of Nile Perch is at Kshs 500 which is approximately Ugshs 15,000. Why is it that in Uganda it is at Shs 3,500? Actually, our people here invest a lot because a litre of fuel on the island is Shs 5,000. So, imagine a fisherman who gets 20 litres to go fishing and then comes back and he is given Shs 3,500. The information I want to provide here is that in Kenya fish prices are high and we both go to the same European market; why?

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of fish has to be taken seriously. I expected the minister to have brought a written statement because this year round, the government had invested a lot in enforcement to have quality fish. So at a time when we have realised quality fish, the prices have gone down. This is a perishable item that Government should have thought about and put forward a solution where the prices for fish go down. 

I implore Government to come up with a written statement to help the people of Uganda, especially the fishing community, get some knowledge. These are very desperate people and even if you look at the budget, this community is never planned for. So we want to help our people. There is no item in the budget to cater for funding of the fishing community. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to the minister is that actually other than the price going down, the fishermen are also facing the problem of double taxation. As a result, even the little they are getting is double taxed. When Parliament enacted the Road Fund Act, it created, under section 21, fuel levies where Shs 200 is collected on every litre of fuel and they abolished the road licence. However, when it came to the fishermen, the boat licence was not abolished and so even the little which they are getting is affected by that double taxation. Thank you very much.

MR WAMAI-WAMANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to tell the minister that I think he is not in touch with the reality of what is happening on the world market concerning fish. We do not have enough fish to export to Japan or China. Our Tilapia is a delicacy and there is no fish in Lake Victoria. So, you are not in touch with the reality. Even on the local market, the price of fish is very high. So, you must know your figures if you are talking about fish. (Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: Depleted stock; yes, at a time when what hon. Wamai is talking about - when the demand was very high - there was overfishing in the lakes. As I speak now, the stock has been raised because of the vigilance of hon. Nankabirwa through monitoring the use of wrong fishing nets.

Yes, I know about the issue of the disparity between the Kenya price and the Uganda price. The Kenya price is high because of proximity to the coast - (Interjections) - because when the fish - (Interjections)- I know that for a fact. Because –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, I do not know whether you are aware that some of my members are located in areas where the border is in the water. So you do not talk about Mombasa.

MR BANYENZAKI: Okay, Madam Speaker. The issue of double taxation is an issue that could be researched and looked into. As for the paper, within two weeks I will liaise with my colleague, the Minister of State for Fisheries, and we come with a paper on this sub-sector and it will iron out all these questions.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, in two weeks we expect that statement. Now can I ask the Leader of the Opposition if he can answer the question raised by hon. Muwuma and then we go back to the agenda.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Richard Nduhura): Madam Speaker, there was an issue raised on malnutrition in Namutumba by hon. Florence Mutyabule. She had brought this matter to my attention and I linked her up with the officer in charge of nutrition at the Ministry of Health. I do not know whether she has failed; in which case, she should have informed me so that I intervene. However, we are ready to intervene as we have always done. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for supporting the malnourished children of Namutumba.

3.33
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to put the record straight from the submissions of my honourable colleague, Nambooze. When she was talking, she gave an impression to honourable members - By the way, even when you are speaking, my constituents are viewing what you are saying and they are aware that I am the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. 

You alleged that we did not do our work. We did our work within the allocated time of two weeks. Actually, we did the investigation in one week and submitted our draft report to the Speaker and we are only waiting for her to put us on the Order Paper and we report. We raised this matter in the Business Committee meeting. When we are allocated time on the Order Paper, we shall report accordingly. 

Before I leave the Floor, the honourable Minister for Lands said that they have surveyed 92 square miles in the oil region. I want to ask her to find out which land they are surveying. I have received a complaint that they surveyed the whole farm of the Catholic Church without consent, and you know they are responsible for my being. I spent six years with them and we had a farm in that place; I know it-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tinkasiimire, can you ask a question for oral answer so she can give us details of which land, borders etcetera. Write a question and we shall debate it when the question comes.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to make a correction. It was just a slip of the tongue. It is 29 square miles; I turned it to 92.

3.35
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence so that you uphold your directive to the Attorney-General in relation to KCCA. Section 14 of the KCCA Act, the Fourth Schedule, talks of meetings of the Authority:

“The Lord Mayor shall convene every meeting of the Authority at a time and place as the Authority may determine, and the Authority shall meet for the discharge of business at least once in every three months”.

The law gives power to the mayor to convene the meetings of the Authority. In that circumstance, the advice given by honourable minister, Banyenzaki Henry, that a meeting is going to take place tomorrow may not help the process. This is because the mayor himself came to your office and was seeking the indulgence of Parliament. So, I would seek your direct indulgence, Madam Speaker, if you could uphold your earlier decision that the Attorney-General should intervene and undertake to help resolve this legal impasse. Otherwise, the position given by hon. Banyenzaki is misleading and it is the position of the law which is provided for in the Fourth Schedule of the Act. I would seek your indulgence. 

He does not call the meeting as a Minister of Kampala. Being a minister is not being in opposition as we used to do those days. You know what we used to do to them. (Laughter) This is a different thing. Madam Speaker, if you could help and direct the Attorney-General so that we help the country to do something -

THE SPEAKER: I trust that the Attorney-General will comply with his undertaking that he will facilitate the convening of this meeting before close of the financial year and report to us.

3.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, before I answer the question which was put to me by my colleague, hon. Milton Muwuma, from the NRM side questioning my side, I need to give some definitions.

I have the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act 2006. Under section 1(e) (a), it says:
“‘Leader of the Opposition’ means the Member of Parliament who is the leader in Parliament of the party in opposition to the Government and having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament.”  Have you heard? First of all, “...who is a leader in Parliament.” (Laughter)

Section 6(e)(i) lists the roles and functions of Leader of the Opposition. I told you he is the leader, now these are his roles and functions:
“The principle role of the Leader of the Opposition is to keep the government in check”. The principle role is to keep Government in check - (Interjections) - Listen, and when I am keeping Government in check, I have a team.

“The Leader of the Opposition shall, under sub-section (1), in consultation with his or her party leadership, appoint a Shadow Cabinet from Members of the Opposition in Parliament with portfolios and functions that correspond to those of Cabinet ministers”.

So, you see my principle role is to check, and to check I must have a Cabinet, and the Cabinet must know what we call collective responsibility. Are you getting me? I cannot check with people who are not willing to check. (Laughter) So, that is my role. Whoever you see here is willing to check with me. Those you do not see here or who have already taken the back seats are not willing to check with me. If you were careful, you would have asked me when I am announcing the new line-up to fill gaps. That would have been the question.

The next point I want to come to is from our Rules of Procedure, the old ones. I know you have not got the new ones and the Speaker said you will get them in three weeks’ time. I want to read for you rule 134 of the old Rules of Procedure, which has remained by the way; you never tampered with it. I want to go through it so that you understand well. I will start with (5). In fact, I do not have authority to question the Chief Whip of your side or what the Leader of Government Business does that side. I do not have the authority. That is his authority and when they removed Banyenzaki, I never questioned it. I knew Banyenzaki had gone. (Laughter) 

Rule 134(5) talks about parties: “Parties have powers to withdraw and relocate members from individual Committees.” I to also quote 134(7) and you will know where the authority comes from: “Without prejudice to sub-rule (6), Standing Committees on Public Accounts - Are you listening? I am addressing you because you asked the question; the Speaker knows - Local Government Accounts. Government Assurances and Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises shall be chaired and deputised by Members designated by the official Opposition party or organisation.” So, where do you get authority to question me? (Laughter) I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, whereas that is the position, I just wanted to put it on record that we need to harmonise this area. I have been receiving letters from parties outside Parliament purporting to tell me what to do with my members here. I thought that was outside their ambit. I will not go into those details. Let us go back to the Order Paper. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table - 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The guidance I seek from you regards loan request No. 1.

THE SPEAKER: But he has not even presented it.

MR SSEBAGALA: Yes, the guidance I am seeking is whether it is prudent for him to present it. Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: No, you are discussing something which is not even on the Hansard. You are pre-empting it. Minister, please come.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal by Government to borrow € 15.95 million from the Kingdom of Spain for the upgrade of the national radar system. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssebagala, now there is something for you to speak about. (Laughter)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Having heard the Minister of Finance presenting this loan request from the Kingdom of Spain, I want to know whether it would be procedurally right for the Government of Uganda to get this loan from the Kingdom of Spain when we know that some three weeks ago His Excellency Mariano Rajoy, the Prime Minister of Spain, ridiculed this country. When he was sending his minister of finance to borrow almost € 100 billion, he referred to Uganda. He instructed his minister saying that, “Please, be firm. We do not want conditions. This is not Uganda.” 

So, even Spain was broke, and now we are also borrowing from a country which is ridiculing our country. Are we not losing our respect as a country to borrow from a country which does not respect us and which is broke? Is it procedurally right? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appreciate your concerns but I think the committee will take into account the disparagement of our country in deciding whether we should borrow this money. Let them go, write the report, come back and tell us whether we should borrow or not. It is committed to the Committee on National Economy. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table a request by Government to borrow up to US$ 10 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development for financing the Energy Development and Access Expansion Project in seven towns in Uganda. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for consideration and they will report back. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Minister, what you have given me is not yours. (Laughter)

3.49
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Madam Speaker, first of all I would like to state that the Government of Uganda extends condolences to the people of Bududa, especially those who have lost their loved ones. As we speak now, the Prime Minister has been designated by His Excellency the President, who could not go there, to share the unfortunate situation with the people of Bududa. As we speak, the Prime Minister is on his way to Bududa. I am also leaving for Bududa as soon as I finish this presentation. 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister and honourable Members of Parliament, on Monday the 25th of June -(Interjections) - a tragedy struck-

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I rise on a point of order. When the minister was making his submission, he addressed the House by saying “the Rt hon. Prime Minister”. Just as a reminder, this House is chaired by the Rt hon. Speaker. Is he in order to change the decorum of the House and address the Speaker as if he is in a Cabinet meeting being chaired by the Prime Minister? Is he in order, therefore, to tamper with the decorum of the House and speak in a disaster-like fashion? (Laughter) Is he in order?    

THE SPEAKER: Although the minister is both an MP and a minister, I think he should be aware of the differences between the Parliament and the Executive.

DR MALLINGA: I apologise, Madam Speaker. Inside my brain I was referring to the honourable Prime Minister – (Interjections) - but he is also an honourable Member of Parliament - (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_) - I apologise. I have apologised. I have followed rules –

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious point and you have ably advised the honourable minister on how he should move but he continues to draw our attention to another form of disaster. How shall we take what he is going to read seriously and not end up in a disaster situation? Is he in order and should he be allowed to read the statement under that situation of absurdity? 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please present.

DR MALLINGA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. You have always guided this House with a lot of ability and we would like to thank you for having guided us on this occasion. I was on the same side with hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and I remember and know what we used to plan in order to keep the House down. (Laughter)

On Monday, 25 of June this year, tragedy struck the country again in the form of a huge landslide which occurred at about 2.00 p.m. in four villages, which are, Bunakasala, Bunamulembwa, Mabaya and Walwanyi. All of these are in a parish called Bumwalukani in Bulucheke Sub-County, Bududa District.

The landslides buried 15 homes with 18 people according to a technical assessment that has been submitted as of now. The assessment was done with the assistance of the LC I Chairman and residents of the area. Preliminary figures of the number of people feared buried, which had been released earlier, should be discarded. 

Given that the landslide also washed away a road which is used by people from other villages which have not been affected, it is possible that some non-members of these villages could have been covered while on the road to visit these villages. We shall, therefore, know the exact numbers buried by the landslide only after digging all the soil up to the bottom of the valley.

Ten people were rescued and are receiving treatment in Bududa Hospital, which is acting as the evacuation centre. Staff have been strengthened by postings from the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Health has reinforced Bududa Hospital with additional medical officers and drugs. Mbale Regional Referral Hospital has been put on standby for any referrals that may be necessary.

So far, 70 houses neighbouring the tragedy site have been assessed as damaged and too risky to live in. A population of 220 people has been displaced and has been advised to stay with relatives and friends in safe locations from where they will continue to receive humanitarian assistance together with the host families. 

I would like to explain this. The last time we had a tragedy in this area, we formed camps and there was a lot of rain and so there was mud all over the place; children were covered in mud. We tried to construct pit latrines but we could not as the water was very close to the surface. If you dug four feet, you struck water. At the moment we have cholera which has been in the area for three months. So we decided that we do not put these people in camps but they should live with relatives and friends who have already got established sanitary situations. 

As I speak now, almost all the families have been placed – (Interjections)- today. The reason why the displaced survivors were advised to reside with host families is as I have explained.

The landslide washed away everything in an area measuring 200 metres wide and 300 metres long. The tragedy happened following heavy rainfall the previous two nights and several weeks of rain in the area. Warning signals of the tragedy in the form of cracks on the ground with creeping sounds were heard by the population during the night of Sunday 24th while it was still raining. However, the people took it lightly and did not inform the authorities or get out of the way. 

When the landslide occurred at about 2.00p.m., many people had gone to the market - it was a market day in that area - and some of the children were at school. Both the market and schools were not affected and this is the reason why the number of missing persons feared dead is not as high as we had expected and as it occurred in the last tragedy.

There is no hope of finding anymore survivors. Our focus now is to recover the dead bodies, assessment of the needs of the displaced people and provision of humanitarian assistance.

The area is accessible, fortunately. It is not like the last time when we had to fly equipment into the area. The use of earthmoving equipment from Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) is therefore possible. Uganda National Roads Authority and Ministry of Works and Transport will deliver earth moving equipment and trucks and by the end of today, they will have been delivered.

The Uganda Peoples Defence Forces and Police have deployed 150 men to assist in recovery of the bodies. Normally, the army deploys in hundreds and a section is 100 people. So it means that there are 100 army personnel and 50 policemen in the area.

Hon. Musa Ecweru is leading a technical team at the tragedy site. I can report that they have so far delivered 100 family size tents, 100 bags of 100 kilograms of maize flour, 50 bags of 100 kilograms of beans, 200 mosquito nets, 100 water jerricans, 100 buckets, 500 drinking cups, 50 pieces of hoes, 20 axes, 30 spades, and so on. The Uganda Red Cross Society has also dispatched to the site 220 bars of soap, 220 saucepans, 320 plates, 220 blankets and 220 mosquito nets. More items are being delivered. 

This landslide follows another one that occurred on 3 June 2012 in Sironko District where two people were killed in Bumasifwa Sub-County and over 150 people were displaced. Similar landslides have also occurred in the sub-counties of Bumalabi, Kato, and Bukoto in Manafwa District and Siyiyi Sub-county in Bulambuli District. I think there are two more sub-counties in that district that have also experienced this kind of landslide with hundreds of people being displaced.

Considering the fact that the rains are intensifying and we are certain there will be landslides and displacements, we estimate that between 400,000 to 500,000 people are likely to be displaced in the districts of Bududa, Bulambuli, Mbale, Sironko, Manafwa, Kapchorwa and Bukwo. These are areas around Mt Elgon. We also suspect even areas around Mt Rwenzori such as Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Kasese, Ntoroko and Kyenjojo will experience similar tremors. Kisoro, Kabale, Kanungu, Buhweju, Ibanda, Rukungiri, Rwampara –(Interjections)– everything you want to mention.

Ladies and gentlemen, these are the short, medium and long-term interventions. I would like to report that a Cabinet sub-committee chaired by Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali, the Third Deputy Prime Minister, has been established. The other members comprise the following ministries: 

•	Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees  
•	Ministry of Defence 
•	Ministry of Internal Affairs 
•	Ministry of Lands and Environment 
•	Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 
•	Ministry of Health 
•	Ministry of Water and Environment 
•	Ministry of Works and Transport; and 
•	Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

This sub-committee will meet monthly and handle the current Bududa tragedy. It will also assess future risks and work out mitigations to handle such situations. 

The Bududa Short-term Interventions

Recovery of the bodies using both the earth-moving equipment and manual tools comprising hoes, spades and so on is on-going. Provision of the survivors with tents, blankets, mosquito nets, saucepans, jerricans, plates, cups, soap and water treatment medicine has been achieved.

I also want to report that the provision of relief food to the survivors and host families for a period of six months has been initiated. Also done is the support of Bududa Hospital with more medical officers and medicines to treat the injured.

Medium-term Interventions

Detailed assessment and the mapping of the risky areas of the mountains mentioned will be carried out by the relevant committee that has been formed. Registration of all people at risk will also be carried out. Also to be carried out will be the valuation of the economic assets of the people at risk. The other one will be the identification of safe resettlement areas for them. Review of an existing seven-year resettlement plan for 10,000 people to be resettled every year at a cost of about Shs 15 billion to purchase land, build schools, health facilities, road networks, production and employment inputs will be carried out.

Long-term measures

Long-term interventions will involve purchases of pieces or blocks of land giving priority to safer locations within Bugisu. Along those lines, I think in Bulambuli the lower areas used to be visited by the Karimojong in the past, but that is not going on any more. That means that that land is still available. The people in that area prefer to relocate near their homes other than being relocated faraway.

Development of social and economic infrastructure in the new places, moving about 10,000 people every year out of the mountains to the new places while at the same time restoring the vacated areas of the mountains with vegetation by planting trees, will be carried out. That is planned.

There has been a rumour in the press, and also from some people who have been saying that the people who were relocated to Kiryandongo are suffering. I would like to encourage Members of Parliament to visit Kiryandongo and see the miracle that has happened there. What happened was that initially, these people were given temporary houses, but each of them was given about three acres of land – (Interjections) – 2.5 acres to the nearest is three acres. Actually, if the honourable members want the exact figure, let me say it was 2.5 acres of land –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please stick to the statement.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Anyhow, I encourage the Members of Parliament to plan to visit Kiryandongo. Over the years, there have been many landslides in the country. Because of population growth, climate change and other factors, the magnitude and frequency of the occurrence of these landslides has increased. Annex (I) shows the frequency. The issue is that over population has occurred on the steep slopes of the mountains and people are using poor agricultural practices. This is the main cause of these landslides. On average, 1,059 people live on a square kilometre of land on the steep slopes of Mt Elgon compared to only 161 persons – this is from a UBOS report for 2007.

Currently, in Bulambuli District, over 2,000 people are permanently displaced as a result of the landslides. There are also displaced people in each of the other seven districts on Mt Elgon that I already listed. The total number of persons at risk of landslides in Bugisu alone and on Mt Elgon is about 400,000. 

The good soil and climate up on the mountain keeps attracting hundreds of people every year. Many of these people migrate from the lowlands, especially during periods close to political elections.

Ladies and Gentlemen, the people of Bugisu hold their mountain with a lot of fondness. It is the lowest people who migrate to any other areas. People who migrate in Bugisu are not referred to with fondness - what are they called? (Interjections)- No, they are not called Bafuruki; they are Baabuya. Most of the population settled in the mountains lives on the slopes of 30 degrees and beyond without permits. A number have encroached on Mt Elgon National Park. The mountain has a bimodal rainfall pattern with no dry season. In Bugisu, it rains the whole year. 

The Mt Elgon National Park lying in the higher parts of the mountain has a unique eco system with a high density of biodiversity. This is a good source of local resources such as wood, herbs, bamboo shoots (khamalewa) for food, which the communities settled in the neighbourhood benefit from. 

The fertile volcanic soils and abundant rainfall, which averages over 1,500 millimetres per year, ensure ample yield of both cash and food crops. However, poor agricultural practices, lack of terracing as is done in Kigezi, and choice of fibrous food crops such as bananas, beans and onions that replace the taproots, that is, the forests trees, is escalating the possibilities of landslides. 

The Department of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Management was recently established in Kagadi and Lake Mburo resettlement schemes where it resettled 50,000 people. The department also resettled 15,000 people who were evicted from Mbokia Forest Reserve. Recently, it resettled 3,000 Ugandans who were expelled from Tanzania in Kamwenge and 4,186 Bududa survivors have been resettled in Kiryandongo. This is evidence that capacity and experience in resettling persons is available. 

In the year 2010, the department coordinated development of an inter-ministerial national resettlement action plan for people living at the risk of landslides. The resettlement strategy involves annual acquisition and distribution of 5,000 hectares of land over a period of 10 years. Each year 10,000 people would be resettled beginning with the year 2010. By the year 2020, over 100,000 people will have been resettled and removed from the mountain side. 

The cost of the plan is about Shs 15 billion each year. Purchase of land and infrastructure will be as I have mentioned earlier. The plan has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and a budget line entitled, “Resettlement of landless persons and disaster victims” will soon be established. 

The next page is a record of major landslide incidences. I think I do not have to read those; the honourable members have read them. There is also the history of landslides on Mt Elgon. This was a PhD dissertation research by a lady called Gidudu Kimono. I do not have to read from this dissertation though. 

Madam Speaker, I am very grateful to you for having allowed me to make this presentation and I thank the honourable Members of Parliament for having listened to me. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister. That is the response to our request yesterday. Honourable members, we have other business pending and so let us use only 20 minutes; one minute each. Should we have only 10 people? Can the whips assist me identify the 10? 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. I am seeking your guidance. Under the Commonwealth parliamentary practice and IPU where you are President, you know very well that parliaments worldwide under a multiparty system are managed through their parties and party whips. Members of Parliament are given notice that they will speak on a particular issue the following day or on whichever day. That enhances research, discipline, competence and accuracy. Therefore, Madam Speaker, may I propose, as you have indicated, that from today, henceforth we start giving our whips the proposed names of people who will speak on issues? Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, seriously, you know it becomes difficult for everybody to speak on every subject because it means that we cannot do any other business. We shall have to adopt some of those practices so that we can all speak but not on everything. You can specialise. 

4.21
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE KHAFABUSA (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his presentation. I also wish to convey my condolences and sympathy to the people of Bududa upon the loss of their beloved ones and for those who have been injured. 

On page 2, the minister is talking about people living with their relatives and possibly friends, but most of these people’s relatives happen to be in the same vicinity. I do not know whether these are areas regarded as safe for those who have been affected to move to. I think we should consider having these people taken away from those local areas because the entire area of Bududa is critically affected. So, honourable minister, it is not safe to say that people are going to live with their relatives.

A few years ago when the mudslides occurred, we appreciated that people were moved to Kiryandongo, but only a few of them were actually able to be moved. A good number of people remained behind and I believe some of these are the ones who are affected. Government promised to acquire land in various parts of this country, and I remember this; it is on record. I think if we check our Hansard, it is actually reflected. I wish to place it on record that Government still needs to come out expeditiously and acquire land so as to resettle people who are actually facing these challenges. (Member timed out.)

4.23
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to reiterate what my colleague has just said, that in the last Parliament the same issue was debated and resolutions were made. However, the minister’s statement does not tell us the achievements made on issues like land acquisition, resettlement of the people etcetera.

I will zero in on my constituency. A couple of months back, I did raise the issue that one of the bridges connecting Tororo Municipality to Rubongi in West Budama was swept away and a few people died. This is now being brought out as an afterthought.  The ministry in charge of relief, refugees and disaster preparedness should have been prepared. These rains were predicted.

Madam Speaker, I have risen on this Floor again and again and referred to the buildings that are covered with asbestos in my constituency. Asbestos and its use were banned in the world in 1980 and Uganda is part of that protocol. We had the factory in Tororo and it was dismantled, but schools, hospitals and churches are still roofed using asbestos.

This issue of coming and referring to Bududa because a few people have died is much appreciated, but the ministry should look at the larger picture because we have Ugandans dying in other parts because of disaster. The use of asbestos -(Member timed out.)

4.25
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for this statement. My main concern is from page 3. The minister has clearly stated that they estimate up to about 400,000 people are likely to be displaced in different districts including Ntoroko.

In Ntoroko District, particularly in the sub-counties of Nombe and Karugutu, we have been experiencing landslides for a number of years. Even in the month of May, we had landslides and people were internally displaced but Government did not take any action. 

I am looking at the short, medium and long term interventions Government is listing for these districts, including Ntoroko. I do not see what the government is prepared to do for these districts. I know that the best way Government can handle disasters is by being prepared. So, I would like to know from the minister and from Government how prepared they are to handle landslides in my district particularly in Nombe and Karugutu sub-counties. (Member timed out.)

4.27
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Bugisu as a sub-region need to be seriously supported by this House. Landslides occurred in Bulambuli and to date, over 3,000 are still displaced. On 3rd of this month, landslides occurred in my constituency, in Bumasobo Parish, Bumasifwa Sub-county. The minister went there and promised to go back, but up to date over 500 people are still displaced. The road was washed away, the bridge was damaged and children from the neighbouring schools cannot cross and go to school. This time the landslide has occurred in Bududa, and the government has kept on lamenting. 

The people of Bugisu are now concluding and believing that maybe they have been abandoned by the government. They hear that the Congolese have been resettled in Uganda, the Rwandese are being resettled in Uganda yet bona fide Ugandans like the Bagisu, who are very friendly people –(Interjections)- So I am appealing to the House and members, in case you have some land in your constituency or district please give us information. In the places where the Bagisu have been settled, they have done so very peacefully. (Member timed out.)

4.29
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to start by conveying my heartfelt condolences to the people of Bududa for the loss of their dear ones. I have two issues to raise.

One, I would like to inquire from the minister; if we resettle the people of Bududa and take them out of Bududa, who will then take over their original land?

Two, on page 7 there is a point where the government is saying that they have the capacity and expertise to settle the people who are being displaced by these calamities. I would like to know why we cannot be proactive. Why do we want to wait for the event to occur with these many innocent lives lost and then react after?

How many people are acquiring land on wetlands, for example? The Ministry of Lands is issuing land titles on wetlands! What are we doing about it as parliamentarians, as leaders, as responsible citizens? Should we wait for people to continue reclaiming the land? These Bududa landslides will not stop there; one day they will attack us in Kampala here. So, let us be proactive rather than wait-(Member timed out.)

4.30
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the long term resettlement strategy, but when looking at human lives we need to get a little more serious. This resettlement plan does not come out clearly to quantify the expected loss per district. In my district, five sub-counties are on the mountain slopes and people have been dying. Government just brings jerricans and posho for a day or two and because people are desperate, there is no assurance and they have to climb back to the mountains for survival.

We have been passing loan requests and borrowing money. If Parliament has to approve money, if the ministry comes up to quantify necessary expenses, we had better do that. Otherwise, we are going to continue losing people and their property as 
we continue extending the plans. This plan says it is going to be effected up to 2012. Eight years from today, people will continue dying. So, it is my desire that the ministry now goes district by district and evaluates the number of possible affected people, quantify the possible land to accommodate these people and – (Member timed out_)

4.32
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am disappointed by the minister’s statement, particularly on page five, where he says, “In the mid-term intervention, there is going to be a detailed assessment and mapping of the areas of the mountain.” I am surprised, because we have been having this problem in Bududa for almost 50 years. Why is it that up to now, we do not know the affected areas and we are just going through the mapping process now? 

On page three, where food is being mentioned, I request the minister to note that sometimes the 100 bags of food cannot be enough to share among the affected people. I request you to also put into consideration Butaleja District because it is a disaster area; whenever we have a disaster in Bududa – the good thing, you know the areas very well since you are my neighbour – all the water that comes from that side comes to rest in Butaleja. The minister could also work together with the Minister of Agriculture to provide these people with seeds so that they grow their own crops. If you divide 100 bags of posho among 1000 families, they will be getting almost one kilogramme each. That is the problem we have been facing. At least, work on providing them with agricultural inputs. Thank you.

4.34
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I send my condolences to those who have lost their loved ones in Bududa. I have three fundamental questions that I want the minister to respond to. One, it has been reported that Government ignored the warning; that a series of warnings were issued by the environmentalists, but Government ignored them. Is that true? If it is true, why do we sympathise with the dead? Two, on September 8 – it is on record – I raised here an issue of disaster in Rwampara and hon. Alice Alaso moved a motion that in two weeks, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness should come up with a comprehensive report on disasters in the country. Up to now, nothing has been done; do we still need this minister in charge of this ministry? (Member timed out.)

4.03
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Obongi, I send condolences to the bereaved families whose people were affected by this disaster. Honourable minister, we have a problem when it comes to disaster preparedness. On page three, spilling over to the page where you listed a number of places which are at risk, including districts outside the Elgon area – (Interjections)– like Kyenjojo. You say, “We estimate up to 400,000 who are likely to be displaced, since we consider that rains are still coming…” I would like to appeal to everybody to assist the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, given the fact that we are already aware of the shortcomings there. We should not restrict ourselves to the failures of Government or the ministry. I, therefore, suggest the following: The question of the survivors so far in the affected area; where are they? Is there a safe area where they are being helped from? Can he ask the people of Uganda in flat lands to donate land – the question here is that Government should buy land, but I have seen people collecting relief items to assist others who are in need. Why don’t we request people with land to donate it for the resettlement of the victims? 

Madam Speaker, the people of Bududa and those in Elgon area are mainly agriculturalists. I believe that if they come to areas, for example, like Obongi, where there is land, they can mingle freely with the indigenous people. My point is that we should make a general appeal to the people of Uganda to provide land to resettle those who are at risk. We should not come here and cry all the time that Government is not doing enough – that there is no land that has been bought. 

Secondly –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I wish to provide is that Section 41 of the Land Act creates a Land Fund, whose purpose is to buy land when such incidents occur. So, when we are debating this? We need to task the relevant ministry to find out where the money that goes to the Land Fund is put. We need to be told how much is there currently, because we need it for acquiring land for resettling people. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: As I wind up, I thank hon. Mwiru for that information. We should also consider the question of land reclamation – in the long-term – even from the mountains themselves. We know that the population worldwide is increasing. If you go to Switzerland or any other country which is close to a water body, when land is in short supply, technology and human brains are used to ensure that land is reclaimed. I said it here during the Eighth Parliament that Government should not wait for disaster to occur –(Member timed out.)

4.40
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for his report. I join other Ugandans to mourn those who perished in Bududa. I have a few questions to ask the minister. He has indicated here that there are currently 2000 people in Bulambuli who are displaced, and that there is a Cabinet memo currently handling Bududa. What about those in Bulambuli? It is now a year since they were displaced. Honourable minister, remember that I have been asking you about the issue of resettlement and you told me that you discussed the issue in Cabinet and you wanted clearance from the Ministry of Finance to commit funds. I have a copy of a letter here written by the PS/ST concerning a request for the certificate of financial clearance for a Cabinet memorandum for the resettlement of landslide survivors of Mount Elgon. 

Madam Speaker, during the Eighth Parliament, this House passed emergency money for Foot and Mouth disease without clearance. If this was done for animals, what about human beings? Do we really need clearance? Is that how we are going to operate? So, I need the minister to clarify that and tell this House how far he has gone.

4.42
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from a mountainous area. When my colleagues in Bududa are hit like this, I am threatened. In the last two weeks, one of my parishes was hit by a mudslide. I reported the case to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, but up to now, I have got no response. 

We are threatened. Our hot springs have stopped producing steam and we are expecting a volcanic eruption anytime. The people living around that place are threatened. We do not know whether we are supposed to go to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness or which other ministry. Sometimes, when you get such a problem, you go to the Ministry of Environment and they tell you to go to disaster preparedness. You fail to know which ministry is responsible for what. We need this clarified.

In Burondo parish, in Kasitu sub-county, all schools and farms were taken. I reported the case, but I do not know whether we shall need people to die first before we can respond in an organised way. (Member timed out.)

4.44
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I want to share the grief that the country is going through, following the loss of lives in Bududa, as a result of the mudslide. 

This is not a new phenomenon and I would like to suggest that disaster is a cross-cutting issue. We may be condemning the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, but what funds do they have in the basket? Let all the ministries be prepared and plan for this.

I would also like to say that we need to look at the issues of the people. I know that the people of Bududa have a strong attachment to the mountains, but my appeal to them is that they should come out of that place and accept to move when Government calls for that. Sometimes, they over politicise certain issues because I overheard last year, when Government came up with the idea that the people should be shifted, the issue that came up was that Government wants to grab their land and most people refused to leave the place. We have now seen real disaster. (Member timed out.)

4.45
MR ABDI CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask some supplementary questions. One: How much funds have been earmarked for this particular exercise in Bududa? Two: Since he has been resettling other people in other districts as a result of displacement, when will you resettle the people of Benet sub-county who were displaced from the forests?

Three: Is the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness coordinating with the meteorological department to see that these disasters do not occur again? Now, honourable minister, Kween as a district has been very much affected by floods and even landslides in Benet sub-county. I wrote a letter to the Prime Minister and copied it to your office informing you about the occurrence of the landslides in Benet sub-county, but of course, no action has been taken. I even requested your ministry to provide relief items to these people who have been affected. 

To the flood-prone areas of Ngenge sub-county –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I extend my condolences and sympathies to the bereaved families and the people of Bududa. 

When you look at the long-term interventions on page 5, the ministry is proposing to buy some plots of land, but gives priority to safer locations within Bugisu. First of all, Bugisu is a densely populated place and the soils are fertile. When you keep adding more people, what does it mean? It would mean that still, they will have to go back and encroach on the hills and therefore, the landslides will escalate.

Two, I have looked at the resettlement strategy of 10 years whereby you are planning to spend Shs 15 billion to acquire land and the like, to resettle 10,000 people per year. I think that a disaster cannot be handled like any other ordinary investment, where, for example, you plan to work on say 100 kilometres of road. Why can’t we say, because this is a 10-year strategy, we use Shs 150 billion because per year, you are planning to use Shs 15 billion. (Member timed out.)

4.49
PROF. BALTAZAR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the statement of the minister on page 9, you can see from 1818 to date, landslides have occurred in this same place. This is serious information, which we should use as Government to plan on how to manageand prevent what could happen. That is what I thought your ministry is supposed to be. Can I, therefore, propose that Government comes up with a statement that is exhaustive to show how we can prevent and plan for future problems? 

The forest cover is dwindling at a fast rate and I have not heard the Ministry for Water and Environment going into overdrive to make sure that this forest cover, which is disappearing, is replaced. If it is not, we shall have a problem even in areas, which may not have landslides. There are floods in Teso and they could be droughts elsewhere. People will not have food and they will start dying. (Member timed out.)

4.51
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am at pain because the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is very good at stating the chronological order, basing on history, the record of mega landslide incidences as indicated on page 8. He is a very good historian, but when he came to the commitment of what Government has learnt from these disasters, that is where there is a real problem and I think we need to concentrate on that.

Madam Speaker, usually, when you go to these ministries, they talk about shortage of money and today, we are going to consider the budget. I want to hear the minister saying, “Good enough, we have now got money into the budget to deal with this emergency.” If that is not the case, I will move a Motion under 46(1)(k) that we appropriate Shs 16 billion to cater for thevictims who are catered for under these emergencies. This would really rectify the immediate problem, although we must prevail upon the ministry to ensure that they have a much longer term commitment -(Member timed out.) 

4.52
MR PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the honourable Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness, and the entire ministry, for the work they have done, and most especially, for this presentation. When you visit the area that has been affected and give them counselling, you will realise that they are not really mindful of what to do next. They are just saying that after two months of rains, they are ready to go back to the area and this is very dangerous. 

A lot of sensitisation was done the other time and we thought that these people will be ready to move to other places. Some places were created, but still, some people refused to go and now another disaster has happened. So, in this respect, I want to also call upon the people in the affected area to appreciate that there is this problem so that they can begin thinking -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Is the honourable member in order to say that the people were asked to be resettled and they refused? I expected a man of his calibre - being a Reverend - to speak the truth. Is he in order, therefore, to mislead this House when the people of Bulucheke who were supposed to be transferred to Kiryadongo were not transferred? The bus took the first lot, dumped them in Kirayandongo, and it did not go back to take the rest to be resettled. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not in position to rule because I have not got the feedback on how many were supposed to go, how many arrived, and how many refused to go. I do not have the information. I hope the minister will be able to tell us.

MR BAKALUBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The problem we have in this area is also about these politicians from Mbale, who cannot accept that there is this problem, because we have been there. We have some church organisations that have been operating in that area. We have sensitised the people, but some people refused to go -(Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The colleague using the opportunity extended to him for the two minutes, a Reverend at that, who is supposed to speak the truth and nothing but the truth, is supposed to be fair in his remarks and assessment before he makes statements of such a nature. He is speculating and insisting that the leadership from Mbale region has refused to heed or see the point he is trying to make, whereas we are here labouring and trying to portray and put the same grievous picture to this honourable House. Is the honourable member in order to mislead the House and to speak erroneously and incorrectly?

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask hon. Bakaluba to substantiate how the leaders have failed to sensitise the population?

MR BAKALUBA: I think I will be given about two minutes. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I went to that place which was affected earlier, with other religious organisations. We sensitised the people but some politicians were encouraging people to stay, saying that after the rains, it would be okay.

We were telling them that if land has been allocated to these people elsewhere, it is safer for them to move because landslides were likely to re-occur. I agree with my colleague; he is not among those politicians who have been politicising the area. There are some politicians who have done a disservice to these people. My appeal to everybody and the people of Bugisu, is to understand and appreciate that we have this problem. If it is possible and land has been allocated, let these people move. (Interjections) Prayers will not be enough; action is required. People of Bugisu, please, stop politicking. Thank you.

4.57
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join those who have expressed their condolences to the people of Bududa about the tragedy. The information given to us by the minister - I am confused and disturbed. I do not know whether to crucify my friend the Minister for Disaster Preparedness or somebody else in Government. When you look at the chronology of events, it is extremely clear that this disaster has been occurring many times. We do not need a teacher to alert us that it is going to occur again.

The strategy that is being brought to the Floor includes a plan to resettle 400,000 people. Ten thousand people per year means it will take 40 years for us to be able to resettle the entire group at risk, yet the risk is occurring every year. These are the people who are getting more babies, the population is increasing, and the risk is also increasing. Surely, is this feasible? 

On the issue of whether people can move or not. People are ready to move. Nobody can want to risk his or her life in a vulnerable situation like this. They need to be moved in conditions that are good and that are better. We had information about the conditions that are very appalling in the areas where they took them earlier for resettlement. Many people did not have houses and they remained in tents for long. Even parts of the land were not good at all and so, some of them resorted to going back to Masabaland. I would like to urge Government to undertake the pledge to map out the vulnerable areas and alert people, and also ensure that there is an early warning mechanism within the population. This does not seem to come out clearly. Where is the early warning mechanism for the population? (Member timed out.)

4.59
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Only this morning, I came to your office to speak about a matter of national importance. Mabanga hill in Rukiri sub-county, Ibanda District, has developed cracks with a 20 metre deep slit separating two parts of the hill. People are actually worried that any time soon, there could be a disaster similar to the one of Bududa and they are threatening to camp at the district headquarters as I speak. I am glad that a Cabinet sub-committee has been put in place, but I would want to know how this Cabinet sub-committee can help my people by assessing the magnitude of the problem on this hill and how they can be resettled before they die of this impending disaster. Thank you.

5.00
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to convey sympathies to the people of Bududa. If one took off time and read through the policy on disaster preparedness formulated in 2004, the spirit within which it was made was really good, but the key challenge we are facing is implementation of the policy. I wonder how this ministry has kept on managing. In fact, we should no longer call it, if it was possible, disaster preparedness, but disaster management. They do not prepare but they just manage crises. 

The spirit in which I am saying this is that we have registered very many complaints on the way materials are distributed to the the items that have been dispatched to Bududa, but now that Red Cross is taking and Government is also on board, most of these items are put to abuse. I remember one time when they were delivering these items, one of the ministry officials instead of taking them to those who are supposed to benefit, was diverting them to other places. (Interjections) I want to appeal and pray to the implementers – honourable Minister for Disaster Preparedness, I assure you that from some sources of intelligence, we have this information. It is not on the Floor that I can give you this -(Member timed out.)

5.02
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the minister for the statement and to express the condolences of the people of Mitooma to their brothers and sisters in Bududa. 

I would like to hail the long-term interventions given to us by the minister and hope that the minister will stick to these. In the coming budget, we would like to see budgeted items to ensure that these plans are going to be put into effect. Like my colleagues, I would like to hail the plan to relocate people; for Government to buy land and make sure that people are safe; and the plan to develop social and economic infrastructure in the new places before people are moved there. We are used to seeing people just moved anyhow and then the services, infrastructure is supposed to follow them, but it never does. We hope this will be done. I would also like to hail the plan to plant trees in the hills where the people will have left -(Member timed out.)

5.04  
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we are talking about landslides, we who have experienced them are talking about instant and secret death. I have a lot of experience because I live in a hilly area. I have seen many landslides which, incidentally, are not listed on the record of the landslides. Before I come to that record, there is a seriously threatening situation of a landslide which is about to occur. 

Hon. Kiboijana talked about a hill which has been split two feet apart by about 20 metres across. This is between Buhweju and Ibanda, and it is called Mabanga Hill. We do not know which side this hill will fall, but whichever side, whether Ibanda or Buhweju, it will fall on Ugandans. This problem has been there for the last one month. I do not know whether any Government official, except my RDC, has gone there. 

I am glad the minister has at last recognised that Buhweju is a landslide-prone area. In 1987, five people died in a landslide and all of them were buried underneath. In 2000, 23 people died in one home and one was rescued. In 2010, a house was moved by a landslide for 20 metres. Good enough, all the inmates survived. Just last year, a landslide occurred in a stretch of 2 to 6 kilometres and up to now, the area is closed. Lastly -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, I have two questions for you: I want to know why you have abandoned the idea of the contingency funds for supporting disasters such as these. I also want to know why you have not implemented Article 249 of the Constitution to establish a Disaster Management Commission. One of your predecessors, hon. Butime, came here and said he was in the process of appointing that commission. He told this Parliament and it is on the Hansard. We would like to know why you do not have that Disaster Management Commission.  You can answer now together with the other questions. 

5.06
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Madam Speaker, I think this question can better be answered by Finance - whether this fund really exists - because we have tried to access it and we are told there is no money. [Ms Alaso: “Guidance.”]

THE SPEAKER: Yes hon. Alaso?

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank –(Hon. Alaso rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso -

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek your guidance on two issues relating to this debate. The first is the motion I moved, and I kept asking when Government would present the forthcoming business. I would say, “Where is the statement in regard to what Government thinks are going to be upcoming disasters in this country?” I think Government should be able, to a certain degree, to tell what is coming and what is happening. It was not acted upon and I need your guidance because even as we debate Bududa, Bulucheke - I am one of the people who took interest and went to that belt. There is a crack which runs from Bududa through to Sironko through to Mount Elgon and Kapchorwa. I think if this country has not seen a landslide, there will be a bigger landslide than the one we are dealing with.

My limited understanding of geology also tells me that there should be a department somewhere in one of these ministries, which is able to do satellite images and tell us that such and such a thing is going to happen. I would like to be guided. I think tasking the ministry - I do not even think they have the capacity. This department should either be in geology - whatever - or national environment. They should be the ones to give us this information because if they do not give it to us, we are clearly in trouble. Again, I would like to pray that Government gives this House an appraisal of what it thinks is going to happen to people in this country.

I am even worried. In his statement, the minister said on page 3 that he had hoped the people in Bududa would tell the authorities that there was going to be a problem. It should have been Government to issue a warning that there was going to be a problem. So, Madam Speaker, please guide us. I hope Government will come with that statement, but also, the departments which have the capacity to forecast disasters of a geological nature should help us.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when Members ask questions, it is not just for a show; they want solutions and it is because they have issues from their areas; issues from the country. So, when you do not respond, I do not know how you want us to help you. When are you going to bring the statement which was pending from the last session on these issues of disaster? 

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I try to recall, I think I was not here when hon. Alaso raised that issue. Now that I am here, I promise that within a month, I will come with the response to her concern. 

THE SPEAKER: That is Government assurance now. Respond to the queries quickly because I have got to do other business. Thank you very much. [Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi: “Further guidance.”] Let us finish. Minister, please respond to the issues. I want to go to the Budget.  

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -(Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: When a Member does not leave the Floor, you sit. 

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Interjections) I would like to thank the honourable members for the issues they raised during this debate.

Hon. Werikhe raised the issue of the people who are displaced, living with relatives and friends rather than being placed in camps. I think I explained that one at the beginning, that our experience as a ministry during the last disaster in Bududa was that when we established camps, they became extremely muddy and it was very difficult to establish sanitation when you dug into the ground for pit latrines, you went down only about four feet and you reached water. We are also taking into account that at the moment, there is cholera in the area and so, if we dig very shallow pit latrines where there is water, we might be making the situation of cholera in the area worse. Therefore, the established homes have pit latrines and we are encouraging the members – those who have friends or relatives low down in the flatter areas to take in these people. 

As I stated, by the end of today, almost all the displaced people would have been placed. The Bagisu people in that area usually own land in form of clans and the clans own land from the foot of the mountain and they rise up to the top of the mountains. Finding relatives and friends is not difficult as this has been demonstrated. 

About the people who moved to Kiryandongo, ladies and gentlemen, it is true that some of the people who were offered the chance to move to Kiryandongo did not move and we have been told the reasons. People on the mountains have greater attachments to their areas for two reasons; the land is very fertile because it is volcanic soil; and secondly, Bagisu are not very migratory people. They tend to stay on their mountain to which they are attached. I have also encouraged honourable Members of Parliament – those of you who are on relevant committees - please, visit Kiryandongo and see the living conditions of the people who were moved there. 

Some of them have built their own houses, Government has put up a number of houses and it is a continuous process. It is not true to say that they are still in tents. It is true that tents are still there, but they are being used for something else and the people are quite comfortable. 

Someone said that the land in Kiryandongo is not fertile. That is untrue. Those of you who are familiar with Kiryandongo know that it has extremely fertile - almost as fertile as the land on the mountains - and this is land that has not been used for a very long time.  

The population in Bunyoro, as we know, as decimated during the colonial days, know that land has been almost empty and also, there were tsetse flies in that area. It was closed to habitation until the tsetse flies were cleared. So, the land in Kiryandongo is extremely fertile. 

I think this also brings out the issue of Government owning its land. Some Members of Parliament have come here and forcefully wanted to take over Government land, and we are resisting in every way. It is in situations like this where you need Government land to settle people. Land belongs to the people by the new Constitution, but Government has got to own land for emergencies like this. It is not true that those who have been settled are going to have their land taken away. They have been allocated this land and it is theirs. If they want, they can get titles. 

Today, we are discussing the issue of Bududa. I was surprised that the honourable member from Tororo Municipality brought in the issue of asbestos and the people of – ladies and gentlemen, there is confusion as to what this ministry can handle and what is not relevant to us. Asbestos is totally a different area and not a disaster situation. So, the honourable members ought to know. 

Hon. Mujungu was quite constructive. All the areas that have been mentioned and which we have listed, we know there are problems there and we intend to handle them. Government is extremely concerned and that is why a special committee of Cabinet has been set up, and we initially said that maybe it should be chaired by the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, but we thought we wanted somebody heavier in Government, and we decided that the Prime Minister should chair the meeting in order to make all the others concerned and to ensure a response from other ministries. So, the hon. Gen. Moses Ali has been made the chairman of that committee and relevant committees have been –(Interjections)- it is because he holds a lot of power and authority in Government. He is a Prime Minister – [Hon. Member: “Clarification.”]. Okay, clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have other business. Please, wind up.

DR MALLINGA: Okay. The honourable member from Butaleja – I am aware and I have been to Butaleja more than once, since problems started, and we suggested a solution; that River Manafwa as it enters Butaleja should be dammed so that there should be control of water that goes down to Butaleja. Some of these problems have been there for a very long time, but solutions have been suggested and we intend to put those proposed solutions into action. On the question of seeds, that is the Ministry of Agriculture. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness does not distribute seeds. (Laughter)

Hon. Kyamadidi tends to think that Government has ignored – Government has not ignored anything. [Mrs Atim Ogwal: “Clarification.”] We are concerned as I said and we have suggested solutions but sometimes -[Hon. Member: “Order.”](Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR MUJUNI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been listening attentively to the Minister for Disaster Preparedness. I said that on 8 September last year, a statement was made to this House about the disaster in Rwampara and up to now, nothing - including the Motion moved by hon. Alice Alaso - has been done and he is a member of the Executive, and in this case, a member of Government. Is he in order, therefore, to insinuate that I tend to think what is not ordinary?

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order.

DR MALLINGA: Hon. Wamakuyu wanted to know something about the clearance. What I want to say is that I cannot decide to spend Government money. Government decides the priorities before they come here for Parliament to approve by way of the expenditure in the Budget. I cannot get money to purchase land – I wish I could, I would purchase land for the people on the mountains.

Finally, honourable members, I think we need to work together. (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL CECELIA: Madam Speaker, I have been listening to the minister and I have also read the report. However, the manner in which he is summarising his report is agonising for those of us who are listening. First of all, he said that he does not know where to find seeds; it is not the ministry to find the seeds, yet on page 4 of the report, he has said that there is a Cabinet sub-committee that includes Ministry of Agriculture as a member, which I think should address this question of seeds.

In that view, I notice that the minister is being evasive. But also, when you continue with the report, you realise that on page 5, there is something on medium and long-term plans. I thought these plans are already ongoing, in which case I thought they have been budgeted for. But in the circumstances, is the minister in order to sound very desperate and ignorant of what he has written? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know you said that you have asked the people on the slopes to allow their friends and relatives to live with them. But how will they survive? Where will they get more seeds to feed them? That is what the Members are asking and so, you cannot avoid it.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I have emphasised that those families which take in the people who have been displaced, will receive help from Government. Food, water utensils and so on will be distributed including the members of the host families. And I would like to emphasise the issue upon which the honourable Member of Parliament raised a point of order. I know she is sure that I have never been evasive. I was her leader in this House and she knows that not on any single occasion, was I ever evasive –(Interjections) I am a highly educated mind. I have travelled all over the world. Can you mention any continent to which I have not been? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

DR MALLINGA: We are aware of the deep cracks in Ibanda and some areas in Rwampara. We are asking for the cooperation of the leadership and Members of Parliament to help us in encouraging people move away from those areas. Not everybody who leaves these areas is going to be settled by Government. Some of these people have the money and if encouraged, they can move to purchase land in safer areas.

You remember one of us pointed out that it will take long if we are to settle every person. The Government will only help those people who are totally incapable of purchasing land for relocation. If we explain the situation to the people who are going to be affected, most of them will voluntarily leave risky areas that face the danger of landslides. Thank you very much, for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you might want to circulate the reply for the benefit of the other Members of Parliament who were not here, for the record.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

5.28
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga North, Kampala):  Madam Speaker, in what may also constitute my maiden speech to this august House, I rise to make a personal statement to clear the air on the wild allegations made by the Leader of Government Business yesterday and most unfortunately, on the Floor of Parliament.

The Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi was responding to remarks made by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, while welcoming me together with hon. Odo Tayebwa upon our recent victories, in which he also noted that we are worthy additions to his side.

Madam Speaker, the Leader of Government Business made a very sweeping statement to the effect that my presence in this Parliament is not worth congratulations, since, according to him, I came to Parliament through court and not an election.

To this end, I am constrained to report with grief that the people of Rubaga North feel insulted by the wild assertions of the Leader of Government Business as it implies that their Member of Parliament is an imposter in this august House. 

This is made worse by the fact that the allegations came shortly after they had just had a sigh of relief on realising that they had finally been cleared to be represented like all other Ugandans in this Parliament.

It is this record that I wish to set straight since it was captured in the Hansard. In 2011, I offered myself for the candidature of the Member of Parliament for Rubaga North, for which I was found fully fitting and accordingly, cleared to contest, by the Electoral Commission.

In the election that followed, I was declared winner by the Electoral Commission on 20 February 2011, which was a resounding victory, not as an individual, but of my constituents and that of all democracy-minded Ugandans. It is fully known that the joy of our triumph was short-lived as our victory was rudely interrupted by a sinister declaration of a one Singh Paminda Malwaha as the winner of the election by a magistrate at Mengo Court and security personnel deep in the night of 1 March 2011.

As a result, we, the people of Rubaga North went on unrepresented for more than a year. Madam Speaker, it will be noted that despite being –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not interrupt him, since this is his maiden speech.
 
MR KASIBANTE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It will be noted that despite being deprived of their right to be represented in Parliament, my constituents exhibited a high level of patience and political maturity when they, though painfully, chose to wait for the course of the law to prevail over the perpetuators of this outright vote thuggery. They should instead be commended for not demonstrating or taking on the robbers of their victory in any undesirable manner. 

The reference to court as an instrument that brings to Parliament Members unworthy of congratulations and, therefore, recognition, is also a regrettable attack on the system that the Leader of Government Business should instead be encouraging Ugandans to avail themselves in their pursuit for redress and arbitration. 

The courts of law finally upheld and re-affirmed the unanimous decision of the people of Rubaga North and I was declared winner in a precedent-setting ruling that brought me to this House. (Applause) 

This has opened the eyes of all patriotic and democratic-minded Ugandans to look for electoral petitions and redress. Ugandans have learnt from this ruling that electoral petitions and subsequent by-elections are a very costly venture that could be avoided in circumstances where the winner can be visibly determined, like it was in my case. By-elections could arise only in cases where electoral procedures have been flouted without the involvement of any of the candidates participating. It has been reported in the press today that the Electoral Commission has already spent Shs 1.3 billion of taxpayers’ money on by-elections and is expected to spend in the range of about Shs 700 million more on the pending by-elections. Such wanton waste is uncalled for, Madam Speaker. 

The allegations of the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi were not only careless, but an insult to the democratic principles spelt out in the Constitution of this land and agreed upon the world over. Much as I cannot pre-empt his motives, it was clear that he was so high-handed in making statements with utter abandon and in any way that could condone lawlessness in the country. This is a clear example of taking legislation for granted and vulgarisation of the law.
 
It is my humble prayer that these allegations be expunged from the Official Report on the grounds that their merit is terribly in question, for them to be kept on record. It would amount to collective embarrassment on the part of all Members of this Parliament including those of NRM. I do so pray. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This is a personal statement which does not call for debate. 

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 176(7) AND TO THE STANDING COMMITTEES ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 148(8) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Kwagala.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to yesterday’s Order Paper, I remember very well that the Attorney-General explained that we had not considered the Committee of Subsidiary Legislation. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: That was a subject of my communication. 

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (LUWEERO TRIANGLE) (Ms Rose Namayanja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In accordance with Rule 15(10) of the Rules of Procedure, which enjoin party whips to supply lists of Members to serve on standing and sectoral committees, I have accordingly designated committee chairpersons and vice-chairpersons as the Acting Government Chief Whip, and also designated Members to various sectoral committees as indicated; I will be reading out the names. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you let her make her presentation and then you can object if she is interfering in your areas? 
 
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: I have also re-designated some honourable members to the new standing committees. Madam Speaker, I will start with the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development:
 
1.	Hon. William Nokrach, Chairperson 
2.	Hon. Margaret Baba Diri, Vice-Chairperson 
3.	Hon. Rosemary Nauwat 
4.	Hon. Theopista Nabulya 
5.	Hon. Flavia Kabahenda 
6.	Hon. Joy Arinaitwe  
7.	Hon. Beatrice Barumba
 
Committee on Natural Resources

1.	Hon. Michael Khafabusa Werikhe, Chairperson  
2.	Hon. Eddie Kwizera, Vice-Chairperson 
3.	Hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu 
4.	Hon. Annemarie Nankabirwa 
5.	Hon. Yorokamu Katwirwemu 
6.	Hon. Anifa Bangirana 
7.	Hon. Vincent Mujuni  
8.	Hon. Grace Byarugaba 
9.	Hon. Jim Muhwezi 
10.	Hon. Jacob Wangolo 
11.	Hon. Alex Ruhunda 
12.	Hon. Godfrey Kiwanda 
13.	Hon. Martin Drito 
14.	Hon. Bigirwa Julius 
15.	Hon. Margaret Komuhangi 
16.	Hon. Peter Bakaluba 
17.	Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma 
18.	Hon. Syda Bbumba 
19.	Hon. Samson Lokeris 

Committee on Public Service and Local Government

1.	Hon. Florence Kintu, Chairperson 
2.	Hon. Raphael Magyezi, Vice-Chairperson 
3.	Hon. Ignatius Besisira 
4.	Hon. Mable Bakeine 
5.	Hon. Terence Achia  
6.	Hon. Florence Mutyabule 
7.	Hon. James Kiiza 
8.	Hon. Carolyn Nanyondo  
9.	Hon. David Muhumuza 
10.	Hon. John Bosco Mubito 

Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry 

1.	Hon. Stephen Kasaija, Chairperson 
2.	Hon. Evelyn Tete, Vice-Chairperson 
3.	Hon. Grace Balyeku  
4.	Hon. James Mbahimba 
5.	Hon. Idah Nantaba 
6.	Hon. Peter Mugema 
7.	Hon. Beatrice Mpairwe 
8.	Hon. John Ssimbwa 
9.	Hon. Stephen Mayende
10.	Hon. Felix Okot Ogong 
11.	Hon. Patrick Nakabale 
12.	Hon. Elizabeth Karungi 
13.	Hon. John Mulimba 

Committee on Information and Communication Technology

1. 	Hon. Mary Turyahikayo, Chairperson 
2. 	Hon. Vincent Bagiire, Vice-Chairperson
3. 	Hon. David Bahati 
4. 	Hon. James Kabajo
5. 	Hon. Anthony Ssemuli 
6. 	Hon. Edward Kafufu Baliddawa
7. 	Hon. Geoffrey Omara 
8. 	Hon. Gregory Matovu 
9. 	Hon. Harriet Ntabazi 
10. 	Hon. Dr Elioda Tumwesigye 

Committee on Physical Infrastructure 

1.	Hon Gabriel. Ajedra, Chairperson 
2.	Hon. Samuel Ssemugaba, Vice Chairperson 
3.	Hon. Nulu Byamukama 
4.	Hon. Ephraim Biraaro
5.	Hon. Sulaiman Balyejjusa
6.	Hon. Peter Lokii 
7.	Hon. Emmanuel Dombo 
8.	 Hon. Robert Migadde 
9.	Hon. Micah Lolem 
10.	Hon. Iddi Isabirye 
11.	Hon. George Ekuma 
12.	Hon. Majegere Waira  
13.	Hon. Robinah Nabbanja 
14.	Hon. Amos Mandera 
15.	Hon. Simon Peter Aleper 

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

1.	Hon. Prof. Atwooki Kasirivu, Chairperson
2.	Hon. Jennifer Egunyu, Vice-Chairperson 
3.	Hon. Boaz Kafuda 
4.	Hon. Prof. Gilbert Bukenya 
5.	Hon. Sarah Kataike  
6.	Hon. John Okot 
7.	Hon. Huda Oleru 
8.	Hon. Oketayot Lowila 
9.	Hon. Peace Kusasira 
10.	Hon. Jalia Bintu  
11.	Hon. Dorothy Mpiima  
12.	Hon. Margaret Kiboijana 
13.	Hon. Stella Namoe 
14.	Hon. Freda Kase-Mubanda 

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs

1.	Hon. Milton Muwuma, Chairperson, 
2.	Hon. Simon Mulongo, Vice-Chairperson 
3.	Hon. Patrick Mulindwa
4.	Hon. Tonny Kipoi 
5.	Hon. Fredrick Mbagadhi 
6.	Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo 
7.	Hon. Eriaku Peter Emmanuel 
8.	Hon. George Mukula
9.	Hon. Betty Namugwanya  
10.	Hon. Margaret Makhoha 
11.	Hon. Peter Okeyoh

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development

1.	Hon. Frank Tumwebaze, Chairperson  
2.	Hon. Robert Kasule, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Hon. Michael Mawanda 
4.	Hon. Henry Musasizi 
5.	Hon. Rwakajara Arinaitwe 
6.	Hon. Anthony Okello
7.	Hon. Rose Akol 
8.	Hon. Sarah Nakawunde  
9.	Hon. Isaac Sejjoba 
10.	Hon. Xavier Kyooma 
11.	Hon. Timothy Lwanga  
12.	Hon. Martin Mugabi  
13.	Hon. Lilly Adong 
14.	Hon. Dorothy Nshaija 
15.	Hon. Hatwib Katoto
16.	Hon. Amos Lugoloobi 
17.	Hon. David Ochwa
18.	Hon. Emma Boona 
19.	Hon. Michael Ayepa

Committee on Presidential Affairs

1.	Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire,  Chairperson
2.	Col. Fred Mwesigye, the Vice-Chairperson 
3.	Hon. Tom Alero 
4.	Hon. Peter Ogwang
5.	Hon. Gertrude Nakabira
6.	Hon. Agnes Nabirye
7.	Hon. Faisal Kikulukunyu 
8.	Hon. Ernest Kiiza 
9.	Hon. Mary Amoit
10.	Hon. Muhammad Nsereko 
11.	Hon. Cerinah Nebanda

Committee on Foreign Affairs

1.	Hon. Alex Byarugaba, Chairperson 
2.	Hon. Hood Katuramu, Vice-Chairperson 
3.	Hon. Abdi Chemaswet  
4.	Hon. Edward Sempala  
5.	Hon. Onyango Kakoba
6.	Hon. Clement Ongalo 
7.	Hon. Juliana Auma 
8.	Hon. Stanley Omwonya 
9.	Hon. Hellen Asamo 
10.	Hon. Ahmed Awongo 

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

1.	Hon.  Stephen Tashobya, Chairperson
2.	Hon. Stephen Bakka, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Hon. Monicah Amoding 
4.	Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba
5.	Hon. Remigio Achia
6.	Hon. Dennis Obua
7.	Hon. Lyndah Timbigamba
8.	Hon. Yona Musinguzi 
9.	Hon. Kabakumba Masiko
10.	Hon. Jovah Kamateeka
11.	Hon. Richard Todwong 
12.	Hon. Sarah Nyirabashitsi 
13.	Hon. Annet Nyakecho 
14.	Hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny

Committee on Education and Sports

1.	Hon. Sylivia Ssinabulya, Chairperson
2.	Hon. Jacob Opolot, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Hon. Yahaya Gudoi 
4.	Hon. Connie Nakayenze
5.	Hon. William Kwemara 
6.	Hon. Tophace Kaahwa 
7.	Hon. Helen Kahunde 
8.	Hon. Lydia Chekwel
9.	Hon. Alex Ndeezi
10.	Hon. Wilson Asupasa
11.	Hon. Betty Mbabazi
12.	Hon. Victoria Busingye-Rusoke 
13.	Hon. Aboud Kitatta
14.	Hon. Khiddu Makubuya
15.	Hon. Margaret Aleper
16.	Hon. Christine Acayo
17.	Hon. John Kamara 
18.	Hon. Susan Amero 

Committee on Health

1.	Hon. Dr Samuel Lyomoki, Chairperson 
2.	Hon. Margaret Iriama, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Hon. Dr Kenneth Omona
4.	Hon. Evelyn Anite
5.	Hon. Jacquiline Amongin
6.	Hon. Naome Kabasharira
7.	Hon. Dr Medard Bitekyerezo
8.	Hon. Dr John Baptist Lokii
9.	Hon. Dr Jeremiah Twa-Twa
10.	Hon. Sarah Lanyero
11.	Hon. Evelyn Kaabule 
12.	Hon. Ruth Lematia 
13.	Hon. Rosemary  Najjemba
14.	Hon. Justine Khainza 
15.	Hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi 

Committee on East African Affairs

1.	Hon. Sarah Mwebaza, Chairperson
2.	Hon. Veronica Babirye, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Hon. Mathias Kasamba
4.	Hon. Nelson Sabila
5.	Hon. Sarah Kayagi 
6.	Hon. Safia Nalule
7.	Hon. Kyabangi Nakato
8.	Hon. Olivia Kabaale
9.	Hon. Rosemary Seninde 
10.	Hon. Baker Ssali
11.	Hon. Anne Auru 
12.  Hon. Fred Badda
13.	Hon.  Tonny Ayoo

Madam Speaker, I have re-designated some honourable members to the new standing committee on Human Rights.

1.	Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, Chairperson
2.	Hon. Safia Nalule, Vice Chairperson
3.	Hon. Margaret Iriama 
4.	Hon. David Muhumuza
5.	Hon. Rosemary Seninde 
6.	Hon. Florence Mutyabule 
7.	Hon. Clement Ongalo
8.	Hon. Elizabeth Karungi
9.	Hon. Rwakajara Arinaitwe 
10.	Hon. Onyango Kakoba
11.	Hon.  Peace Kusasira
12.	Hon.  Godfrey Kiwanda
13.	Hon. Sarah Nyirabashitsi

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 15(10) of the Rules of Procedure, I have re-designated hon. Amos Lugoloobi from the Standing Committee on Government Assurances to the Standing Committee on Budget, replacing hon. Nasser Basajjabalaba.

I would also like to replace hon. Safia Nalule with hon. Wilberforce Yaguma, who is designated as Vice-Chairperson for the Committee on Equal Opportunities. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you.  Can we listen to the submissions by hon. Otada?

5.49
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, before I read the list of Independent Members of Parliament, I wish to say that we had adopted a good practice in the last session of Parliament, because we had a meeting of Whips, and I represented the Independents as their coordinator in that meeting.

We reached consensus on certain issues of representation, of membership and of chairing, and deputising committees in that small meeting. I thought that was a good method of work because at that point, we agreed that the Committee on Rules be chaired by an Independent Member of Parliament, and the Committee of Science and Technology be deputised by an Independent Member of Parliament by consensus.

This time round, we did not do that and yet this House approved three additional sessional committees on top of the 12 to make 15 sessional committees of Parliament. I want to address Members with a fair mind, if you have a fair mind really. Those who do not have fair minds and believe in the power of numbers, I am not talking to those ones. So, in all fairness, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for an honourable Member of Parliament who is trusted as the coordinator of Independents, to put this august House to a measure by saying that some people may have a fair sound mind and others may not, on television, when citizens who voted for us are listening to him, showing that other Members may not be of sound mind? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, he was not talking about soundness of the mind; he was talking about fairness. (Applause)

MR SAM OTADA: Madam Speaker, I hope my colleague is not conscious. Anyway, I was making the point that the list read by hon. Ruth Namayanja clearly shows that the ruling party chairs and deputises all the 15 sessional committees; is that fair? Independent members of Parliament are not second class Members. We may base on Rules of Procedure of Parliament – that is in order – but Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ROBERT KASULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would not have continued to disrupt the Member on the Floor, but I want us to be clear on what is going on. I do not know in whose capacity hon. Otada is addressing this House. And is he addressing Government as the Opposition or some kind of authority? Can we get the clear position of hon. Otada and go by the rules. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am the whip of the Independents and I have delegated my power to hon. Otada. (Applause)

MR SAM OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. I also invite my colleague who has raised that point that if you want to know the power of Article 29 of the Constitution, this is when he should appreciate it. Do you really want each of the 44 Members of Parliament to stand here and speak? We would spend the whole night here. So, I think you should appreciate the beauty of all the 44 who are saying the same thing through one person. I think that is commonsense. The Speaker and I are just trying to save time and make the House move at a certain rate.

Madam Speaker, even if we emphasise that the rule does not expressly state how an Independent Member shall chair and deputise a committee, I think the consensus method of work which we developed with hon. Bahati in the last session was a good way of doing business. If we do not get fairness here, we shall consider other options of getting fairness, if colleagues here do not think that we merit chairing and deputising committees. So, I have said that without any fear of contradiction, on behalf of Independent Members of Parliament. 

May I also announce that we are glad to add to our number, hon. Kasibante; he is now Independent Member number 44. We are such a number which cannot just be played around with. I have the list of Independents – and again I thank you, Madam Speaker, for delegating your powers to me, that way it makes our work quite easy  because you are a busy person. The following honourable members wish to join the following committees:

Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development

1.	Hon. Manoah Achile 
2.	Hon. Rose Iriama

Committee on Natural Resources 

1.	Hon. Andrew Baryayanga
2.	Hon. Jacob Oboth
3.	Hon. Phyllis Chemutai 

Committee on Public Service and Local Government 

1.	Hon. Joseph Matte
2.	Hon. Kenneth Kiyingi

Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry 

1.	Hon. Julius Maganda 
2.	Hon. Kenneth Lubogo 

Committee on ICT

1.	Hon. Mariam Nalubega 

Committee on Physical Infrastructure

1.	Hon. John Bagoole 
2.	Hon. Martin Mugarra
3.	Hon. Robert Kafeero 

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

1.	Hon. Moses Kasibante
2.	Hon. Vincent Ssempijja

 Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs

1.	Hon. Rose Akello
2.	Hon. Cyrus Amodoi
3.	Hon. Kezekia Mbugo
 
Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development

1.	Hon. Michael Oromait 
2.	Hon. Joshua Anywarach 
3.	Hon. Gerald Karuhanga 

Committee on Presidential Affairs

1.	Hon. Patrick Nsanja
2.	Hon. Haruna Kyeyune 
3.	Hon. Mathias Mpuuga 
4.	Hon. Jesca Ababiku 

Committee on Foreign Affairs 

1.	Hon. Joy Atim
2.	Hon. Benjamin Cadet 
3.	Hon. Sanjay Tanna

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs

1.	Hon. Jennifer Mujungu
2.	Hon. Fox Odoi
3.	Hon. Grace Namara 
4.	Hon. Sam Otada 

Committee on Education and Sports

1.	Hon. Mary Nalubega

Committee on Health

1.	Hon. Dr Sam Okuonzi 
2.	Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro 
3.	Hon. Ronah Ninsiima 

Committee on East African Community Affairs

1.	Hon. Gilbert Olanya
 
The Standing Committee on Human Rights

1.	Hon. Kenneth Lubogo
2.	Hon. Moses Kasibante 
3.	Hon. Jesca Ababiku

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, you have not placed hon. Andrew Allen on any committee, but you can place him on the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

MR SAM OTADA: Sorry, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, Andrew Allen belongs to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Thank you. 

5.59
MR PHILLIP OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here in my capacity as the acting Chief Whip of the Opposition.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before hon. Oguttu continues, let me introduce the children who are up in the Gallery from King David Primary School, Kyadondo County East. They are represented by hon. Nganda and hon. Seninde. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the acting Chief Whip –(Interjections)– I am the acting Chief Whip of the Opposition before we bring hon. Winifred Kiiza, who is coming back shortly. (Laughter) I wish to present the list of committee members from the Opposition. 

Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development 

1.	Hon. Betty Aol 
2.	Hon. Florence Namayanja

Committee on ICT 

1.	Hon. Bernard Atiku
2.	Hon. Phillip Oguttu
3.	Hon. Benson Obua-Ogwal
4.	Hon. Odonga Otto

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development

1.	Hon. Franca Akello
2.	Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya
3.	Hon. Jack Sabiiti 
4.	Hon. Isaiah Ssasaga 
5.	Hon. Issa Kikungwe
6.	Hon. Maxwell Akora
7.	Hon. Odo Tayebwa

Committee on Physical Infrastructure

1.	Hon. Patrick Amuriat
2.	Hon. William Nzoghu
3.	Hon. Stephen Ochola
4.	Hon. Peter Omolo
5.	Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju 
6.	Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba 
7.	Hon. Joy Acheng

Committee on Natural Resources 

1.	Hon. Alice Alaso
2.	Hon. Beatrice Atim  
3.	Hon. Yokasi Bwambale-Bihande 
4.	Hon. Reagan Okumu 
5.	Hon. Jimmy Akena
6.	Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi

Committee on Public Service and Local Government

1.	Hon. Christine Bako 
2.	Hon. Roland Mugume 
3.	Hon. Nambooze Bakireke 
4.	Hon. Santa Alum 

Committee on Agriculture

1.	Hon. Francis Epetait 
2.	Hon. Kassiano Wadri 
3.	Hon. Lucy Ajok 

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs 

1.	Hon. Hassan Fungaroo 
2.	Hon. Hussein Kyanjo 

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs 

1.	Hon. Christopher Acire
2.	Hon. Abdu Katuntu 
3.	Hon. Paul Mwiru 
4.	Hon. Medard Lubega 
5.	Hon. Joseph Mutebi 
6.	Hon. Krispus Ayena 

The Committee on Human rights 

Madam Speaker, we are under the impression that human rights is an oversight committee, which is supposed to be chaired by us. The Speaker had said we were going to settle this administratively, but up to now, we think we are going to be chairing this committee and the following are the members:

Committee on Human Rights

1.	Hon. Alice Alaso, Chairperson
2.	Hon. Isaiah Ssasaga, Vice-Chairperson
3.	Hon. Hussein Fungaroo 
4.	Hon. Nambooze Bakireke 
5.	Hon. Cecilia Ogwal Atim
6.	Hon. Fred Ebil
7.	Hon. Reagan Okumu 

Committee on Education and Sports 

1.	Hon. Angelline Osegge 
2.	Hon. Joseph Ssewungu

Committee on Trade and Tourism

1.	Hon. Kevinah Taaka
2.	Hon. Nabilah Naggayi
3.	Hon. Mohammed Kawuma 
4.	Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi 

Committee on Foreign Affairs

1.	Hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai 
2.	Hon. Latif Ssebagala 
3.	Hon. Fred Ebil 

Committee on Health

1.	Hon. Michael Bayigga 
2.	Hon. Betty Amongi 
3.	Hon. Femiar Wadada 

Committee on East African Affairs

1.	Hon. Susan Namaganda 
2.	Hon. Elijah Okupa 

Committee on Presidential Affairs

1.	Hon. Jacinto Ogwal 
2.	Hon. Mathias Mpuuga 
3.	Hon. Florence Ekwau 

Madam Speaker those are the names we have. I beg to move.

MRS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is, I am on the committee on Public Service and Local Government, but my name was not pronounced well. It was pronounced “Aluma” but it is Alum. So, I hope the spelling is okay.

MR OGUTTU: Much obliged. It will be corrected. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there any Member who has not been placed on any committee?

CAPT. LAKOT: Madam Speaker, I have not heard any of the UPDF Members as belonging to any of the committees. 

THE SPEAKER: You are Members of this House. Did you apply? 

CAPT. LAKOT: Yes, Madam Speaker, I did apply. I even have a copy of all the Members of UPDF on the different committees.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you submit the list to the Clerk so that we know where you applied because you did not apply to me. 

CAPT. LAKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: When we get it, we shall place you.

MRS BETTY AMONGI ATIM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter in respect to the Rules of Procedure which we passed, mandating at least 40 percent of the leadership positions to be occupied by women. I am glad the acting Government Chief Whip is a senior woman of this House and a member of UWOPA. I heard her read women - five chairpersons and six women for vice-chairpersons. That would constitute 33.3 percent and for vice-chairpersons, it would constitute 33.8 percent, short of the 40 percent -(Interjections)- Can I know what went wrong? 

And two, can I know how we can proceed in respect to not conforming to that particular rule?

6.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (LUWEERO TRIANGLE) (Ms Rose Namayanja): Madam Speaker, my interpretation of that rule is that we are looking at about 40 percent in totality, both Opposition and Government - the entire House. As far as the NRM is concerned, first of all, for the old committees, we did not change the leadership but for the new committees that were established by this House, they were four committees and, therefore, eight Members who are supposed to be on the leadership. Out of the eight, six are women and it is more than 90 percent, and our intention is actually to go even beyond. Because, when we look at NRM alone, we are at almost 35 percent and we believe that in the next session when we internally change our leadership, we shall even go beyond. But we would also wish to hear from the Opposition on how many women have been put on these committees. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the mistake we probably made was not to take a position on whether we are going to reconstitute all the sessional committees or not. I think we did not take a position on dismantling all of them and reconstituting them in the rules. Maybe, we should have addressed it.  

6.10
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have had an experience in mainstreaming issues of gender in this country and this really calls for patience. The time Uganda took that affirmative decision and accordingly established the first ministry known as the Ministry of Women in Development, it was a gradual process, and from that time to date, I think we have made some strides. Neighbouring countries in the East African region, more specifically Rwanda, have learned a lot from us and have gone a little further than us.

I do appreciate the sensitivity of the issue of gender representation. I would like to advise and really beg my sisters that we should appreciate what we so far have in our hearts. I am looking at a situation of the entire population of Parliament consisting of 375 MPs with 120 women MPs each representative of women representing districts, and those others who have competed for constituency seats. When we look at all these and add them up, I think in all fairness, the ratio that has been given in as far as leadership is concerned vis-à-vis the positions held by men, is good enough for us to have a starting point. Good enough, this Parliament has that unique position and advantage of being chaired by a lady. There are not many in Africa. So, we should really be able to say we have something in our hands and we can improve on it gradually. When we get so rigid -(Interruption.)

MRS BETTY AMONGI ATIM: Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of guidance on the Rules of Procedure. The Rules of Procedure have already been passed as a minimum of 40 percent. Now, you are taking us back to the amendment of that rule. Is it in order, therefore, for the honourable member, to make an argument as if he is debating an amendment of the rule, and yet I am raising a matter in conformity with the rules which have already been passed?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should have addressed this matter when we were doing the rules. We should have taken a decision to dismantle all the sessional committees and reconstitute them. I think that is what we should have done, but we did not do it. So, I think that we can note that we have fallen slightly short of the 40 percent, but undertake that we must reconstitute all the sessional committees in the third session, and that we must get 40 percent. (Applause) I want a commitment on equity and I want a commitment on the Independents.

6.14
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, our position on Independents is favourable. We consider Independents as our allies. If you have an ally in the Army, you give them an ark of fire so that when you are fighting and you hear some fire shots from that side, you know these are from friendly forces. We have -(Interruption)

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order, with due respect to the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business. He referred to Independents as their allies and I am not one of them. I am an Independent, but I am not your ally. So, I would not want you to refer to me as something I am not. We are Independent Members of Parliament and our status is very clear; that we are independent of any party, whether the party in Government or the party in the Opposition.

We are not allying. We are on our own and what we are demanding are our rights and our entitlements. So, we do not need any favour from anyone. 

Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to insinuate that we are here allying with him, especially when I am not allying with him?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want anybody to own another Member of Parliament. In my register, Members are either Independents or they are FDC or they are NRM or DP or UPC or JEEMA and CP. So, nobody owns the other. Now, I want a commitment from you on the question of equity in the third session. Government Chief Whip, I want a commitment from you before we vote.

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, the side of the ruling party has handled this issue equitably, previously, to the extent that there are some Members who are chairpersons of standing committees or vice-chairpersons and they are Independent. We believe that in the next session, like you said, Madam Speaker, on the issues of gender, that we did not reconstitute all the committees, but this is an issue that we undertake to consider in the next session. That is my commitment.

THE SPEAKER: That is an assurance now from the government side. I will be here to monitor its implementation. Okay, please conclude, Prime Minister.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, according to the history of this Parliament, we had a memorandum of understanding in the Eighth Parliament. When I say these are our allies, I do not mean to offend anybody and this is strictly how we relate. Most of them were actually Members of NRM in the beginning. During the primaries, when they lost, they stood as Independents. That is why I say they are our allies. If you are not, then it is not an offence really. We are not short of people anyway. (Laughter) We are not dying for people, but our hands are open. If you come, okay; if you do not come, it is still okay. We have discussed their participation in leadership in the next session.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee on Gender still has only 11 members. It is below the minimum. Can I ask the whips to look at the situation again and see what changes they can make? It is below the minimum.

MR SAM OTADA: Madam Speaker, you realise that many colleagues did not do very well in terms of writing to you, especially the Independents. That is why you kept on reminding us to write even at the last meeting of the Budget Speech. We did not do very well in terms of writing to the Clerk. 

I just have four adjustments to make and I seek your indulgence.

One is a designation of a new Member, hon. Kasibante, who has just made his maiden speech here. Due to lack of coordination again, we did not coordinate with him very well and he prefers the Committee on Education and not the Committee of Agriculture as it was earlier mentioned, and I apologise on his behalf for that.

Our other colleague, hon. Kaddumukasa, wants the Committee of Trade and not Public Service. Again, many colleagues have been asking who hon. Kaddumukasa is. He is hardly in the House; he is still battling his court cases, which are protracted, and I think we should excuse him for that. The third Member is hon. Godfrey Lubega, who wants to be retained in the Committee of Tourism.

Last, but not least, hon. John Bagoole who wants to be retained on the Committee on Finance and not Physical Infrastructure.
Again, I think this is good because the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is oversubscribed. So, I think this gives room for somebody else to come in especially from my friendly forces on the other side. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope that is acceptable to you. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on the matter of the Committee on Human Rights. 

THE SPEAKER: No, we are not yet there. Let me finish with the sessional committees. I want to deal with the sessional committees first.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I was attentive when the coordinator of the Independents was reading the names of Members to belong to committees and also the acting whip of FDC -(Interjections)- acting  Chief Whip of  FDC -(Interjections)- okay, of the Opposition. He read the name of Mathias Mpuuga which was equally read by hon. Otada. I am at a loss. Who should lead, who should own hon. Mpuuga? (Interjections) It is misleading to us to find that he can be read by the Opposition Chief Whip yet we very well know that hon. Mpuuga is an Independent Member of this House. The right person maybe to have read his name should have been hon. Otada.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mpuuga is an Independent Member of Parliament. He belongs to the Independents. Can I ask Capt. Lakot to -(Mr Mujuni rose_)– I want to finish with the sessional committees. Yes, hon. Kyamadidi. 

MR VINCENT MUJUNI: Madam Speaker, I was listening attentively to our acting Chief Whip and under 13(10) she moved to replace some Members in terms of leadership. Our rules require that no one Member should subscribe to more than one sessional committee or more than one standing committee, yet to the best of my understanding, hon. Yaguma has been made the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities. That is a standing committee, but he is also a Member of the Committee on Natural Resources in as far as you read. (Interjections) Yes, sessional committee. This is what I am asking. Yes, he has been a Member of PAC. I have not seen you withdraw this honourable member from PAC. So, how shall we proceed, Madam Speaker?  Also, hon. Rosemary Seninde has been put on the Committee on Human Rights, yet, she has also been a Member of PAC, and we have not seen the acting Chief Whip withdraw these Members from their other standing committees. How do we proceed?

THE SPEAKER: We were dealing with sessional committees first. Why don’t we finish sessional committees? Capt. Lakot can read out the proposals for UPDF, but I suggest that you assist the Committee on Gender and take some of these Members there. They are only 11. (Laughter) 

6.25
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the whip to the UPDF Members of Parliament, I beg to read the names of the UPDF Members of Parliament for the different sectoral committees of Parliament.   

Committee of Public Service and Local Government - hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine;
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - hon. Gen. Aronda Nyakairima;
Committee on Natural Resources - hon. Gen. David Sejusa;
Committee on Physical Infrastructure - hon. Lt Gen. Katumba Wamala;
Committee on Information and Communication Technology - hon. Lt Gen. Jim Owoyesigire. 
Committee on Presidential Affairs - hon. Maj. Gen. Julius Oketta;
Committee on Foreign Affairs - hon. Brig. Charles Angina;
Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs - hon. Col Phinehas Katirima;
Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs - hon. Lt Col Sarah Mpabwa; and
Committee on Education and Sports -  hon. Capt. Susan Lakot.

I beg to move.  However, we shall look at the issue of placement on the Gender Committee and inform the House accordingly. Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of guidance. I applied to remain on the Committee on Gender, but my name has gone to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I want to be guided. If what has already gone on the Hansard remains the way it is; I think it would not be my best -

THE SPEAKER: No, we have not voted. So, are you saying you want to go to the Committee on Gender?

MR ANYWARACH: Strictly Gender.

THE SPEAKER: So, remove him from Finance and take him to Gender. 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: So, now we have 12 Members. Thank you, hon. Anywarach. Honourable members, is there anybody who has not been placed? Those who are absent. Okay, honourable members, the sessional committees - I put the question –

MR SAM OTADA: Madam Speaker, just one issue. With the short consultation, we realised that the Committee on Human Rights is a very important committee and we had only designated two Members. Therefore, I request that we add the name of Ronah Ninsiima and Joy Atim to the standing committee on Human Rights. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay honourable members, I put the question that the proposal for the sessional committees as proposed be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: However, I ask the Whips to reconsider and see how we can support the committees on Gender and Education. On the Standing Committee on Human Rights, I was not here when you were working on the rules, but my enquiries reveal that there was a debate on this matter and a vote was taken to retain it as a sessional committee. That is what I have been advised by the clerk. It is a standing committee, but not an accountability committee. (Applause) 

6.29
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to bring this as a point of distinction between a sessional committee and a standing committee. In my understanding, sessional committees oversee ministries which are directly involved in the implementation of policies. That is why the party in Government considers it very dear to itself to have Education, Agriculture, and Physical Infrastructure so that it can fulfil its manifesto. 

Whereas on the other side, a standing committee like is the case with Human Rights, the Human Rights Commission, which is the overall institution responsible for human rights issues in this country, does not implement any policies. It is a committee which is intended to keep Government on check of its excesses. Therefore, to expect the government of the day to superintend its own faults, which it has made to its people will raise a conflict of interest. (Interjections) It will be a conflict of interest. [Mr Byandala: “Information.”] I will take the information, but to me, it is a conflict of interest.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank my brother Wadri, for giving way. You see, violation of human rights is not only by Government. Even if you are in the Opposition, you can violate human rights. [Hon. Members:- “Walk-to-work.”] So, you cannot start arguing that we are going to look at Government only. This is for everybody. It is not for Government. So, that argument that you are checking Government is null and void.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati. I will come.

MR BAHATI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. We do respect every view of every Member in this House, but this matter was debated extensively and comprehensively. We listened to different views from different sides of the House; we took a decision that this committee is not an oversight committee and, therefore, should be chaired by the side of Government, and this is a decision of Parliament. The point of procedure I am raising is that, are we opening a debate on this matter, because we also have rules on this matter?        

THE SPEAKER: Now honourable members, unless the Hansard proves that you did not vote on this matter and we agreed that it was not an oversight committee, I want to propose that we try it for this session and then if we need to review, we can review the rules again – because this is a new committee and we do not have all the parameters. Let us try it for this one year and then we can review it at the end of the session. I want to go by the decisions of the House and I do not want to overturn them. I now put the question that the Committee on Human Rights as constituted be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ROSEMARY NAMAYANJA: There was an issue that was raised by hon. Kyamadidi that we did not remove the other Members whom you have designated to different committees. Our understanding of designation is that somebody has been removed from there to the new committee. So, consequentially that person ceases to belong to the other committee. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: No one can belong to more than two committees anyway. Hon. Taaka has not spoken.

MS TAAKA: I thank you very much for this opportunity. Madam Speaker, you have put a question and everybody has agreed. We, on this side, also have the chair and everybody on the human rights committee, so is the other side.  So, we have two human rights committees –(Interjections)- it was read -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Taaka, you voted on this matter when you were making the rules and it was agreed that it is not an oversight committee. Therefore, the chair of this side is the chair of the committee. The other Members are welcome. Let us move on. If it fails for this session, we shall change. Let us give it an opportunity to work for a start. Let us go to the next item.

PRESENTATION FROM THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE MEDIUM-TERM MACROECONOMIC PLAN AND PROGRAMMES FOR SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FOR FISCAL YEARS 2012/2013 - 2016/2017 AND THE INDICATIVE PRELIMINARY REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK OF THE GOVERNMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

6.36
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Tim Lwanga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I did lay a copy of the big report yesterday and because many Members did not have the copy, the copies which I believe they have today, we had to stop and so I have to repeat and read through.

Madam Speaker, the Budget Committee considered the National Budget Framework Paper comprising the Medium-Term Macroconomic Plan, Programmes for Social and Economic Development and the Indicative Budget Framework for the next fiscal year presented to Parliament in accordance with Section 4 (1) and (2) of the Budget Act 2001.

The Budget Committee also considered the reports and recommendations of the sessional committees on the Government proposals. I must warn the Members that what we are giving you here is a summary of the report. The actual report has been –

THE SPEAKER: It is a summary.

MR LWANGA: It is a summary.

THE SPEAKER: The main report was given to me and the President and it was signed, but this is a summary.

MR LWANGA: The committee prepared its report and submitted to His Excellency the President as per Section 7(3) of the Budget Act on 14 May 2012. As I said, Madam Speaker, I laid the report on Table yesterday and actually, Members have copies of the big report on their email addresses.
Section 8 of the Budget Act requires that I present the same report to Parliament. This is to highlight some key features of the report. Proposals for re-allocations and funding gaps are also contained in the report. 

The Budget Committee outlined key principles and proposals for effective budgetary allocations and implementation. These are expected to guide His Excellency the President, in the subsequent presentation of the budget proposals and plans, which I think was done this month. Section II of the Budget Act enjoins Parliament to analyze programmes and policy issues that affect the national budget and the economy, and where necessary, recommend alternative approaches to the Government. At an appropriate time, the Parliament will verify that the programmes of the various ministries and departments comply with these principles as a pre-requisite for budget appropriation.

The Budget Committee also considered the submissions from sessional committees and made adjustments to figures within and across sectors in accordance with priorities of the country and in line with national goals contained in the National Development Plan (NDP). This was done by providing general and specific observations and recommendations.

The committee also made suggestions to improve the effectiveness and responsiveness of the NDP to the country’s economic and social needs. The Budget Committee continues to support the theme of the NDP being: “Growth, Employment and Socio-Economic Transformation for Prosperity”. The committee will ensure that budgetary outlays in the medium-term deliver the objectives of this theme. 

The committee also supported the budget strategy for the financial year 2012/13, which focuses on the following areas:

a)	Maintaining macroeconomic stability;
b)	Increasing agricultural productivity;
c)	Encouraging agro-processing and market diversification;
d)	Appropriate skills development;
e)	Facilitation of private sector;
f)	Removing infrastructural constraints in transport and energy; and
g)	Efficiency in Public Service delivery.

The committee also welcomes the government’s employment strategy for financial year 2012/13 involving:

•	Vocational training;
•	Youth venture capital;
•	Improving employment services; and
•	Increased infrastructural development

However, the committee recommends that this strategy is popularised and made as transparent as possible to enable the beneficiaries to have easy and equitable access.

The Budget Committee is concerned about the laxity in economic management, which resulted in escalating inflation and attendant increases in bank and interest rates. This laxity was in the bigger part a result of the large losses incurred by the Central Bank in its operations as a result of financial pressures placed on Bank of Uganda by the Government. The committee recommends that the Government respects the independence and autonomy of Bank of Uganda and desists from exploiting weaknesses of law, to put undue financial pressure on Bank of Uganda. (Applause) The committee further recommends increases in infrastructure investments to stem any impending economic slowdown. 

The financial sector has experienced some shocks recently, both in interest and exchange rates which caused unrest in the business community. The committee recommends that the financial sector should be deepened with the pension sector and investment policy reforms, and provision of support for the extension of banking and financial services to rural areas. 

The committee also recommends that Microfinance Deposits Taking Institutions’ (MDI) regulatory framework is expedited and presented to Parliament for enactment as soon as possible.

The committee is concerned that the revenue to GDP ratio has stagnated at 12.6 percent making our budget to continue relying heavily on external financing. The committee recommends that the scope for tax improvement should actively be explored with the aim of widening the tax base rather than overburdening the existing taxpayers.

Madam Speaker, poor absorption of development and donors’ funds was also handled. The committee is concerned about widespread absorption problems, especially relating to developing a budget across virtually all sectors. This also affects externally financed activities.

The reason advanced for poor absorption range from procurement constraints and contract management, change in design, land acquisition difficulties and others. Most departments have returned funds to the Treasury at the close of the financial year, even when the procurement process was ongoing. The committee recommends that these absorption obstacles are addressed urgently to improve service delivery. 

Funding gaps for underfunded and unfunded activities

The committee has noted a number of funding gaps for priorities across various sectors. Where Parliament has identified these requirements in this report, they should be given priority whenever new resources are identified during this or subsequent fiscal years.

Development of ICT in the country

The committee notes that ICT is a very critical part of national development infrastructure. However, the Ministry of ICT and NITA-Uganda, as the agency responsible for ICT infrastructure development, are grossly underfunded. The committee noted that the levy collected by the Uganda Communications Commission is not fully utilised.
 
In the circumstances, the committee recommends that the government explores a mechanism of utilising redundant resources at the Commission for ICT development.

Public Finance Management

The committee notes the proposal to reform public finance management by consolidating the various laws. However, the committee cautions that this change should not compromise vital elements of each of the laws in question.

The committee does not support – and I want to repeat - the proposal to merge the Budget Act with the proposed public finance management law.

The committee recommends that the Budget Act should remain distinct from the proposed Public Finance Bill to avoid mixing roles and responsibilities of the implementing agencies.

Infrastructure development for roads and energy

The committee is concerned about the poor state of Uganda’s physical infrastructure despite significant budgetary allocations over the last three financial years. Poor infrastructure or lack of it has also been identified in the NDP as a binding constraint on economic growth and social economic development. It increases the cost of doing business and trade, and constrains the enhancement of rural income as access to markets is limited. 

The committee further notes that previous efforts in the development of Uganda’s physical infrastructure, particularly the roads, has been hampered by the shortage of the implementing capacity. Focus on the road sub-sector should emphasise capacity development and outsourcing, including the use of labour-based approaches where applicable. Rehabilitation of the railway network should also be undertaken urgently.

The committee notes the decision to commence the Karuma Hydro Electric Power Station Project, and to complete the construction of Bujagali Hydro Electric Power Station. These and other efforts should be intensified to increase the power generation capacity in the country.

Public-Private Partnerships

The committee is concerned that the policy and legal framework on public-private partnership isn’t yet in place. We, therefore, recommend that a legal framework be enacted to regulate public-private partnership, and such activity should henceforth be halted until the entire attendant regulatory framework is put in place.

Petroleum and Mineral Development

While the discovery of petroleum presents a solution to the country’s financial problems, it also poses a potential risk of civil and economic strife if not transparently handled. The committee advises that the exploitation and management of the petroleum resources should be undertaken in a manner that will not disrupt other aspects of the nation’s economic life. A legal framework for the exploitation and exploration of this resource should be expedited.

Land grabbing

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of land grabbing and irregular allocation of land. The committee is concerned about the rampant land grabbing and the irregular allocation of land to certain persons in the name of investors. This phenomenon has resulted into the loss of land by individuals and public institutions. It has also resulted into the loss of trust in the land registration or allocation system.

The committee recommends that Government enforces the land laws without discrimination, and strengthens the land registration system. The government is also encouraged to secure titles for all public land, including roads, to stem encroachment on such land. We also recommend that Government urgently restores public confidence in the land management administration institutions.

Agriculture

Under this sector, we look at the poor absorption of budget releases, especially at the local level, and the non-observance of the access to the project conditions. The other key issues include:

•	The lack of a capital budget for the cotton sub-sector, prompting the diversion of funds from the current development activities affecting service delivery.

•	The provision of agricultural services through the decentralised system continues to face challenges, as local governments face acute shortage of staff, and non-operationalisation of the approved structure for the production and marketing departments.

•	The unclear roles in the provision of water for production between Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Water and Environment. 

•	The lack of fertilizers and policies to guide interventions in sectors.

•	Limited funding for livestock activity improvement.

•	The limited involvement of the agricultural sector in the selection of beneficiaries of the agricultural credit fund.

•	The creation of matching grants is more complicated as it would be based on farmers’ willingness to contribute to maintenance and operational costs of the equipment and not capability.

•	Insufficient non-wage provisions for the setting up of new directorates or departments for their effective operations under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

•	he implementation of NAGRIC and DB structure is 30 percent of the establishment constraining service delivery.

•	The fees paid by the fisher folk for fishing licenses, including the cost of the fishing vessel identification plates also known as number plates in Ssese Islands. However, all the revenue for fishing licenses is transferred to the Consolidated Fund as non-tax revenue retaining no funds for issuing these licenses.

•	Insufficient funds available to finance NARO in the financial year 2012/2013 due to reduction of donor contribution to the NARO budget.

•	Ministry of Agriculture is spending Shs 2.76 billion annually on rent, which money could be used to start on the construction of a permanent home for the ministry.

Trade, Tourism and Industry

Madam Speaker, the main issues under this ministry include:

•	Legality of the Uganda Development Corporation, the statutory body that has been converted into a private limited company;

•	the revival of co-operatives.

•	The Africa Growth Opportunity Act (AGOA) is placed under the direct supervision of this ministry;

•	Construction of export development centre;

•	Creation of micro, small and medium enterprises;

•	Strengthening cross border trade;

•	Pre-export verification of conformity;

•	Strengthening the commercial extension services; and

	 Uganda Industrial Research Institute. 

Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage

The main issues under this ministry include:

•	Inadequate funding to the tourism sector and yet 9.2 percent of GDP comes from this sector; 
•	Insufficient marketing of tourism;
•	The need to construct a tourism circuit;
•	Compensation for loss of lives and destruction of crops;
•	Compensation of land owners in the wild reserves;
•	Need to carry out the animal census in our game parks
•	Lack of a home for the ministry;  and
•	Safety of the museum land and inadequate human resources.

Information, Communication and Technology

The main issues in the information, communication and technology sector include: 

•	Lack of a refurbishment centre to handle unwanted electrical and electronic equipment and the E-waste recycling in all regions of the country; 

•	Lack of public awareness of physical addressing and post code project, a pilot of which is being carried out in Entebbe Municipality;

•	Lack of a vote status for NITA Uganda;

•	PBO activities are still underfunded;

•	Lack of funding for E-Government implementation; and

•	The challenge of rent. 

Social Services

Under the social services sector, we handle education, sports and also the health sector. 

Under the education and sports sector, key issues include: 

•	Inadequate increment of salaries for teachers; 
•	Inadequate UPE and USE capitation grants;
•	Need to prioritise Special Needs Education; 
•	Need to review the Thematic Curriculum;

	Gender concerns in the sector;

•	Urgent need to operationalise Government policy of having public universities in each of the counties; and
•	Need to operationalise the students’ loan scheme. 

•	Under the health sector, Madam Speaker, the following are the main issues:

•	Underfunding of the sector;

•	Inadequate medical personnel; 
 
•	Motivation and increment of salaries for health workers;
•	Underfunding of immunisation and disease management; 
•	The need to prevent and manage Malaria increase;
•	There is need to prioritise the prevention and management of HIV/AIDS;
•	Urgent need for implementation of the health insurance scheme; 
•	The need to minimise medical treatment abroad;
•	There is need to increase funding for health facilities under the local governments;
•	There is need to recruit lower level medical workers at the Uganda Heart Institute and Cancer Institute;
•	There is poor supply of medicines, supplies and commodities at National Medical Stores; and 
•	The Social Health Insurance Scheme. 

Gender, Labour and Social Development

The key issues under the Gender, Labour and Social Development sector include:

•	Lack of adequate facilitation for community development workers in the local governments;

•	Intervention on street children not adequately addressed;

•	Exorbitant fees paid by the ministry for Simbamanyo Building - we don’t see why they don’t build their own;

•	Inadequate funding for the wage; 
•	Functional adult literacy with a shortfall of Shs 3.6 billion;  

•	Inadequate facilitation of FAL instructors in the local governments;
 
•	Operationalisation of the Kiswahili Council; 

•	Poor performance departments of occupational safety and health; 
•	The Equal Opportunities Commission requires an independent vote separate from the ministry; 
•	Administration of labour services in the local governments is not functional; and

•	De-linking the department of labour from the ministry - we think that that is the problem. 

Works, Lands, Housing and Urban Development

We start with works and transport. 
Madam Speaker, the issues under works and transport include:

•	Inadequate capacity of local contractors; 
•	Delayed release of funds for counterpart funding; 
•	Delay in compensation for right of way acquisition; 
•	Lengthy PPDA procurement procedures; 
•	Dwindling share of Government of Uganda Budget towards the development budget, which has reduced from 50 percent in the financial year 2011/2012 to 44 percent in the financial year 2012/2013. In addition, despite the fact that a number of roads projects have been tendered, there are no funds to have them kick-started in the next financial year starting next week.
 
•	Shortfalls for ongoing road constructions and a number of projects ready for tendering but lacking funds to have then started next  financial year. 

•	UNRA undertakes many roads construction projects with very meagre resources allocation;
	 
•	Funds from the fuel levy and other road-user charges are still collected by URA and remitted to the Consolidated Fund instead of a special account as envisaged in the Road Fund Act. 

•	Many bridges and roads are in a sorry state after being washed away and damaged by heavy floods across the country;

•	Delay in releasing the findings of the feasibility studies for the re-opening of Kampala-		Kasese-Tororo-Pakwach railway line. 

•	No funding to work on the additional 10,000 kilometres upgraded from districts to national road status; and 

•	Laxity in enforcing of road designs for ongoing projects.
 
Lands, Housing and Urban Development

The main issues under this sector include:

•	Underfunding of the Land Fund;
•	Lack of an enabling law to guide the operationalisation of the Uganda Land 	Commission;
•	High incidents of land disputes including districts and national border conflicts;
•	Lack of a streamlined housing policy; 
•	Lack of a national land use plan;
•	Lack of a clear mechanisms of allocating and accessing public land;
•	Housing loan scheme for the civil servants is still wanting;
•	Indiscriminate encroachment on wetlands and water shores;
•	Inadequate funding for district land boards; 	and 
•	Delayed compensation to ranchers.
    • Legal and Parliamentary Affairs 

The main issues in the legal and parliamentary affairs sector include:

•	Inadequate budget provisions for rent for the Ministry of Justice and Uganda Registration Service Board;

•	No budgetary provision to facilitate the Government witnesses to attend court under 	the DPP;

•	Lack of ample provision for court awards, 	human rights court tribunal awards and 		compensations keep the domestic arrears accumulating;

•	Thorough enhancement for statutory institutions such as Electoral Commission, Law Reform Commission and Uganda Human Rights Commission that was last revised in the early 1990;

•	Lack of a development budget for the construction of a head office for the following institutions: Inspectorate of Government, Electoral Commission and Uganda Human Rights Commission. 

•	Inadequate operational funds for the Electoral Commission to conduct elections for village, parish and county councils plus women in the financial year 2011/2012; and

•	Inadequate office space for Members of Parliament and the need for a new chamber. 
 
Public Service and Local Government, Ministry of Public Service and Public Service Commission

Issues under this sector are:

•	Payment of pensions;
•	Poor salaries for public servants; 
•	District Service Commissions not fully constituted; and 
•	Officers in acting capacity beyond the statutory period of six months. 

Ministry of Local Government and Local Government Finance Commission 

The issues under this sector are:

•	Poor facilitation for councillors;
•	Local Council I elections still pending; 
•	Bicycles for LC I disappeared somewhere;
•	Equalisation grants; 
•	Unspent balances by local governments;
•	Staffing levels in local governments; 
•	Non-wage component of the unconditional grant was so limited; and 
•	Flexibility principle of the conditional grant was reversed by Cabinet.

Natural resources, energy and mineral development

In this sector, Madam Speaker, the issues are:

•	allocations to Karuma hydropower project should be adjusted to its original sealing of Ugshs 215 billion;
•	a policy on management of the escrow account in the sector should be expedited by Ministry of Finance; 
•	a special audit in the operations and management of the escrow account should be instituted;
•	the Ministry of Finance should expedite the process of elevating the rural electrification agency to a vote status;
•	the legal framework of the public-private partnership should be expedited to govern the PPP projects in the sector;
•	Counterpart funding obligations of the energy for rural transformation project should be made to avoid the project from stalling.

Water and Environment

The key issues under this sector are:

•	The URA Act should be amended to operationalise the national environment fund, to meet environment management challenges and emerging issues both at local national levels;
•	Functionality of existing rural water and sanitation facilities should be prioritized other than continuously investing in new facilities;
•	The process of taking up the wage bill of the National Forestry Authority by Government should be expedited for effective delivery of service;
•	The counterpart funding to the sector projects must be prioritised.

Presidential Affairs

Key issues of concern under this sector are:
 
•	Statutory arrears in the internal security organisation, continued supplementary requests, revamping the Uganda Media Centre, slow implementation of the government communication strategy, non-occupation of the newly constructed premises for the Office of the President;
•	Exclusion of women, youth, PWDs in monitoring Government programmes such as NAADS;
•	Inadequate support of people living with HIV;
•	The delayed process of passing the Anti-homosexual Bill into law;
•	Increase in pornography;
•	Encroachment on city wetlands;
•	Inadequate funding of barazas; and
•	Lack of funds for a new portfolio in the Office of the Prime Minister and subscription to African Union Chiefs of Intelligence and Security.

Foreign Affairs

The issues under Foreign Affairs include:

•	The need for a review and codification of Uganda Foreign Policy;

•	Funding for drawing up of the national plan on human rights;

•	Inadequate funding for foreign travel;

•	Arrears of international organisations;
•	Need to open new embassies;
 
•	Inadequate funding for missions and embassies. People in Foreign Affairs budget in the local currency and the dollar changes, and then their money is reduced and they suffer tremendously;

•	Lack of funds for the 50th anniversary;

•	Non-remittance of contributions to the East African Community; and

•	Delay of issuance of certificates of financial implication for the Common Market implementation.

Defence and Internal Affairs

Issues under this sector include:

•	Inadequate facilitation of the Amnesty Commission;

•	Inadequate attention;

•	Financing an analytical laboratory since its transition to a fully constituted directorate with two departments;

•	Lack of office accommodation for the ministry headquarters and directorate of citizens and immigration control; and

•	Lack of funds for operationalisation of the National ID project and absence of a policy framework of the national community survey.

Uganda Prison Services

The main issues under this sector are:

•	The slow progress in integration of local administration prisons into the central system;

•	The creation of new districts and requirement to have a complete of justice in each district;

•	Establishment of the anti-corruption court in Kampala for all the cases in the country; and

•	Challenges of misalignment t of courts and prisons allocations.

Uganda Police Force (UPF)

The main issues under UPF include:

•	Implementation of the public- private partnership without an enabling law and institutional framework;

•	Persistent problem of poor accommodation; and

•	Inadequate funds for operations.

Defence

Several issues under Defence include:

•	Persistent wage bill shortfall under UPDF;

•	Ministry of Defence is continuing to accumulate domestic arrears;

•	Uncontrolled acquisition and disposal of public land under the Ministry of Defence;  and

•	Lack of clarity on the financing of AMISOM operations in Somalia and the need for a comprehensive Defence reform.

Finance, Planning and Economic Development

The main issues under this ministry are:

•	Tax exemptions. These continue to hinder tax collection;

•	The Public-Private Partnership Bill has not yet been presented to Parliament;

•	The Tier Four Bill for the microfinance industry has not been tabled before Parliament;

•	The Office of the Auditor-General has limited internal capacity to undertake forensic audits in the energy, oil and gas sectors. There is need to enhance the URA data centre in order to stimulate taxpayer registration and minimise tax evasion;

•	There are inadequate finances to carry out a population and housing census for the year 2012.

•	There are inadequate finances to carry out the manpower survey; 
•	MDAs have continued to initiate procurements late outside the PPDA timeline;

•	PPDA is not timely in updating the list of the common-use items. Recommendations on all these issues have been made in the report of the budget committees to Government, which you passed on to His Excellency the President.  

I now beg that the House adopts the report of the Budget Committee on the Budget Framework 2012/2013. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to propose that this report be debated together with the State-of-the-Nation Nation and the Budget because all the issues raised here are things that Members should arm themselves with.

Actually, if I were you, I would pick out my section and do research on it and come and present in five minutes.

7.08
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleagues from the NRM are anxious about my reshuffle; maybe I will be the next prime minister in the NRM Government. So, you overthrow your prime minister.

I want to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget for the report. This report is in line with the Budget Act Section 7(3). 
The concern that needs to be reflected is that the government has not been budgeting for counterpart funding for all the donor support. It is not lack of absorptive capacity, though it might be one of the issues, and institution and management, but the major problem, Madam Speaker, is that when you go to your sessional committee, look at the donor item and look at the portion of counterpart funding. Do you know why equipment for the roads delayed? Do you know why the highway express has delayed? We got a loan from the Chinese Government. If you go to the money from the World Bank, Africa Development Bank, and the Islamic Development Bank, the major problem is counterpart funding.

Madam Speaker, I urge this House that this coming financial year, we really have to take a decision. If there is no counterpart funding, we should not approve any loan in this House without Government clearly stating that this is the percentage for counterpart funding and the resources are available. Otherwise, we are denying other people and sectors that need the money. 

It is a major issue and as I speak, some of the programmes of the loans approved here have reached closing period. That means that the commitment fee we paid and some surcharges are likely to be lost if we do not re-negotiate urgently, like the money for Influenza, and the list is so long. I will table the list to all of you to look at it because the total donor support we have for this country for the next few years is $2 billion, which is about Ugshs 5 trillion. You need to monitor this money because it is the taxpayers’ money. Do not look at it as foreign money because in the end, we pay.

The second issue, Madam Speaker, is Government commitment to honour the legislative power of appropriation. We sit here and make recommendations. The Ministry of Finance stated in the Budget Speech that the budget was through a consultative and inclusive process, but most of our recommendations have not been honoured. 

Scan the Budget Speech as Madam Speaker has directed and look at the allocation of resources. It is not in line with the Medium-term Expenditure Framework as the House has recommended. So, at the end of the day, it makes us spectators or cheerers in a football match. You go to Namboole, sit on the side and keep on cheering others, but the real players are not us, yet the Constitution says it is our role to do appropriation.

So, when it comes to appropriation, colleagues, I want to urge that we stick to our recommendations. The chairman has said agriculture is key; that is where 90 percent of the population is, and we should stick to this recommendation and do re-allocation.

Madam Speaker, when we approved a loan for the Public Service College, we took a decision that the money should go to Uganda Management Institute. His Excellency the President - and Rt Hon. Leader of Government, you need to note - even wrote a letter. When the committee of Parliament had raised the money to about Ugshs 16 billion, the President requested the committee to add Ugshs 8 billion and the total came to Ugshs 23 billion and he directed that the money goes to UMI.

During the budget process here, we put the money in the vote of the Ministry of Finance, but to my surprise, Ministry of Finance together with the Prime Minister’s Office decided to take over parliamentary responsibility and pass the money to Public Service. Yes, even in this Vote-on-Account which is coming, the money is again in Public Service and there is no construction. I beg to rest my case, thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I hope Members will take into account those issues when we come to debate. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) I thought you had delegated to your shadow minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, yes, I said I want to raise a small issue. I want to first of all thank the committee; they did a very good job, but the whole issue -(Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the report that the Chairperson, Budget Committee has presented, are recommendations of Parliament to the President, and these are sessional committee recommendations that have been summarised by the Budget Committee. Now, it is surprising that we are proceeding to debate our own report and recommendations. These are our recommendations from our various committees that have been summarised by the Chair, Budget. Actually, it is just for the information of the House that these recommendations were summarised and read, otherwise this is what you agreed on in your various committees.

So, Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the House to again continue and debate its own summary and reports, which we only read here for the information of the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I had already said that this information is useful for the Members. Own it and when you are debating the State-of-the-Nation Address, you can make use of it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think we have laws. If you read Section 8, “There shall be presented to Parliament, by the Budget Committee, the recommendations submitted to the Speaker under sub-section (3).” They have presented them. Does it mean that they are not supposed to be commented on? If that is the case –(Interruption)

MR TIM LWANGA: Madam Speaker, on the 14th May, a report was presented to the President and we all know why there was a delay in getting information from the Ministry of Finance. You all remember that and as a result, we could not actually present a report to Parliament then. But the duty to be carried out by the Speaker was done. She wrote to the President and forwarded the report, which is actually a consolidation of all the other reports from the various sessional committees and standing committees.

As a result of that, a budget has been prepared. What we have done now is to formalise the presentation of the report, which we did yesterday; and not only that, but we gave a summary just to make sure that everybody is on board so that when we come to discuss the State-of-the-Nation Address and look at the budget, we will be properly armed with all the information. So, definitely, there is no reason why we should even be discussing it now. What we have got to do is get on our computers, because the big report is there. We also have the summary, which I have given you and we should be safe all the way.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what I said; that this information is very good for us, you should study it and when you are designing your response to the State-of-the-Nation Address, you can pick up from here and speak on the issues that you want.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have no objection, but one of the things, which is very touching - like when you say that the wage bill for Defence is always in arrears, the first call on the budget is people’s salaries on the Consolidated Fund. So, how does it come here to be an arrear, when it is a first call on the Consolidated Fund?

These are some of the things where the committee should have said, no, this cannot happen because it is a first call on the Consolidated Fund.

Madam Speaker, I am not objecting, there is nothing bad, but these committees do work for us. There are issues they have raised, which are very good and we have no objection to that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you say it when we are debating the State-of-the-Nation Address and the Budget? Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE SUPPLEMNETARY SCHEDULE NO.2

7.21
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Remigio Achia): Madam Speaker, a report of the Committee on Budget on Supplementary Schedule No.2. 

On the 16 May 2012, the Minister of Finance presented to Parliament a Supplementary Budget Schedule No.2. On the 7 June 2012, an addendum was presented to Parliament through the Office of the Clerk. And the full amount requested under this schedule together with the addendum is Shs 517.59 billion. Of the above, Shs 300.77 billion (58 percent) is for recurrent expenditure, Shs 150.08 billion for development expenditure, and Shs 66.74 billion (13 percent) for statutory recurrent expenditure. The details are in Table 1 attached. I ask Members to take interest in that table.

The Budget Committee has scrutinised the supplementary request and it is my pleasure to present the committee report.

Methodology 

The Budget Committee scrutinised the supplementary request together with other relevant documents, and held discussions with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other relevant sector ministers and their technical staff.

The committee focused on the following areas:

(a)	Whether the supplementary expenditure is in conformity with the law, that is:

i.	If the supplementary expenditure requiring additional resources over and above the appropriated amounts is within the legal limit of three percent prescribed by Section 12(1) of the Budget Act;

ii.	Whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development indicated the impact of the supplementary expenditure on the original financing arrangement and sector work-plans as required by Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act; and

iii.	Whether adequate consultations were held amongst the departments and agencies affected by the budgetary adjustments as per Section 12(3) of the Budget Act.

(b)	The sources of funding for the supplementary expenditures.

(c)	Whether the supplementary expenditure was occasioned by the unforeseeable emergencies that the relevant sectors could not capture in the normal budgeting process - that is the expenditures of unpredictable nature.

(d)	Whether all the deserving emergencies were covered under the supplementary expenditure.

Overview of supplementary

The total supplementary request under Schedule No.2 represents 5.01 percent of the total approved budget of Shs 10,323.75 billion for financial year 2011/2012. In April 2012, Parliament passed a Supplementary Budget (Schedule No.1) amounting to Shs 215.6 billion, which represented 2.09 percent of the total approved budget for financial year 2011/2012. The table with the details is shown there.

Parliament was informed that the entire amount under supplementary Schedule No.1 was released under the constitutional powers entrusted to the Minister of Finance.  

The committee noted that the cumulative amount for supplementary schedules 1 and 2 is Shs 733,196,525,000 of which, Schedule 1 was Shs 215,604,052,000 and Schedule 2 is Shs 517,592,473,000. Further, the committee noted that under Supplementary Schedule No.2, wages exceeded the budget by Shs 69,021,650,000 and the non-wage recurrent expenditure exceeded the approved budget by Shs 288,106,240,000. Government of Uganda development budget was under-spent by Shs 433,082,390,000. This amount was re-allocated to cover the over expenditure of the wage and non-wage. As such, there was an overall under-expenditure of Shs 75,954,500,000. Therefore, no extra funds were required to finance the supplementary.

And, Madam Speaker, it is the same information that hon. Ekanya was raising; that we appropriate money on the Floor of this House and along the way, the Executive goes and makes different re-allocations through suppression of the Budget, which distorts the priorities that we agree upon through the budget cycle process.

The minister informed the committee that supplementary was derived from suppression of various votes considered non-core. I will refer you to Annex 1 and Table 2 below for details. In the wage, we approved Shs 1,703,618,360 but Government spent Shs 1,772,640,010. So, they overspent by Shs 69,021,650. In the non-wage, we approved Shs 3,297,747,560 and Government spent Shs 3,585,853,800, thus an over-expenditure of Shs 288,106,240. In the government development budget, we approved Shs 3,446,684,480, but Government used Shs 3,013,602,090 and saved Shs 433,082,390, which they re-allocated to wages and non-wages. 

Table 3, on page 5, shows the Supplementary Budget (Schedule No. 2) for the financial year 2011/2012 by the major cost centres.  

Here are our findings from the analysis:

Legal Aspects

According to Article 156(2) (a) and (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, Government is allowed to lay before Parliament a supplementary budget if the amount of funds appropriated in the budget is found to be insufficient, or if a need arises for expenditure for a purpose for which no funds were appropriated by Parliament. Section 12(1) of the Budget Act, 2001 provides that the total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament, shall not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for the financial year without prior approval of Parliament.  

The minister informed the committee that the supplementary was derived from suppression of various votes considered to be non-core. So, honourable members, there were no new resources requested by the government; they just caused suppression and a re-allocation from various sectors.

Specific Vote Scrutiny 

Vote 001 – Office of the President

The Office of the President requested for an additional funding of Shs 8.03 billion, representing an increase of 14 percent in the approved recurrent budget, to cater for expenses pertaining to commemorative activities for the Independence Golden Jubilee celebrations and wage shortfalls under ISO. The committee notes that Independence Golden Jubilee celebrations cannot be classified as unforeseen expenditures, and hence, should have been budgeted for during the budget process - since we knew that this financial year, we shall be marking 50 years of our Independence.

Vote 002 – State House

An additional amount of Shs 1.368 billion, representing a 2.4 percent increase in the approved recurrent budget, is required under State House to take care of wage shortfalls due to fresh recruitment in the financial year 2011/2012.

Madam Speaker, you will note that in the first supplementary schedule, State House received Ugshs 81.66 billion which brings the accumulative request to 144 percent of the originally approved recurrent budget.

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence

The Ministry of Defence has requested for an additional funding of Ugshs 132.5 billion to cater for shortfalls in the wage bill, and specifically, Shs 22.15 billion for the wage shortfall and general operations of Shs 110.35 billion. This represents an increase of 26.8 percent of its approved recurrent budget. Like other Government MDAs, the issue of wage shortfalls reflects a serious planning problem at the ministry, as noted by the Leader of the Opposition.

Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service

The Ministry of Public Service requested for Ugshs 10.621 billion representing a three percent increase in its approved recurrent budget. This is to cater for salary arrears for teachers and other public servants. The budget committee tasked the Ministry of Finance to give reasons for persistent salary shortages across many sectors. 

The Minister of Public Service informed the committee that it is as a result of recruitment and promotions in the course of the financial year. The Minister of Finance informed the committee that the Auditor-General’s Office carried out an audit of the Government of Uganda payroll and a final report is being awaited. We wanted to know why the Ministry of Finance and that of Public Service did not budget fully for salaries and yet they said that they had concerns over the wage bill, and they carried out a forensic audit. I hope that report will be available to this Parliament for further scrutiny.

Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

The additional resource required amounts to Ugshs 2.76 billion. To cater for staff salaries for those staff recruited during the financial year - Shs 122.66 million; Shs 355 million for the legal fees in respect of the case of J. Mashate against His Excellency the President, Yoweri Museveni; Shs 1.79 billion for rent of the Administrator-General’s Office; and Shs 508 for funding for the verification of properties lost during the LRA conflict in Teso and the Acholi regions.

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Development component

The Ministry of Finance has requested for Shs 10.5 billion of which, Shs 5.5 billion is from donors and Shs 5.0 billion is from the Government of Uganda. The request represents a four percent increase on its approved development budget. The supplementary is to clear pending certificates of work for ongoing construction of the Auditor-General’s headquarters - Shs 7 billion, and for replacement of the IFMS systems of the ministry at a cost of Shs 3.5 billion.

The construction of the audit house is estimated at Shs 44 billion over a contracted period of three years starting on 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2014.

Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government

Recurrent 

The Ministry of Local Government has requested for an additional Ugshs 3.308 billion representing a 47.4 percent in its approved recurrent budget, to cater for shortfalls in the ministry budget. 

Madam Speaker, if you remember, Government came before us here and even issued a circular that they were going to cut wasteful expenditure by 30 to 50 percent, but as we go along, Government has come back to claim that money through supplementary requests.

The shortfall arose on account of Parliament’s decision to transfer Shs 4.874 billion to the Ministry of Public Service to improve wages of local government staff at the appropriation stage. I have given the reasons because we consider that wasteful.

However, the Ministry of Local Governments experienced difficulties in operations, that is, rent, induction of local councillors at workshops, and inspection of local governments, hence the supplementary request.

Development

The ministry is requesting for Shs 51.01 billion representing a 27 percent increase in its approved development budget to cater for transport and taxes of the newly procured district road equipment currently stored at Namboole, some of which was disbursed last week. Taxes are non-resource that will require Shs 43.2 billion, and transport will require about Shs 7.81 billion.

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health 
The Ministry of Health has an application of Shs 4.043 billion of which 394 million is for salary shortfalls and Shs 3.65 billion is for national diseases control towards the Nodding Disease Syndrome. So, Government has finally honoured its promise to this Parliament. The supplementary represents an increase of 14 percent in its approved recurrent budget.  

In the previous meetings, Parliament was informed that the management of the Nodding Disease Syndrome requires Shs 7 billion. Government should give Parliament the status of the disease on the ground and when the next release will take place for purposes offollow-up.

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports 

The ministry has a supplementary request of Ugshs 1.47 billion being tax obligations under support to USE to cater for payment of gross taxes on equipment procured under IDA funded project. The committee notes that taxes should have been appropriated during the normal budget process and recommends that such practices be discouraged in future.

Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment

Additional resources are required by the Ministry of Water and Environment amounting to Ugshs 133 million to cater for salary shortfalls. The committee was informed that during the financial year, a number of staff were promoted whereas a few others had not accessed the payroll.

Vote 020 - Ministry of ICT

Under supplementary Schedule No.2 the ministry is requesting for an additional amount of Ugshs 3.6 billion representing an increase of 73.9 percent of the approved current budget to cater for the wage shortfalls under the NITA-U. This had earlier on been reflected as a funding gap in their budget for financial year 2011/2012. And I think this is a good practice. When we find additional resources they should go to areas which we already identified in the budget as being a funding gap.

Vote 104 - Parliamentary Commission

A supplementary request amounting to Ugshs 64.692 billion which represents an increase of 42 percent of the approved recurrent budget is to address shortfalls on general budget operations. Under Schedule 1, the Parliamentary Commission received Shs 28 billion, which brings the cumulative representation to 60 percent of the originally approved recurrent budget. So, honourable members, you are also not innocent.

Vote 111 - Busitema University

Busitema University has a supplementary application of Ugshs 1.81 billion representing a 22.8 percent increase in its approved recurrent budget. The additional resources requirements constitute non-wage budgetary provisions amounting to Ugshs 1.58 billion and Ugshs 0.14 billion for salary shortfall.

Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority 

A supplementary request has been made for Ugshs 77.927 billion, which represents an increase of 9.6 percent in the approved development budget of UNRA. The supplementary is to cater for funding pressures for outstanding road certificates for completed, ongoing and road designs on the following projects as listed in that table.

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that roads construction has a programmed and contractual phased timeline till completion. Therefore, there is no justification for clearance of certificates to be regarded as unforeseen.

Vote 136 - Makerere University

Makerere University has requested supplementary application for Shs 2.42 billion which represents an increase of 5.2 percent in its approved recurrent budget to cater for staff salary shortfall and staff allowances. 

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority

I think this was really a very critical area. There were a lot of demands on this.

URA requested Shs 10 billion as additional resource. This represents an increase of 10.2 percent in its approved recurrent budget. The supplementary caters for shortfalls in general operational funds for items like staff allowances and training, travel inland, travel abroad, ICT and consultancy services. 

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force

Recurrent

Additional funding amounting to Shs 53.3 billion is being requested for by Uganda Police Force to cater for shortfalls in wages and salary, and to cover other shortfalls in non-wage provisions. This represents a 28 percent increase in its approved recurrent budget. This request was due to the increase in the Police Force as a result of the Cabinet decision to recruit an additional 5,000 Police officers, and also, due to promotions during the course of the year.

Under the development component, Uganda Police Force has requested for Shs 6.69 billion to cater for shortfalls in procurement of transport equipment. This brings the cumulative increase to 35 percent of the approved development budget for financial year 2011/2012.  The Uganda Police Force has expanded its presence due to creation of more districts and the re-alignments in Kampala after the creation of the Kampala Metropolitan Area. The funds requested are for the procurement of vehicles to support the newly created administrative units.

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service

The Uganda Prisons Service has requested for an additional Shs 7.181 billion of which Shs 2.181 billion is to cater for shortfalls in wages, and Shs 5 billion for shortfalls in the budget provision for prisoners’ food. The wage shortfall was caused by inadequate provision and additional recruitment, while the food shortfall was due to an increase in prisoner numbers and increased prices.

The committee notes that the prisons department used to benefit from income-generating projects such as the prisons farms. This seems, however, to have declined. 
 
The committee is concerned about the increasing number of inmates amidst the JLOS programme to decongest prisons, and also Police statistics on the generally declining crime rate trend.

Vote 157 - National Forest Authority

Additional funding amounting to Shs 5.2 billion or a 2,600 percent increase in the approved recurrent budget is required to cater for salary shortfalls under the National Forest Authority. During the financial year 2010/2011, NFA faced challenges of sustaining its wage bill as a result of a fall in internally generated revenue from forest resources, coupled with accountability and litigation challenges, which led to the freezing of project accounts. 
 
The committee notes that although the accountability and litigation issues have been sorted out in the NFA, most of the forests from which the Authority generates revenue have not yet attained the rotational age.  This has led to Government taking up the NFA wage bill in the short-term. The committee recommends that NFA management streamlines its commercial activities to ensure sustainability of the Authority. 

Votes 162-174: Various regional referral hospitals 

Government has requested for Shs 4.195 billion for 13 referral hospitals, representing an increase of 11.7 percent of the approved recurrent budget. The funds are meant to address the staff salary shortfalls in regional referral hospitals.  

Votes 201 – 233: Various Missions Abroad

Missions abroad are requesting for additional funding amounting to Shs 10.178 billion, which represents an increase of 16.6 percent. This is to cater for shortfalls in wage and allowances of foreign service workers, property and rent arrears, and to regularise funds appropriated in the financial year 2010/2011, but spent in financial year 2011/2012.

Furthermore, missions abroad are experiencing poundage loss due to the fluctuating exchange rate, which erodes the real worth of their payments in foreign countries. The Minister of State for Foreign Affairs made a passionate appeal to Members to re-categorise his ministry among the core priority areas to enable it receive adequate funding. The committee noted the importance of missions abroad and recommends that they be appropriately funded.

Votes 501 – 850: Various Local Governments

The various local governments are requesting for Shs 36.95 billion under recurrent budget representing an increase of 2.9 percent in the approved recurrent budget.  The supplementary is to cater for:

•	Salary shortfalls for teachers;
•	Salary shortfalls for healthcare officials; and
•	Shortfalls for ex-gratia and councillors’ 		allowances and arrears;

I think we really summarise as much as possible the key concerns and these have been persistent but it does not do any harm to repeat them here.

Observations   and   recommendations 

Though the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that the source of financing the supplementary budget was principally by suppressing non-core elements of the Budget, which is really re-allocation after we allocated critical areas like agriculture - if you go on to Annex I of this report, under the development expenditure, you will notice that Agriculture lost about Shs 133 billion; Education, Works, Mulago Hospital and districts have been affected although the Ministry of Finance treats them as non-core areas. This affects service delivery and is an abuse of the intentions of Parliament and the people of Uganda as agreed through the budget planning process, and as presented and approved in this House.

URA collections for the past three quarters of financial year 2011/2012 amounted to Shs 4,400 billion, which represents a shortfall of Shs 88 billion or 1.95 percent against the target. URA should be facilitated and equipped to collect taxes. As highlighted in the Budget Committee report to the President during the MTEF, the total funding gap for URA is Shs 145.26 billion, which represents 55.7 percent of the total amount required. It is no wonder that domestic revenue collections have stagnated at about 13 percent of GDP as compared to the sub- Saharan target of 20 percent. We suspect that one of the problems is because they are financially constrained to do what they really need to do. The Budget Committee requests the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to follow up this issue as a matter of urgency in the discussion of the budget.

As noted above, the total supplementary requiring additional resources over and above the approved budget is actually 2.907 percent, which is within the legal limit. However, the re-allocations move resources from capital investments, very critical areas of the development budget, to the consumption budget; from development to wages and non-wages. This situation severely affects service delivery. Indirectly, we paid people during this financial year to sit in offices.

The committee observed that less than one percent of the total supplementary appears to be of unforeseen nature. So, 99 percent is actually not unforeseen. The only one which I can say is unforeseen is the Nodding Disease Syndrome.  The rest of them should have followed the normal budget process. Government should expedite the legal framework to operationalise the contingency fund to handle emergencies. In future, this kind of supplementary should not be tolerated since it negatively - especially the supplementary in respect to re-allocations after Parliament has approved, should not be tolerated, because it really reflects bad planning and budget capacity management, and drawing resources away from development to consumption.

Some sectors over-performed as a result of the cuts notably, ICT. ICT received 629.8 percent; ESO received 625.7 percent. This is a sign of poor planning and you could never have predicted such an increase of over 600 percent. It cannot be justified. The explanation that the ICT budget blew up due to recruitments for NITA-U is not justifiable as setting-up of statutory bodies is always accompanied by certificates of financial implication and should not distort the budget in any way. 

During previous financial years, Parliament committed itself never to pass supplementary expenditure on staff salaries and allowances, as it negatively reflects on the planning and budgeting capacity of Government. Government should come out with a comprehensive manpower planning strategy to address all the Public Service issues of ghost workers, transfers, omissions, manpower wastage, among others; even promotions. Promotions must be budgeted for. We must promote in the first quarter of the financial year and it must be captured in the budget.   

In addition, issues regarding rationalisation of salary disparities within Government departments and agencies should be addressed, as it is seen as one of the major demotivating factors in the service. For example, staff are leaving URA to join KCCA, which has more lucrative salaries. 

The committee notes that Government is spending colossal amounts of money on rent instead of constructing buildings. The committee demanded for a schedule of rented premises. It indicates that this financial year, the government spent Shs 42 billion, and I refer you to Annex 2, on rent alone. The committee noted some examples of the rent paid, which are really of a bogus nature. Take, for example, Government is paying somebody on its own property like Amber House. We do not know who this person is, but the government building is paying rent to some other units. The same with National Theatre; the same with Uganda Bureau of Statistics Building; the same with Ministry of Agriculture. So, we need to go deeper into these issues of Government paying itself. The explanation will come from the minister. The issue of Amber House is not new to this House. The Minister of Finance has pledged and the minister is right here to follow it up. She has also pledged to bring to this House the Public-Private Partnership legal framework which may pave way for partnerships in building Government offices. Honourable members, this is a pledge of Government through the minister to this House.

The committee notes that the practice of paying rent is uneconomical and recommends that Government pursues more rational and innovative approaches of building offices for ministries, departments and agencies or even re-acquire the buildings we sold in the 90s under the Privatisation Unit. 

The committee was also concerned about selective releases of resources to Government agencies by the Ministry of Finance. For instance, some of the funds passed under supplementary Schedule No.1 have not yet been released to the departments. In the case of the Police, the Police came back and said, “You gave us Shs 10 point something billion, we have not yet got money from the Ministry of Finance.” The committee recommends that the ministry implements an open and transparent criteria for equitable release of funds to all MDAs. We approved money here under a supplementary schedule, but it has not reached the respective agencies. 

Parliament appropriates funds to specific votes and activities based on work-plans, procurement plans and recruitment plans. Re-allocations of funds midway distort the originally intended objectives and outputs. It also makes monitoring the performance of the budget by Parliament and different agencies very difficult. The Government should in future desist from re-allocating resources away from planned activities.

The committee, after scrutinising documents presented by the Ministry of Finance, discovered that most of the available funds for re-allocation were suppressed from the domestic development budget. The domestic development budget performed at 87.4 percent while the wage at 104.1 percent. Even the non-recurrent performed I think at 108 percent. This means that Government is paying workers who are not facilitated to work, or they have no development work to do, hence little value-for-money. Government should be more systematic in handling recruitment or promotions, as the wage bill is getting out of hand. I think we need to support the President on the issue of the Shs 1.8 trillion, which goes to wages.  

Ministries do not receive funds as requested for and are, therefore, unable to implement approved programmes or even pay salaries. For example, Police and Ministry of Defence already have a shortfall in salaries and wages right from the MTEF. We discovered that the Police had requested for Shs 143 billion under salaries alone, but the Ministry of Finance gave them Shs 122 billion. So, they have had to come back for Shs 23 billion to make 143. Now, there are 5,000 more Police. Even right now, they have not got that amount in the coming financial year. They are going to be allocated that money. The same with UPDF. They wanted Shs 285. They got I think less than that - 140. They have now got that other money, 22.15 billion. They have more recruitment. The next requirement of the wage bill has not been met and definitely, they are going to come for a supplementary because this is very important. You have to pay people’s salaries. So, the sectoral committee should address this gap – this sectoral committee should really discuss this issue during the ministerial policy statements to avoid endless supplementary requests; otherwise, they will be here before we even close our eyes on this one.

Conclusion 

Government has continued to depend on supplementary budgets for a number of years now. This raises the question of the credibility of the budget process, the planning process, the effectiveness of the public expenditure management practices, and the reforms; and actually, it has serious legal implications on how we manage and appropriate our budget. 
  
Supplementary budgets affect output, outcomes and commitment delivered to us by Government through the budget. It also undermines the budget process when targeted outputs are not realised. 

Though the committee was informed that Cabinet agreed to the re-allocations in compliance with Section 12(3) of the Budget Act, which requires the Minister of Finance to discuss with the different departments, agencies and ministries when their budgets are being cut; we found there was no evidence to this effect because the Minister of Foreign Affairs and other people kept complaining that they were not consulted. This practice should be totally discouraged. 

With the above caution, since this is not new money, it is just the same Shs 10.3 trillion being moved from one vote to the other. It is my committee’s opinion that this Supplementary Schedule No.2 be approved as follows: 

Development     -	Shs 150,080,394,000
Recurrent 	 -   	Shs 300,770,603,000

Statutory - and you are not innocent here - Shs  66,741,476,000

The total is Shs 517,592,473,000.

I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair. Yes, honourable shadow minister. 

8.00
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the vice chair of the Budget Committee for a good report. But one day, some gentleman went to the hospital and they told him, “You are sick, and you cannot live for more than 24 hours. But we know some people who can treat you and you will live if you can give us some money.” The gentleman and the relatives mobilised money and sold the entire property of the family and the wife, and everything hoping that the elderly gentleman would survive more than 24 hours. Twenty-four hours after selling everything, the gentleman died; the family remained destitute and they also died within a short period of time because they did not trust. The first doctor told them that he could not live for more than 24 hours and another said that if they had a lot of money, he could live and so they trusted the second one, sold everything and became destitute. 

That analogy reflects on the report of the chairman. The chairman has said that this report violates all the laws of Uganda in its entirety -(Applause)- and then he concludes by saying that nonetheless, we approve it. It is just like the other person who says that if you have money, you can live for more than 24 hours.

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure, hon. Magyezi.

MR MAGYEZI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya is a member of the Budget Committee and this is a copy of the report of this committee –(Interjections)- I am aware that he did not sign, but on the programme, we do not have any notification for a minority report. In terms of procedure, is it proper for a member of this committee to now start debating the report of his own committee? Are we procedurally right? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter has been a point of contention and even in the last Parliament, I asked the rules committee and they have not - so your name is here and you are a member of the committee and we approved you. The shadow minister should have written his separate opinion – but you are entitled under the rules. You should have told the chairman to indicate that you will make a separate comment, but it is not there. You have made the comments but –

MR EKANYA: I thank you very much. I am making a comment and I started with that analogy. In my comment, I want to refer colleagues to Article 156 of the Constitution –(Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. You have rightly ruled that hon. Ekanya is a member and our Rules of Procedure demand that if you are a member and unless you have a minority report, you are not supposed to debate thereto –(Interjection)- unless you are giving some clarification or information. I know the honourable member of Rukungiri will not know the rule even if I mentioned, it but is hon. Ekanya in order to continue debating even when you have rightly ruled that he should not?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had asked the rules committee to advise us on this matter right from the Eighth Parliament because for me, if I approve you here as a member of the committee, I am bound by what we have approved. Under the rules, you have a right to file a minority report. 

You know, hon. Ekanya had said that he does not want to appear as if he is always writing minorities, but you are a shadow minister and you are entitled to your minority opinion, which you should have done. Otherwise, it means that I will allow all the other members who have not signed to present comments here, which tantamount to minority opinions. Yes, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: I seek your guidance. I think you rightly refer to the scenarios we had in the Eighth Parliament, but you also recall that it was an attempt to have a win-win situation. We argued here that the shadow ministers would be helped if they are members of the committee, to appreciate what Government presents to those committees and make an informed opinion. If they stay out of the committee, it would be very difficult to make an informed opinion, and that is when we compromised and said that let them be members of the committee, but they do not necessarily relinquish their role to provide guidance as shadow ministers.

I think that probably, a time has come when we really must take a final position because it comes up every other day. Is it to the benefit of this House that shadow ministers go to those committees and, therefore, benefit from the information given by Government to the committees or you would rather have a shadow minister coming from the blue without even knowing what you presented and submitting from an uninformed position?

Secondly, it has occurred to me that it has also become one way of technically knocking out information which might help this House. I would rather that if you guided this House, you advise us now – I am aware that hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition, had proposed that he would be making changes in his team. Would you guide us then so that when he makes changes, he actually withdraws them completely from committees and then unfortunately, you will lose out on the benefit of having us have information from ministers as presented and we will be shooting from anywhere?   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you had an opportunity to debate the Rules of Procedure extensively, and I do not know why you did not pursue this matter, and I was not here. But if you want, bring a new proposal and we discuss it, but for now, if you are a member of the committee, you are bound by the committee report. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: For me, I am bringing the law. Under the rules and functions of the Leader of the Opposition, 6(e)(iv), “The Leader of the Opposition shall study all policy statements of Government with his or her shadow ministers and attend committee deliberations on policy issues, give their party views and opinions, and propose possible alternatives.” They have attended and they are coming here to give their views –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, they are supposed to have proposed those alternatives already to come with this report but not to surprise me and the committee or the other Members. You are right, but they should have done it before. Honourable members, either we amend the Rules of Procedure and we make it clear - but so long as you are here and you have no minority report, you are caught by the report. (Applause)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I know that hon. Ekanya has been a very constructive member of the committee, but unfortunately, during the discussion of this Supplementary Schedule No.2, he was out of the country –[Mr Ekanya: “Order.”]- yes, I chaired all the meetings.

MR EKANYA: The vice-chairperson has raised a very serious matter that affects my integrity. Madam Speaker, may I propose that this matter be referred to the rules committee and the attendance record be tabled in this House? Is he in order to make allegations and yet I attended the meeting and we did agree on most of these issues, but did not agree to approve this money? Is the vice-chairperson in order to allege that I did not participate in the meetings when the records are very clear?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my communication yesterday, I said I will now be requiring a monthly record of attendance. I do not have the attendance for the last session, and so I do not know who attended and who didn’t. But from this session, every chairperson must report to me monthly, who has attended and who has not.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, hon. Alice Alaso has raised an issue, which we discussed here to a conclusion. In view of that, are you saying that whatever we have discussed and agreed on has to be thrown out at some point?

THE SPEAKER: No, what did we discuss and agree on? Can you restate it for the Hansard?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Alice Alaso said that for Members of our Shadow Cabinet to get information, they should attend the meetings of those committees. That would help them make informed decisions. That is why hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, who has been in those meetings and got the information, is here to give an informed view on this report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you went to that very good school called Busoga College Mwiri. What you are saying is very logical, but his comments should have come in writing. He should have attended the meetings, not signed the minutes and written his views down; but not to come with them here orally.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I think it is very bad for us to start playing hide-and-seek games in Parliament. First, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya is a  member of this committee and when you read Rule 178 on writing a minority report, you realise that it says that any Member of the committee who dissents from the opinion of the majority of the committee may state, in writing, the reasons for his/her dissenting views. Such written statement should be appended to the main report of the committee.

Yes, I am a doctor, but for the time I have been here, I have been able to read some laws. What exactly stopped hon. Geoffrey Ekanya from writing a minority report when he is a senior Member of this House having been here for almost 20 years. What he is telling us is all about playing double standards. Madam Speaker, we should conduct business according to the rules. We should be very clear on this and I would like to advise hon. Geoffrey Ekanya that he is making a great mistake.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you want to review the rules again, make new proposals. But for now, the rules we have require that if you have a different opinion, you put it in writing and ensure it is attached to the main report. Let us not just alter goalposts at this stage.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I need to be guided. There are 28 Members of this committee, but only 10 signed the report. Is that right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if one-third of the members of the committee sign a report, such a report becomes eligible for debate.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am not a member of this committee, but I have been following the contribution of the vice chair very well. I notice that he has elaborated everything very well. I also notice that he gave a very good conclusion in which he said thus: “With that caution above ….” But where does the caution come from? What does he mean by cautions? I want to learn more about that.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I put up that caution to particularly deal with two or three things: One is on the issue of salary shortfalls. But I have also given the explanation the Ministry of Finance brought before us, and said that one of the reasons there were shortfalls was because they were being very cautious about the forensic audit on the wage bill, and she has done that. The indications were that there actually happened to be some ghosts, which matter is being handled. After verification – she has reached a point where she can pay, but one of the reasons was about the sudden recruitment both in the UPDF and Uganda Police Force.

Anyway, I think we need look into the laws – we looked at the Budget Act, but did not find any provision that makes it illegal for Government, which owns the budget, to do re-allocations. So, we had nothing to do because there was no new money; Government was only playing around with the votes. So, technically, since the Executive owns the budget, what they have to do is to only inform us about the re-allocation they might have done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is our responsibility to design strategies to stop Government from re-allocating money. I think that should be our next step. I now put the question that this House adopts the report of the committee.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2 

Recurrent Expenditure

Vote 001: Office of the President

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,031,702,000, under Vote 001 - Office of the President, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012 -

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, procedure. We need some clarification from the Minister of Finance. The budget that the minister presented and what she is presenting now do not tally – I mean the one of 2012/2013.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we are not yet there; we are doing the supplementary. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, even on the supplementary, when you look at the budget we approved and compare it with what was released, the two do not tally.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which figures are not tallying?

MS AKOL: Madam Chair, I think it is not fair for the honourable colleague to just talk about things not tallying. For purposes of this supplementary, it is important for him to state to this House what the variance is, and what the problem with this particular supplementary is. You need to state that so that we can proceed while on the same page.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,031,702,00, under Vote 001 - Office of the President, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/12. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 002: State House

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,367,807,000 Vote 002 - State House, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 004: Ministry of Defence 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 132,500,000,000 under Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that   a total sum of Shs 10,621,033,000 under Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 25,202,000 – is this all?  Let me stand over this one. 

Vote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,775,662,000 under Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,307,640,000 under Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government, be provided for as supplementary statutory expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014: Ministry of Health
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that   a total sum of Shs 4,043,731,000 under Vote 014 - Ministry of Health, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 549,000,000 under Vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment  

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 133,803,000 under Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 020: Ministry of Information and Communication Technology
  
THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,600,000,000 under Vote 020 - Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 021: Ministry of East African Affairs  

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 14,115,000 under Vote 021 - Ministry of East African Affairs, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 111- Busitema University 
  
THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that   a total sum of Shs 1,810,536,000 under Vote 111 - Busitema University, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute
   
THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 339,972,000 under Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 115: Uganda Heart Institute   

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 445,550,000 under Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Board 
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 76,283,000 under Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Board, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority   

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 695,090,000 under Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Vote 136: Makerere University

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,420,527,000 under vote 136, Makerere University, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 141: Uganda Revenue Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,000,000,000 under vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144: Uganda Police Force

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 53,307,000,000 under vote 144, Uganda Police Force, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 145: Uganda Prisons Service

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 7,181,481,000 under vote 145, Uganda Prisons Services, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 151: Uganda Blood Transfusion Services 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 114,262,000 under vote 151, Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote one 157: National Forestry Authority 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,200,000,000 under vote 157, National Forestry Authority, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 162: Butabika Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 866,767,000 under vote 162, Butabika Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 163: Arua Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 181,298,000 under vote 163, Arua Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 164: Fort Portal Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 508,415,000 under vote 164, Fort Portal Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 165: Gulu Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 428,126,000 under vote 165, Gulu Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 166: Hoima Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 451,439,000 under vote 166, Hoima Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 167: Jinja Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 238,044,000 under vote 167, Jinja Hospital, be provided as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 168: Kabale Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 368,907,000 under vote 168, Kabale Hospital, be provided as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 169: Masaka Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 218,353,000 under vote 169, Masaka Hospital, be provided as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 170 - Mbale Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 454,698,000 under vote 170, Mbale Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 171: Soroti Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 376, 798,000 under vote 171, Soroti Hospital, be provided as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 172: Lira Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 354,279,000 under vote 172, Lira Hospital, be provided as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 173: Mbarara Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 379,311,000 under vote 173, Mbarara Hospital, be provided as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 174: Mubende Hospital.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 235,494,000 under vote 174, Mubende Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 201-233: Missions Abroad

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 10,197,689,000 under votes 201-233, missions abroad, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I earlier stood up on a matter that the supplementary we are passing does not balance and hon. Akol stood up to challenge this. I want to present the facts before we conclude.

If you read page 3 of the chairperson’s report, it says, “The total supplementary request under Schedule No. 2 represents 5.01 percent of the total approved budget of Shs 10,323.75 billion.” The chairman continues and says that there are no extra funds required to finance this supplementary. If you go to page 12 of the report – In fact in supplementary 1, URA collection went down by Shs 80.8 billion. In the chairman’s report on this, URA collection is now down by Shs 88 billion. Therefore, the chairman was very honest and the Ministry of Finance - there is no extra resource that was required. This was internal re-allocation within the overall budget of Shs 10 billion we approved.

Concerning the overall budget, we have not met the target and therefore it does not balance. Our concern is, we are approving air in this supplementary by Shs 88 billion, and this is in the report. So, where is the source of the money? 

The Ministry of Finance should have tabled a document. According to the Rules of Procedure, the report of committees must be tabled with all addendum, documents and minutes. If the Minister of Finance had any source of extra funds, this should have been tabled as the chairman put it here categorically. If there was a drawdown from Bank of Uganda - And as you are aware, Bank of Uganda has been overdrawn by Shs 4 trillion so we do not even have money. If we had borrowed from NSSF, we should have tabled documents here. So as we speak, we are short of Shs 88 billion. Where are we going to get this money? It does not balance.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is true URA under performed by Shs 88 billion. However, as I mentioned here, this supplementary request is a re-allocation of existing resources. I also mentioned on page 4, the second paragraph, that Government suppressed the budget by Shs 433,082,390,000, which they now re-allocated to cater for this supplementary expenditure. Also, they have not actually budgeted, through a suppression – (Interjection) - They have not budgeted for almost Shs 76 billion; they have not allocated it. It is hanging. That also cancels out.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, first of all, hon. Ekanya, our shadow Minister of Finance, is right. The suppression has been done within the budget. You have Shs 79 billion but Shs 88 billion is under cut. What we know about budgets is that when Parliament passes a budget, it is according to the approved work plans and procurement plans, which they have submitted. That is the basis. That is why I do not agree with the Budget Committee that the PPDA law is bad. The budget is based on procurement plans. If that is true, haven’t you suppressed it further by the arrears? 

People have already started the process of procurement, they have done some work - these long term contracts - and arrears will come up. So if we are saying we have not gone out of the budget and yet we have incurred arrears, don’t you think there is a big problem?

I think hon. Ekanya has a big point, which I would love you, the chairperson, to explain to us; how did you come up with suppression, which suppression should have been agreed with us here in Parliament? You should have come here and said, “We are removing money from agriculture to works” and we all come to Parliament and adjust the agreed plan to this. This never happened. They have to come back here; they cannot do this in the line ministry. They have to come here and we agree that I will get this money from agriculture to works or education but not you to sit down there and do it.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: It is true, and this is one of the issues we raised. Money was suppressed from the development expenditure and we found that besides the key ministries like education and agriculture where the money was removed from, even some local governments had their expenditures suppressed. It is also definitely clear that based on the approved work plans and procurement plans, they have suffered. 

In the recent PMT workshop, which was in Hotel Africana, the local governments were asking the Ministry of Finance and Government to explain how they were going to handle the issue of suppression of budget vis-à-vis the kind of procurements they have done. This is a concern and I have raised it very clearly in this report.

Regarding the issue of approval, they have suppressed it and used the Budget Act, which allows them under Article 12 sub section (3) to sit down in Cabinet, do this and come back to us here. Read section 12 (3). They are allowed to do that. We had asked why they are here; they are here for Parliament to accept the re-allocation from different votes to the new ones, which the Madam Chairperson is reading at this moment.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, besides the issue the honourable Leader of the Opposition raised, there is a fundamental question. You are suppressing what you have; so if we had given Ministry of Trade Shs 10 billion, you have now suppressed it to Shs 8 billion and you are doing re-allocation within the budget. If you did not achieve your budget of Shs 10 trillion, what are you suppressing? The budget reduced by Shs 88 billion, so your budget is already less by Shs 88 billion, so what are you suppressing? Knock out Shs 88 billion then start suppressing what you have. 

My point is, you should have put this supplementary less by Shs 88 billion because we failed to realise our total budget of Shs 10.3 trillion. This is very fundamental and legal because you do re-allocation and expenditure within what you have. So, which money is Government suppressing which they do not have?

MR ACHIA: Hon. Ekanya, Government first of all suppressed the Budget by Shs 433 billion and then they caused re-allocation. Even in re-allocations, they have not caused total re-allocation of that money; there is some money which is hanging, about Shs 76 billion. I suspect that is what will take care of the loss they realised from the revenue. I have indicated the figures which were brought before and when we come to appropriation towards the end of this year, those facts will be clear to us – how Government will balance the Budget. That is not the role of Parliament. At this moment we are dealing with the supplementary budget; we will do that later during the final appropriation. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to refer hon. Ekanya and the Leader of the Opposition to the report they have. On page 4, the committee explains the areas of over and under expenditure. Paragraph 2 says: “…wages exceeded the budget by Shs 69,021,650,000 and non-wage recurrent exceeded the approved budget by Shs 288,106,240,000.  Government of Uganda Development budget was under spent by Shs 433,082,390,000.” That means that there is an excess of about Shs 76 billion, which still remained in the Consolidated Fund unutilised. 

On the issue which the Leader of the Opposition raised regarding whether Parliament was consulted, the Budget Act is very clear. Section 12(3) says, “Any reallocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations.” So they consulted the votes which were involved, not necessarily Parliament; Parliament only gets involved when they come to report within four months. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I had read that part and that is why the committee chairperson was saying they recently had a meeting in Hotel Africana – (Interjection) – Please, learn to listen and you will learn more. The local governments were complaining that they did not know what to do with the budget they had agreed on. (Interjection) If you had learnt to listen, you would have understood what I was saying. So, even the local governments were not consulted; if they were, they would not be complaining.

Madam Chairperson, we have talked about Article 157 day in and day out – the Contingency Fund. The day we shall have it operationalised, the problems which are coming up now will cease to exist. I want the - (Interjection) – Yes, I am an educated man who went to Busoga College Mwiri. So there are many things I know, if only you could try to listen. 

Even here there would be no reason for a ministry to complain. I will give an example; State House was given 144 percent. I have seen this year’s Budget and it is about a quarter of what they got the other time. Now, are we budgeting for the sake of it? If some ministry needs a lot of money, give it the money to avoid the supplementary budget. This business of us coming and making budgets and leaving without knowing what we have done is dangerous. 

That is why I disagree with the Budget Committee. When they say they are going to combine budget, finance and expenditure and you say you do not agree, you are making a mistake. You first have to budget, look for the finance to fund the budget, expend, and audit it. If they are trying to combine the law so that we deal with it in unison, it is very good for you. Do not say “we do not agree”; that does not make sense. I assure you that we shall have to do something.

In conclusion, I think if we want to pass this supplementary budget, we shall be doing it for the sake of it because if you scrutinised it very well, you will see gaps. Looking at the example of what hon. Akol has brought; she says there is a balance of Shs 79 billion in the Consolidated Fund but there is also about Shs 90 billion uncollected. That means there is already a deficit of Shs 10 billion. So when he says it is not balancing, he has a big point. We may have to pass it because we feel it will balance next time, but in reality it does not balance and we need to accept that so that we can move on. 

I think it is important for us to operationalise the Contingency Fund immediately so that we get the three percent in our budget and put it there to avoid this issue. (Interjection) You will always agree except that you do not want to listen. Otherwise, I always make points. 

Madam Chairperson, even when you look through here, the Budget Committee said we sold property and now we need more property. There are three institutions in the Ministry of Finance which are eating our money for nothing; these are Privatisation Unit, Custodian Board and NPART. What is the Privatisation Unit still selling? They are instead encroaching on what we have. Parastatals were sold long time ago and so it should have been disbanded five or ten years ago. I am sure even that Amber House you are talking about is under them, if you crosschecked, and they are the ones eating that wealth. Looking at the Custodian Board, people repossessed their buildings long time ago and those which were not were sold. If they were not sold, they should be given to some lawyers to sell.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Leader of the Opposition, you have moved from – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, what I am trying to bring out is that these are the things which are causing the supplementary budget. We had better deal with them, but I will bring this back at an appropriate time. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I really enjoy your submissions, but this is what I would have liked hon. Ekanya to put in his minority report so that even the committee benefits from it. I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 37,470,593,452 under votes 501-778, various local governments, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 25,202,000 under vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be provided for as supplementary statutory expenditure for the financial year 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2 DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

Vote 008- Ministry of Finance

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 10,500,000,000 under vote 008, Ministry of Finance, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2102.
                 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 011- Ministry of Local Government

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 51,010,000,000 under vote 011, Ministry of Local Government, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2102.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 013- Ministry of Education and Sports

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,470,291,000 under vote 013, Ministry of Education and Sports, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2102.
               
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,960,000,000 under vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2102.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 77,927,103,000 under vote 113, Uganda National Roads Authority, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2102.
        
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,693,000,000 under vote 114, Uganda Cancer Institute, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2102.
               
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 511: Jinja District

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 520,000,000 under vote 511, Jinja District, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2102.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS AKOL: I would like to seek clarification, Madam Chair, whether the figure for the Office of the President includes the Shs 1.2 billion which is in the addendum for vote 001. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, we have an addendum, under Office of the President, of Shs 1,200,000 and then we have Uganda missions abroad under New York, London, Ottawa, New Delhi, Cairo, Nairobi, Dar es Salaam, Abuja, Pretoria, Washington, Addis Ababa, Beijing, Kigali, Geneva, Tokyo, Tripoli, Riyadh, Denmark, Brussels, Rome, Kinshasa, Khartoum, Paris, Berlin, Tehran, Moscow, Canberra, Juba, Abu Dhabi, Bujumbura, China- Guangzhou and Ankara. When we total all this, it comes to Shs 11,397,000,689.  I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, this worsens the situation. We are now moving to Shs 11 billion from the point that I said the supplementary is not balancing the budget if you add the overall total. If you add this, it even worsens.

Secondly, because of the issue hon. Akol raised, I still insist there was under performance of development; it went to wage and non-wage. So, there was no free money available. We did not collect all that we had anticipated. We operate a cash budget.

The other point which the chairperson and the minister need to clarify is whether this was not considered. You are bringing an addendum when we are handling the matter. How do we handle this matter? You bring the minutes of the committee report, it is not there. This is an addendum which was just laid here. It was not handled in the committee. You bring the minutes the way the rules say.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Chairperson, I think I need to answer this. Go to page 2. On the first paragraph it says “On 16 May 2012, the Minister of Finance presented to Parliament a supplementary budget - on the same Schedule No.2 - “On 7 June 2012 an addendum was presented to Parliament....” The addendum is indicated there. 

Let me go to page 12, point No.2, under observations; the committee stated clearly that URA collections for the past three quarters of the financial year 2011/2012 amounted to Shs 4,400 billion, representing a shortfall of Shs 88 billion. However, have we known how much URA has collected in the last quarter? And it is collecting until Saturday when the financial year ends. 

So, the shortfall was with the figures available to the committee for only the three quarters of the year, and we know there are four quarters. So, hon. Ekanya, please help me. The figures available for our analysis are not 100 percent, for the total financial year. I strongly believe in the last one quarter, URA could have collected significantly more resources than the amount available to us.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I respect this chairman. He worked in the UN. I want to refer to the Budget Speech for this financial year. The economy was expected to grow at a rate of 5.7 percent but our growth, according to the Minister of Finance, is now recorded at 3.2 percent. That means even revenue performance has gone down. Simple! You have been to UN; I do not need to educate you on this matter.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the appropriated budget is different from the expended budget, and we explained this difference to the committee. We would like to agree with the committee report; they are spot-on. All they are saying is what we explained to them; they understood and they have put it in this. What you appropriated is not necessarily what we have expended. You have rightly stated that we are working on a cash budget, so it is only when we have the money that we expend. In the report, they have made it very clear that there has been a saving particularly from the development aspect. This is quite clear, Madam Chair. I thank you.

MS AKOL: Madam Chair, thank you. On the addendum, I just wanted the clarification on vote 001 but you read the total - missions abroad, Shs 10 billion. Maybe the clerk could crosscheck so that we do not supply twice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The vote for the Missions abroad was Shs 10,197,689,000. That is what we passed. Is this supplied under this? Minister, you move for the House to resume.

MS AKOL: I have not got clarification whether we have included the Shs 1.2 billion on vote 001 in the total that was read because it is also part of the addendum.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have the list of members of the committee. If you look at No.5, she is called hon. Akol Rose Okullu. She is a member of the Budget Committee, and this is her report. She is questioning what she has presented to us. I think this is madness of the highest order. So Madam Chair -(Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chair. I respect the Leader of the Opposition but it surprises me that he has no respect for colleagues.

Secondly, being a long-term serving Member of Parliament up to today, he does not know what unparliamentary language is. Is it in order for the honourable Leader of the Opposition, with all those years of service, to insinuate that there are mad people in this Parliament? Is he in order, Madam Chair?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as far as I am aware, all the members of this House are sane and sober. So, you are out of order.

Vote 114: Uganda Police Force

THE CHAIRPERSON: I understand we made a mistake and called it the Cancer Institute but it is 114. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,693,000,000 under vote 114, Uganda Police Force, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure-

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, in the report the chairman said additional funding amounting to Shs 53.3 billion. I now see a different figures being read.

THE CHAIRPERSON: For Uganda Police Force?

MR EKANYA: Yes, and that is what the 10 members signed. Chairman, please do not adulterate and smuggle issues that the members did not approve. This is in the report, Shs 53 billion. This is what members signed. How can you start doctoring the report here?

MR REMIGIO: Madam Chair, I think hon. Ekanya today chooses not to read the whole thing. If you go to vote 114 on page 10, recurrent is Shs 53.3 billion and development is Shs 6.69 billion. When you add the two, that is what Madam Chair is reading.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I think for purposes of record, there are two types of votes; there is recurrent and development. Madam Chair was reading recurrent and when she read, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya who had a report was right. He said it is Shs 53.3 billion. So, that is what we separate and then we go to development. I am aware that Madam Chair is also going to read development separately, which will be Shs 6.69 billion. Hon. Ekanya was right, so do not blame him.

MR REMIGIO: Madam Chair, my colleague, hon. Ekanya, who is a member of the committee, accused me of smuggling things in the report. I have exactly what the report has under development, Uganda Police Force, vote 114. It is Shs 6.69 billion. At what point did I smuggle anything new into the budget, Madam Chair?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, can you please move for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

9.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chair and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

9.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the supplementary Schedule No. 2 for the financial year 2011/2012 and has supplied it without amendments.

9.21
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, I can see we are discussing an important document and for sure the issue of quorum is very important. So, I propose that since this is an important topic we are discussing for this country and I can see the quorum is not there, -(Interjection)-Yes, even if it is not voting but we need quorum to discuss issues of the budget when at least we are half the number of Members of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am satisfied there are enough members to do business. Proceed. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

9.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

9.23
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, I beg to first move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow for the Poverty Reduction Support Credit, which was passed by the august House on the 25 of April, 2012. 

On 25 April 2012, this august House authorised Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 65,900,000 equivalent to US$ 100 million to support the Poverty Reduction Support Credit 9. However, given the time lapse from the period of appraisal in July 2011 to the time of parliamentary approval, the appreciation of SDR to the dollar meant we needed less SDR to obtain the same amount of dollars. What this means is that the financing agreement which the government signed with IDA, which is in the SDR basket of currencies unit of lending by the World Bank and IDA, has SDR 65,200,000. The World Bank therefore cannot disperse the funds as long as the resolution of Parliament authorising the borrowing is specified as SDR 65,900,000. 

The purpose of this brief is: 

(a) To request you to note the changes which have taken place with the appreciation of SDR against the US dollar, leading to less than the approved SDR equivalent. 

(b) To note that the amount of SDR required under the operation to obtain the equivalent of US$ 100 million in respect of the Poverty Reduction Support Credit 9 has changed from SDR 65,900,000 to SDR 65,200,000. 

(c)   Ask Parliament to authorise amendment to its resolution of 25 April 2012 by passing the attached resolution authorising Government to borrow SDR 65,200,000 equivalent to US$ 100 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for the purposes and on the terms and conditions as authorised by Parliament on April 25th 2012.  The resolution reads as follows:

 “WHEREAS Parliament on April 25, 2012 authorised the borrowing of SDR 65,900,000 from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for the purposes of financing the Poverty Reduction Support Credit 9;

AND WHEREAS the financing agreement as concluded on May 14th 2012 between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and IDA is for the amount of SDR 65,200,000; 

AND WHEREAS in line with the Constitution requirements and in line with the Parliament resolution of April 25th 2012 Government has laid before Parliament the reason for the difference in the amount signed and contracted for; 

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that for reasons advanced, Government has hereby resolved to secure the said credit of SDR 65,200,000 equivalent to US$ 100 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group upon the terms and conditions for the purposes stated therein.” 

This resolution amends the resolution earlier passed by this House on April 25th 2012. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

9.28
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I wish to support the Minister of Finance in her initiative but this House has a procedure. If members bothered to read the background to the budget and the budget speech, it shows how much we have received from development partners. That is one. We have not received all we expected to receive and one of the reasons, which I mentioned here, is because of lack of counterpart funding.

Secondly, this is not the first time in the history of Uganda that we are having fluctuations in currency. Normally, what happens with this kind of support is that not all the money is released at the same time. So, may I propose because of time, this matter be referred to the appropriate committee so that the committee looks at it so that we are not pushed to amend our resolution in a manner which is not in conformity with our rules? Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the matter be deferred.

THE SPEAKER: The committee’s work is to facilitate the work of this House and they work on our behalf. So, let me send that request to the committee. They can report next week - Committee on National Economy.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am seeing something of interest here. This time it has appreciated, tomorrow it will depreciate. Are they going to come and say, “We need you to approve the approval of an increase because the money has depreciated?” It is becoming tricky.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I have sent it to the committee to handle on our behalf.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But why don’t we borrow in dollars instead, or why don’t we borrow in SDR and we forget exchanging it to dollars?

THE SPEAKER: Those are views you can present to the committee through your Shadow Finance Minister who is a member of the committee. They are very good views. 

9.30
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend a resolution of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: Amending? We have Vote-on-Account

MRS KIWANUKA: This is the second one. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have another one for amendment? 

MRS KIWANUKA: Yes because of changes in the amount of money which can be supplied by the lender. 

THE SPEAKER: Must they come today? 

MRS KIWANUKA: I think so, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, present and we send it to the committee.

MRS KIWANUKA: Okay. Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow for the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme III known as CAIIP, which was passed by this august House on 2 November 2011.

On 2 November 2011, this august House authorised the government to borrow Islamic Dinars 7,000,000 equivalent to US$ 10 million from the Islamic Development Bank (ISDB) for co-financing with the African Development Bank (ADB) and Government of Uganda-(Interjections) - for phase 3 of the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Programme (CAIIP), project No. 3.  However, given the lapse of time from the time the project/programme was appraised in January 2011 to the time of loan signature on 13 June 2012, and given competing demands for the resources from ISDB by member countries, and the current Eurozone crisis affecting financial markets, the ISDB can only provide to Uganda up to Islamic Dinars 5,210,000, which is equivalent to US$ 8 million.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, what this means is that the financing agreement which Government could execute with ISDB reads a figure of Islamic Dinars 5,210,000 instead of Islamic Dinars 7 million. The ISDB will thus not be able to disburse funding so long as the authorisation by Parliament reads a different amount from what they can afford in view of their changed circumstances. 

Honourable members, the purpose of this brief is to:

(a) Inform this august House of the resources that are available from the Islamic Development Bank for co-financing CAIIP-III. This programme has already adjusted its costing to come in line with available funding;

(b) To request honourable members to note the changes;

(c) To request Parliament to consider an amendment to its resolution passed on November 2, 2011 by passing the attached resolution authorising Government to borrow Islamic Dinars 5,210,000 equivalent to US$ 8 million from the Islamic Development Bank for the purposes and upon the terms and conditions as authorised by Parliament on November 2, 2011. The resolution reads as follows:

“WHEREAS Parliament on November 2, 2011 authorised the Government to borrow ID 7 million (equivalent to US$ 10 million) from the Islamic Development Bank for the purposes of supporting the implementation of the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) Project III;

AND WHEREAS the financing agreement as concluded on June 14th , 2012 between the Government and the Republic of Uganda and the ISDB is for the amount of ID 5,210,000;

AND WHEREAS in line with the constitutional requirements and in line with the Parliament resolution of November 2, 2011, Government has laid before Parliament the reasons for the differences in the amounts signed contracted for; 

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that for reasons advanced, Government is hereby authorised to secure the said loan of ID 5,210,000 (equivalent to US$ 8 million) from Islamic Development Bank upon the terms and conditions and for the purposes stated therein.” 

That this resolution amends the resolution earlier passed by this House on November 2, 2011. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: This proposal is similarly referred to the Committee of National Economy.

MR KYAMADIDI: I seek guidance before you move, Madam Speaker. If you read specifically paragraph 2, where they are saying that they are reducing on this loan because of the lapse of time from January up to when they signed in June, the significant change here is that we are actually reducing on what we are borrowing. 

I needed to be guided because this project is already being implemented and we are losing out, and yet some of us are beneficiaries of this project. I was wondering whether it would be procedurally right for us to refer this matter again to the committee even when we are still losing. 

THE SPEAKER: But the committee will be able to examine the real reasons why we are moving from seven to five. So, what do you want us to do? We should not have different standards for the same work. Let us trust our Committee on National Economy even if it comes back next Tuesday; they can examine it during the weekend and we vote on Tuesday. It is sent to the Committee on National Economy. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

9.37
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, honourable members, I beg to move that Parliament resolve itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of Vote-on-Account for the financial year 2012/2013.

The total budget for financial year 2012/2013 amounts to Shs 11,398,420,798,231 and shall be financed, as follows:

a) Revenue

i) 	Domestic Revenue – Shs 7,422.3 billion of which: 
•	URA tax revenue, Shs 7,250.5 billion 
•	Non Tax revenue, Shs 160.0 billion 
•	Money from loan repayments by public institutions for money on-lent by Government, Shs 11.8 billion. 

ii) 	Domestic financing of Shs 993.50 billion.

iii) 	External Financing, Shs 2,741.3 billion of which: 
•	Project support is  Shs 1,992.8 billion 
•	Budget support is Shs 748.6 billion.

Non-resource taxes or book entries amount to Shs 241.02 billion. This is not a resource but is a book entry provision for payment of taxes on Government imports, donor funded projects and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) where Government has binding agreements to meet tax obligations.

b) Expenditure

Madam Speaker, arising out of the above projected revenue, the expenditure estimates for the financial year 2012/13 amounts to Shs  11,398,420,798,231 of which:

i)	Central Government votes amounts to Shs 7,732,497,357,000;
ii)	Local Government votes, Shs 1,855,538,252,231; and
iii)	Statutory expenditure, Shs 1,810,385,189,000. 

They amount to, respectively, 67.8 percent for central government, 16.3 percent for local government and 15.9 percent for statutory expenditure.

c)  Vote-on-Account

Rt. hon. Speaker, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, Article 154, Clause (4) stipulates that: “If the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not or has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President may, subject to the provisions of this article, authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier”

The vote-on-account being requested is Shs 3,210,975,036,000 of which Shs 2,592,462,286,000 is for central government votes and Shs 618,512,751,000 is for local governments votes.

The above vote-on-account amounting to Shs 3,210,975,036,000 is subject to appropriation by Parliament.

Madam Speaker, whereas the practice has been to compute vote-on-account as one third of the total  budget, next financial year’s vote-on-account exceeds one third of the total budget. This additionality is due to the need to frontload, in the first four months, the financing of the following on-going critical expenditures:

i)	Inspector General of Government: Shs 1.00 billion is required for contractual obligations for purchase of land for construction of the IGG Offices from Posta. This is the last instalment regarding payment for this land.
 
ii) 	Ministry of East African Community Affairs: Shs 1.14 billion is required to cater for arrears on contributions to EAC. These arrears are outstanding contributions for the financial year 2011/12 for Uganda.  All other Member States have already paid their contributions to EAC. It is important that we clear these arrears now that the Speaker of EALA is a Ugandan; and

iii) 	Office of the President: Shs 10.67 billion is required to cater for construction of Kololo Grounds for the golden jubilee celebrations. Out of the Shs 21.67 billion required to implement the activities for the golden jubilee celebrations, Shs 5 billion has been provided this financial year, 2011/12. The balance  of Shs 16.67 billion is required in the first quarter of the financial year 2012/13 to facilitate proper preparations for the Independence Day on 9 October 2012.

d) Statutory Expenditure

Madam Speaker, a summary of statutory expenditure of Shs 1,810,385,272,000 is hereby laid. Below is the list of statutory institutions to benefit:

•	Vote 101 – Judiciary
•	Vote 102 - Electoral Commission
•	Vote 103 - Inspector General of Government
•	Vote 104 - Parliamentary Commission
•	Vote 105 - Uganda Law Reform Commission
•	Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights 		Commission
•	Vote 107 - Uganda Aids Commission
•	Vote 108 - National Planning Authority 
•	Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor-General.

Other statutory expenditures include, and these are statutory posts as opposed to institutions: 

•	Vote 001 - Office of the President, for specified officers 
•	Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service, for former presidents/vice presidents and pensions
•	Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for court awards
•	Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the President Industrial Court.
•	Vote 130 - Treasury Operations, for public debt.
•	Vote 133 - Directorate of Public Prosecution for salaries
•	Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force for the salaries of the Inspector and Deputy Inspector General of Police.
•	Vote 145- Uganda Prisons Services for the salaries of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I hereby request you to approve the vote-on-account for the financial year 2012/13 amounting to Shs 3,210,975,036,000 in accordance with Article 154 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda by authorising the resolution attached to this request. 

RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

9.37
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, 
“WHEREAS Clause (4) of Article 154 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is earlier;

AND WHEREAS the Government financial year will end on the 30  June 2012, and it is the belief of the President that by that date this House will not have approved the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year 2012/13; 

AND WHEREAS it is necessary that the President authorises the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditures necessary to carry on the services of Government; 

AND WHEREAS Clause (5) (a) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorisation of the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of Clause (4) has to be approved by a resolution of Parliament;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament approves Vote-On-Account of Shs 3,210,975,036,318 allocated to the various votes attached to this resolution.” 

Moved by hon. Maria Kiwanuka, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker – (Interruptions)

MRS MARIA KIWANUKA: I seek your indulgence. I thank the honourable shadow finance minister for giving way. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the estimates of the statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund services for the financial year 2012/13.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the Minister of Finance for presenting this.  First, let me inform the House that the Government of Uganda is losing support from the international community, the USA Government being one of them, for not being thoroughly open in its budget reporting. Kenya, Tanzania and other countries are getting grants. 

Why am I saying so? In the Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance says, on page 12, that the total amount of resources available in the financial year 2012/13 is estimated to be Shs 11.157 billion. Now she seems to have revised her budget. She needs to make it clear whether she has revised her budget for us to understand it. Every time you get new resources, please declare. Make it clear. That is one. The documents are here and when you read the background to the budget, the figures are not tallying.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I raised the issue of Article 156. Last financial year, this House did not approve money to go to the Ministry of Public Service. We decided to keep that money in the Ministry of Finance because we had passed a loan resolution. I am happy that the Minister has brought an amendment saying that the World Bank and the Islamic Bank will not release money unless Parliament amends the resolution. 

Our resolution was that we were only approving Shs 23 billion and the money should go to Uganda Management Institute. After this committee going to Jinja and finding nothing and yet a lot of money had been spent, we took a decision that the money should stay with the Ministry of Finance. But the Ministry of Finance went ahead and released the money without parliamentary appropriation and thereby violating Article 156, which gives power to Parliament to do appropriation. We did not appropriate that money to the Ministry of Public Service to which it was released and as we speak right now, there is nothing on the ground. 

Even the President wrote a letter directing that the money should be used for construction at the Uganda Management Institute but it has also been ignored. Today as we speak, there is still a component of that item in the Vote-on-Account to go to Ministry of Public Service against parliamentary resolution and against directives of the President. That totally violates the Constitution, Madam Speaker. 

We need this time maybe to move that item of Ministry of Public Service to Parliamentary Commission or we do not pass that vote totally. Because when you put it in Ministry of Finance, they release it. You see the challenge we have, Madam Speaker, is that during supplementary appropriation is when they bring certain items that you cannot look at critically.  

Secondly, if you look at this vote-on-account, it has a code for arrears and the minister read it very clearly – arrears which must be paid including the East African Community and others. There is a column here, but the question that we need to ask is where the column for the balance is at the end of the financial year because the Ministry of Works and Tororo District returned some money. 

You are very fast to move on arrears but the law is very clear. Madam Speaker, all these arrears must be verified by the Auditor-General four months after the end of the financial year. So, when did the Auditor-General conclude the verification? The minister says that these arrears are for 2012/13; the law is very clear, they must be verified and you need to table the report of verification by the Auditor-General and also give us a report of the balance of the other year because you are operating a cash budget. 

The Shs 10 trillion for this financial year includes collections and donor support. There was a balance for the other year; we need it reflected because you are demanding for money to pay arrears. Show us where it is because under the Public Finance Act and the Constitution, the Auditor-General is supposed to verify arrears before they are paid because it is a direct charge. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. I agree with the Shadow Minister of Finance that this money should be verified and the report made to Parliament. However, it appears as though he is the one in the know and he has more information than I do. The clarification I am therefore seeking from you is: to the best of your knowledge, how much could be in the Consolidated Fund because you are aware that this money has been transferred? As a shadow minister you should really help us understand what we may not understand. Thank you. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concerns of the Shadow Minister of Finance. However, I would like to add that it is true that the honourable minister’s budget has moved upwards by about Shs 241 billion. But we also have to note that these are estimates; even in her speech she emphasised that it is estimated. Now the estimate has gone up. Maybe what we can ask her to do is just to clarify whether it is from domestic revenue that we expect to realise the Shs 241 billion or is it from borrowing or from donors. It is just that alone.

Again, Madam Speaker, this is a vote on account, which should actually be passed without debate. What we have is a weakness in the current legal framework. It provides for us to pass the Vote-on-Account without even scrutinising it because we pass our budgets by 30th August. So the only remedy here is to pull back or streamline that we should have passed the budget by 30th June. We need to amend the current legal framework but in the current circumstances with this legal framework, I believe we have no option but to pass this Vote-on-Account. After all, the total that we pass here will be part and parcel of the total appropriated amount that we are going to appropriate later on after scrutinising the details of the budget estimates.  

So, my proposal is that we proceed to pass the Vote-on-Account and any adjustments to it, either on the total budget that we shall appropriate or by vote, will definitely be adjusted when we appropriate on 31st August by law. What we are doing now is just to provide a frontload for Government to have money to spend to run this nation as Parliament proceeds with the process of appropriating the budget, which is estimated to end by 31 August 2012. That is my proposal, Madam Speaker. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ekanya is making a good point on arrears in general. However, the arrears we are handling here are peculiar in the sense that these are our contributions to the East African Community, which are known. We know what each country contributes and we do not want to be embarrassed. If they were general arrears, yes you have a good point. But these are peculiar to the East African Community. So, in that case, hon. Ekanya should drop his argument. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ekanya has pointed out funds which we held with the Ministry of Finance for the Civil Service College. I am the vice chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and we met with the Committee on Social Services to resolve this matter. Up to now we have not resolved this matter. So, if it is true that the Ministry of Public Service has gone ahead to access this funding, then this is a serious matter. It will certainly need to be investigated under what circumstances the Ministry of Public Service accessed funds which Parliament had expressly said should be ring fenced under the Ministry of Finance.  It was a big debate, Madam Speaker, that day. I would propose that the committee follows up this matter. It will certainly constitute a violation of our own resolution here. 

Secondly, on the Vote-on-Account, I just need some clarification from the honourable Minister for Finance. I totally agree with hon. Rose Akol. Looking at the figures we have in this detailed schedule, they total to Shs 3.210 trillion. The total required both for central government and local government is Shs 3.210 trillion. Out of our total budget, whether it is Shs 11.1 billion or Shs 11.3 billion, this constitutes less than one third as required in the Budget Act or the Public Finance and Accountability Act. In any case, it is only about 28 percent. So, we would still be safe to approve this as it is in terms of that schedule.

However, the honourable minister made my life complicated under page 2, item No.6, and this is where I need her clarification. When she says: “Whereas the practice has been to compute vote-on-account as a third of the total budget, next finance year’s vote-on-account exceeds one third of the total budget.” I want her to explain. She lists Inspector General of Government, Ministry of East African Affairs and Office of the President; is this constituted in the detailed schedule which we have? In the detailed schedule, which is at the end, she says, “I am seeking approval of Shs 3.2 trillion”. It actually corresponds to this schedule and therefore does not require what she is talking about under item No 6.

Honourable minister are these figures under item No. 6, that is the Shs 1 billion for IGG, Shs 1.14 for Ministry of East African Affairs and Shs 10.6 for Office of the President in addition to the Shs 3.2 trillion which you are presenting? If they are part of it, then I would propose straight ahead that we approve the vote-on-account. 

MR EKANYA: I want to respond to my colleague, the chair of the public service committee. I can tell with authority that the money was released by Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Public Service. For us we do our work. I will table the letters from the President. Whatever is happening is total violation.

Secondly, hon. Rose Akol is really saying that we have to pass the Vote-on-Account, but times have changed. If you go to Dubai or Singapore, you find there money, - in Uganda you think that if you find money then you steal it - if you pick it, they will cut your hand. So even if the law is not written, we cannot just pass money and then it is abused.

The other issue is that the Shs 3.2 trillion excludes statutory because we are only dealing with the other component, which is one third - local government and central government.

I want to thank the Ministry of Works. However, I want to note  that with East Africa, we may make it a special case, but if you look at the column for vote-on-account and arrears, it is not only East African Community. Some of this really requires scrutiny. So, I may concede through my Leader of the Opposition then we have the arrears of East African Community but the other ones are in total violation of the law. They have to be verified by the Auditor-General and the report be brought and this has not happened. How can we really violate the law because the Constitution says that we are not supposed to comment and you see money going contrary to the Constitution and the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

Madam Speaker, in law what is not written is either way. It depends upon the presiding officer or the Judge, and you are in the chair; may I beg you to exercise your power and ensure that we do not pass these other arrears.

THE SPEAKER: which ones? You mean under No. 6? 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure and this is in regard to rule 129(12), committee of supply. It reads: “When the House is in the Committee of Supply to consider a vote on account – 
a) any Member may move to reduce the amount of the Vote-on-Account, but every such motion shall relate to the total amount, and a Member may not refer to any particular vote in moving such a motion.” 

So, Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance whether we are moving in the right direction in relation to this rule. This is in regard to what members are saying, that we reduce on this vote. The rules are very clear; it has to be on the total and not on a vote. I seek your guidance on this procedural matter.

THE SPEAKER: We have not gone to the Committee of Supply because I have not put the question. So, honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the Vote-on-Account as requested.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASULE: May I propose that we do consider the vote-on-account omnibus.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I have no problem with that motion but then based on what my sister has read, I have a motion to move so that I reduce the figure.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 3,210,975,036,318 under various votes be provided as Vote-on-Account for expenditure for the financial year 2012/13.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I beg to move a motion that the total sum as you have read be reduced by Shs 6.1 billion. The justification: to conform to the Rules of Procedure that we can reduce from the total without necessarily making a reference to the vote item, but besides we make special provision for the East African Community.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Two weeks ago, some Members were advocating for embassies and they were advocating for arrears to former heads of state. Here is the Minister of Finance trying to source for money so that those arrears are cleared. We seek your guidance on how these people can be paid when some of the money is being rejected.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We pass these budgets to facilitate Government to function. That is why it is clearly stated somewhere, I cannot remember where, that if a member is not satisfied, we reduce the budget by Shs 10,000. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to plead with members that nobody has any negative interest. We really want these arrears paid but we have the Office of the Auditor-General, which is an office of Parliament and the law says arrears must be verified. So where is the verification account? It is the Public Finance and Accountability Act, it is the Constitution and these are really fundamental. Once these arrears have been verified - They are not urgent because they are arrears anyway. They are arrears that have been accumulating; it is not an emergency. It will come here and we shall pass them and they will have the money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the fact that their provision has been made means that they are required and that is why they have been requesting for it.

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The construction which is on going on at Kololo needs to be completed in time, given that October is near. We should reach that time when everything is well constructed. So everything here is very important and well calculated and I request that we pass this money. 

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I just want to reiterate what hon. Rose Akol said. This is Vote-on-Account. The honourable shadow minister for finance, who has been in this House for almost 20 years, is aware that this is just a component of the entire budget. We are going to have time here to scrutinise sector by sector and anything that does not conform to any legal requirements or frameworks shall certainly be dropped if found necessary.

So I just want to appeal to members to pass the Vote-on-Account to enable Government to operate. If there are any arrears – For your information, these are not the only arrears; there are other arrears which are to be verified, but the peculiar nature of these issues is why the minister has brought these issues. So I would beg the indulgence of members to allow the Vote-on-Account to pass and we wait to debate the entire budget. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,210,975,036,318 under various votes be provided for as Vote-on-Account for the financial year 2012-2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

10.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

10.17
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Vote-on-Account for financial year 2012/2013 and has supplied it without amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

10.17
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)
                           
Report adopted

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work done for the country today. As I indicated earlier, we are expected at Munyonyo this evening for tomorrow’s seminar. Well, you are free to either stay at Munyonyo or stay in your house but be available at 8 o’clock tomorrow for registration. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 10.17 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 July 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

