Thursday, 18 June 2015

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members on the Government side, Opposition and the Independents, I welcome you to the Third Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fifth Session of the Ninth Parliament. 
I had communicated to you on the 11 June that the Fifth Session would resume on 23 June 2015. However, I was obliged to call for a special sitting today because of the following reasons: Uganda is a founding member of the Eastern Southern African Anti-Money Laundering Group, which is one of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) style regional bodies. It is a body that combats money laundering and financial terrorism. 

For a country to be a member of the ESAAMLG, it has to periodically undergo mutual evaluation of its standing in relation to anti-money laundering and combating of terrorism efforts. 

In the first round of mutual evaluation on compliance with FATF standards in anti-money laundering and combating financial terrorism, Uganda was the first to be evaluated.  

Accordingly, the ESAAMLG top organ directed that countries maintain the same order of mutual evaluation as in the first round, which means Uganda is set to be evaluated very soon as to whether it has complied with the new FATF recommendations. 
Member countries are mandated to align their domestic laws with the new FATF recommendations of 2012 and such recommendations include:
    i) Ratification and implementation of the UN instruments;
    ii) Communalising the finances of terrorism and associated money laundering; and
    iii) Freezing and confiscating terrorist assets, among others.

The International Convention for the Suppression of Financing Terrorism to which Uganda is a party requires Uganda to domesticate provisions of financing terrorism. For Uganda, the recommendations meant that the Anti-Terrorism Act of 2002 should have catered for criminalising of terrorism financing, but it did not. 

Therefore, the reason for the special sitting is that there is a deadline for amending the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002, which was in November last year ; we were not able to accomplish it so the country requested for an extension of the deadline, which is due on 20 June 2015 during this weekend. 

If Uganda does not amend the law by 20 June, it will receive international sanctions including getting excluded from membership of the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group as well as the Financial Action Task Force bodies. 

Notwithstanding that, honourable members, I do want to retaliate my statement at the State of the Nation Address that Government should prioritise what they consider to be critical legislation and bring it in good time. This is because now we had to interrupt the recess of the members. Some of the committees have never gone home because of doing this work and this is not fair to the House. 

I also wish to advise that President Uhuru Kenyatta has postponed his planned visit to Uganda. Therefore, the address which had been planned for 24 June will be given on another day when he notifies us of his new dates for the visit to the Republic of Uganda. Thank you very much. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of guidance arising from your communication. I listened to your justification of today’s sitting that Uganda is soon to be evaluated and that we need to pass this Bill in to law by 20 June 2015.

Madam Speaker, as you may realise, this is becoming a trend. We thought the matter would end with the Constitutional and Electoral Reforms where Government kept on promising and promising.  But now they are making Parliament look shabby because the legislative programme ought to be with your office, Madam Speaker, so that you can tentatively give an insight on how the business is to be handled. 

Imagine the interruption that has occurred. Committees have been disbanded because we were having - I am a Member of the Defence and Internal Affairs committee. We had to hurriedly abandon a retreat in which we were considering the Non-Government Organisation Bill. I know many other committees were doing similar activities.  

Two, you had allowed us this time to consult with our voters - to tell them what has happened including what the budget is and its implications. This has now been interrupted. Now we do not see the Leader of Government Business in this House yet he is the one with whom you ought to be coordinating the activities of Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, I am perturbed that the activities are being interrupted because of the haphazard manner Government is leading business in this House. I am further disturbed that we are incurring further and deeper costs having to run - and then we are here; we have to go back again. In a way, it makes us untidy.  

Madam Speaker, can we first receive commitment from Government that the matters that are foreseen - it is not an emergency that it happened yesterday. Government knew this very well. They saw it coming, but they chose to keep quiet and allowed you to put the House on recess but they immediately stormed your office. I think this should come to an end. I would be reluctant to sit in unless we get a firm commitment from Government that this kind of handling and dealing with Parliament is unacceptable.  

We have the three arms of Government - the Judiciary, the Legislature and the Executive. Let us have mutual respect for each other. Let us schedule our business in an orderly manner and avoid the occurrence of this because our people are asking us what has happened. Is the country being attacked? 

To that extent, Madam Speaker, now that the Leader of Government Business is here, can we first receive an equivocal commitment from Government that this is not the way we shall continue doing business and that, therefore, an apology is registered on the Floor of this House? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have written to the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business informing him that I did not see or hear about the legislative programme of Government during the State of Nation Address. There was none. 

I have written to him to say, “Do you have Bills you are bringing to this Session?” This is because nothing was said about it. I have also said, “If you have critical business, can it be brought quickly?” I think we must all acknowledge that this is not a good year. After August, no members will be sitting in Kampala to do business. So, I would like you to acknowledge that issue, Prime Minister. If you have critical business, bring it. 

But also we want an apology because this matter must have been on the table for some time. You must have been encouraged to comply and you did not; you must have been advised to comply and you did not. You must have been warned and you did not respond. You must have been given a very stern warning and you did not respond. That is why the sanctions were coming.  This is not a problem of this House. I do not know what else is going to come in the same manner.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter you have raised, when we were handling the budget, it came up. The Anti-Money Laundering Unit that was established as a result of passing the law was not even adequately funded.

As a Committee of Finance and Budget, they needed more money as they are not well facilitated. Even the appointment of the officials required was done late. So, I do not know the extent to which Government is committed in handling the issues of anti-money laundering. Do they just want to use Parliament as a scapegoat that we are not doing our work?
 
The technical people appeared and raised the conflict between their institution and the institution of police. They queried the police capacity to handle issues of anti-money laundering and anti-terrorism. They wanted harmonisation and proper funding and equipment, among others. That is why they needed additional funding but Government could not abide.

Therefore, I do not know whether it is us or Government that is not serious. So, even if we sit today and do this legislation that the government wants, there is a bigger problem in establishing the unit, financing and de-linking it from police, which does not have the necessary technical capacity to monitor issues of anti-money laundering. They appeared before us and raised very serious issues.

THE SPEAKER: Are you not now speculating? Prime Minister, do you have anything to say before we proceed?

3.13
THE PRIME MINSTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to respond to the statement I heard from my brother hon. Ssekikubo conveying to this House with fury and anger.

I am sorry that, I must say, the House has had to be called when colleagues are consulting and doing many other duties. So I think that this is a situation that we would not want to see happening.

Secondly, I do agree with you, Madam Speaker, that we have had the discussion about the legislative programme, the fact that should have been included in the State-of-the-Nation message. This is going to be done as soon as Parliament re-opens so that colleagues can be aware how the programme is going to be.

Thirdly, the honourable Minister of Finance has some urgent legislation of national importance and it is important we should protect the interest of Uganda. I do agree that there may have been mistakes, errors and omissions on the part of those who were involved in this exercise. That as it may be, it should not bog us down from carrying out our fundamental duty of passing the necessary legislation to protect the interests of Uganda.

So, Madam Speaker, I note and appreciate the comments made by colleagues but do not agree with the language some of them have used. However, let us focus on passing the critical legislation so that the national interests of Uganda can be protected. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the Leader of Government Business in his first reply said that the House had to be recalled, to deal with this important matter. I think this is where some of us feel insulted.

We feel that Parliament should operate separately from the Executive. Whereas we do our part and we did our part; we cleared our desk before you sent us home to rest and interface with our people, the government decided not to clear its desk yet the Prime Minister is saying Parliament had to.

But that is not Government work. The Executive does not have to compel Parliament to come. The Leader of Government Business ought to have said “They made a request for Parliament to be recalled” but not to say, “Had to be recalled” because you do not have authority; we operate separately. Government has to request Parliament and I am not so sure whether the Leader of Government Business, through his boss, actually requested Parliament. If not, we then have to consider this matter as an insult to the institution of Parliament. That is the clarification I am seeking.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received two letters - one from the Minister of Internal Affairs and the other from the Minister of Finance - requesting that this matter be dealt with urgently.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you very much for the thunderous applause I received from Members of Parliament when I read the Budget. I thank you very much. (Applause) 

Two, just like my Leader of Business in Parliament has said, please receive our apologies. We could have pushed for this piece of legislation to be completed before we went on recess but you remember the pressure we had on budget. You remember one time when the Deputy Speaker adjourned the House at around 9.00 or 10.00p.m. That is the pressure we had.

Three, the committee had not finished their work. It only finished its work only yesterday. I received a copy of the committee’s report only yesterday. There is no way I could go to the Speaker – actually when I made an earnest request that Parliament should re-convene to look at this law, the committee had not yet finished with their work. So, whereas –(Interruption) 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. Madam Speaker, allow me to inform the honourable minister that you committed this Bill to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs on Thursday 30 April, 2015 and accordingly, we were supposed to handle it in 45 days, which expired on the 15 June, 2015; we were on recess. So, there is no way the committee can be faulted. We are within the time which is prescribed by the Rules of Procedure. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think the committee should be applauded for keeping within the timeline especially since you were working on the Bill, the budget; you had to share your time. Honourable members, let us move.

3.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I interrupted my field trip in Northern Uganda and returned this morning. I was in Lira visiting courts and prisons when you summoned us for this sitting. I did not understand what was so urgent about this legislation. We have only got a few days to go - actually between and when we are supposed to come back, there is no other day, this was just the last day of this week and we would be back on Tuesday next week. So, I still have not been convinced why we actually had to stop what we were doing to come here and discuss this legislation.

When this Anti-terrorism Bill was discussed and the Act passed, the Government of Uganda, which is a signatory to UN, knew there was already a convention – something to do with Anti- Terrorism Financing had been past three years earlier. Why is it that the Government of Uganda never considered that? Why has it become an urgent matter that we now have to be called from our homes, bedrooms and gardens and stampeded to come and discuss this particular amendment? 

The experience has shown that the Government has been using and uses very expertly, the law to rule us. There is rule by law. They use law to target certain people. It is not rule of law, which we have known; it is rule by law. Is it possible that we are being stampeded because of the current developments in the country - Government is targeting some money somewhere in somebody’s home – why are you stampeding us, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister? There must be something wrong and I think it is not fair that Government orders Parliament and Parliament just jumps.

Madam Speaker, we object to the manner in which the Government is treating this Parliament. They do not even come – we are supposed to have a legislative calendar on Monday 22 2015. They will not even come there with an agenda. They will do whatever they like and when shall we ever say, enough is enough, Madam Speaker? 

So, this idea of stampeding us about this Anti- Terrorism law – it is possible that you are targeting somebody or some people -(Interjection)- we are not speculating but in any case I would like to say that if we do not have numbers, we are not going to proceed and pass this law today; we shall not. That you must know; we shall not. Thank you, very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my communication, I forgot to wish our Imam of Parliament and the Muslim fraternity of this country a very happy Ramadhan. They have started fasting today. So, we should work quickly and allow them to go and have their rituals.

 3.24
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2013, I presented here a petition on behalf of the Uganda Sugar Manufacturers Association asking Government to urgently come up with a law to regulate that industry. 

Consequently, the petition was pushed to the committee. Committee liberated and did all it had to do and we presented a report in August the same year. After the deliberations in response to the report, the Minister of Trade and Industry informed this House that the Bill for the law to regulate the sugar industry was before the First Parliamentary Counsel then, and asked for 60 days to report to this House and Table that Bill. 

However, it is now more than two years since the commitment was made - I do not know whether the Bill is still before the First Parliamentary Counsel or the Minister offered a lie to this House. Bearing in mind that this was a petition, it required an urgent attention and also given the fact that the Minister committed herself and gave a timeline, I now stand here to ask, through you, Madam Speaker, for a response from Government as to what has happened and yet what we thought to cure in the sugar industry is still going on with the situation getting worse.

More so, as matter of principle, matters of petition have to be treated expeditiously. I am surprised that up to now, we have no response from Government after a commitment was made on the floor of this House. 

Madam Speaker, through you, I would like to know from Government what has happened in respect to this commitment. Thank you.

3.26
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on matter of national importance. The National Initiative on Trachoma has begun approaching us - the Members of Parliament from Busoga and Karamoja - on the issue of the outbreak of Trachoma in the areas of Busoga and Karamoja. They further said that they have given us drugs worth more than $100 million lying in Entebbe National Medical Stores. That means that as the Busoga and Karimojong continue becoming blind, the medicine is lying in Entebbe. So, it is upon Government and especially the Ministry of Health to come to this House and give us a clear plan on what action they have to eliminate Trachoma in the areas of Busoga and Karamoja. 

This is a matter of national importance and that is why I have decided to bring it to this House for the Ministry of Health to give us a clear plan, which also encompasses the leaders from Busoga and Karamoja, to help in mobilizing people to eradicate this disease in these regions. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.27
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are aware that few days ago, Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) switched off the signal for all televisions in Uganda. (Laughter) What is on the ground is very clear that UCC was not prepared for this exercise. We have millions of persons who own television sets in Uganda especially in and around Kampala and it is officially clear that there are 800,000 decoders in Uganda. Even somebody who has the money and would like to buy cannot access a decoder. I am told that the off air box goes for Shs 200,000. What about the people, especially the poor Ugandans who cannot afford the Shs 200,000 to buy that box?

Secondly, the Constitution, under Article 41 is very clear on the right of access to information. Even the Access to the Information Act, 2005 is also very clear on that. It is also the Government’s duty to ensure people have access to information.

Thirdly, today the political tension in the country – the fact that we are nearing to the election period, is very tense. So, to block out the public from information is also very dangerous.

Fourth, there are people who had stocked the antennae. Why can’t the ministry first give chance to these people to clear their –(Interjection)– yes, it has ever happened before. They gave chance to people who had twisted iron bars to clear their stock. Why can’t we give those people the same chance? They are Ugandans and paid taxes. 

So, Madam Speaker, you realize that there are so many issues, which the ministry has got to clear before –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER:  Make a request quickly and we move.

MR MAJEGERE: My request and prayer is that the responsible minister should first reinstates the analog signals, he comes back with a clear and detailed statement, giving all the measures and implementation plan to be used to attend to all those issues mentioned here. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is really disappointing that no one has thought it necessary to inform Parliament about what is happening. You just hear things on radios. I do not know - is it a government programme or it is just a private thing? It should have come early and it should have come before the implementation to brief the House and the country about what was going to happen.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ICT (Mr Nyombi Thembo): I thank you, madam speaker. It is true on 15 June 2015 we started the process of digital migration in the Greater Kampala area; that is a 65km radius from Kampala.

Madam Speaker, I am preparing a comprehensive statement to this House on Tuesday. I can confirm that come Tuesday we shall come here with a comprehensive statement to brief this House on what we are doing, the challenges we are facing and how we are ready to face them.
 
As you are aware, we have been –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been told and are all aware that the minister has already disconnected the country. But he is telling us that he will come here with a comprehensive report about the challenges and what he plans to do next week.

The clarification I seek from the minister is: what purpose will that statement serve when you are already moving ahead before consulting this august House?

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you, very much, for the clarification. Those are the issues, which are going to be in our comprehensive statement. (Laughter)

As you are aware, we have been at this together, right from the drafting of the policy to UCC Act that this august House passed last year, which mandates the regulator to do what we did three days back.

However, Madam Speaker, my statement on Tuesday will give comprehensive information concerning this process. I would like to assure the House that we have started this process - we know there are some challenges, but we are taking them head-on and we are sure we are going to handle this process smoothly because we need to harvest our spectrum, which is a national resource, to be used for other purposes for the good of this country.

This is also an international obligation, which we are a signatory to. Though there are some challenges, we are ready to handle them head-on and the process will move on smoothly. I hereby assure the House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall expect a response from the Minister of Trade on the issues of sugar and the Minister of Health on the issue of – what? The Minister of Trade is here? We can handle yours on Tuesday when the statement comes.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM AND TRADE (TRADE) (Mr David Wakikoona): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the Bill concerning sugar was agreed upon in the committee. But when we went there, we could not handle many of the things under the policy.

We have gone very far with the policy of the Sugar Bill. We have had meetings because there are now about 25 groups involved in sugar production. We have consulted many of them and now we are in the final stages - the Bill is now ready. We have it. Just last week we had to clear with the Minister of Justice, the Solicitor-General and Attorney-General.

The Bill will soon come here. We regret it has taken time because of the journey it goes through to come to a Bill stage thus the delay. But now it is about to be submitted. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION): (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, for parliamentary consideration -

THE SPEAKER: Apparently, Members are worried about not watching television. Can the government tell us about what these members are bothered about?

3.37
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I have an issue to raise where Government of Uganda appointed permanent secretaries and kept them idle for over a year now.

We know that under the laws of Uganda, a permanent secretary or any officer cannot act beyond six months. But in some ministries have seen permanent secretaries act for more than one to four years and this has become a constant query by the Auditor-General. Can Government tell us why they keep some permanent secretaries in active capacity and others appointed but not deployed for more than one year? Thank you.

3.37
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, this matter is serious because we are leaders and when I went back home, I found that my television sets were not working. I had to buy some gadgets because when you talk about digital migration, the old generation have to be told what “digital” means and what “migration” means. I only know of the literary migration, but now you are talking about digital migration. (Laughter) It is a very serious matter, Madam Speaker.

I got several calls from my constituency, which had just started watching television, asking what had happened and I just told them I also had similar problems with my television sets though they later informed me that it was something to do with digital migration.

Madam Speaker, we cannot sit back and allow the country to be in darkness. We have already initiated this culture of keeping the country informed through the television network. It is very important that Parliament passes a resolution demanding that the analogue television be switched on until Government comes up with these guidelines they are talking about for our discussion. After they can switch us off when enough time has been given for people to prepare. (Applause) Otherwise, right now we cannot just gloss over this matter. Uganda must be switched on so that we are informed about things like the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, and so on.

We are going to talk about important matters and we do not know how to understand them. We would like to know what is happening in this country and we can only do that by having our analogue television signals switched on. 

So, Madam Speaker, may the Leader of Government Business call his troop to order and tell them to switch us on so that the whole country is informed. I beg to move - (Interjection) - Madam Speaker, protect me from terrorism. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, you are just getting support. But on a serious note, minister, the country is concerned about the blackout.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to put this abundantly clear that Government has not switched off any television. When we talk about analogue to digital migration, there is nothing like digital migration. What we are talking about is analogue to digital migration. When the hon. Cecilia Ogwal talks about her constituency having concerns, that is totally wrong because as far as I understand, her constituency is outside the radius of 60km. There is nothing we have touched outside the radius of 60 km from Kampala. If there are issues, they should be in Kampala, Wakiso, Entebbe, some parts of Mpigi, Luweero and Mukono.

All other areas, if you have problems, those are the normal technical problems that we experience. Television sets can be off due to other reasons other than the analogue to digital migration. There is issue of – we have all the regulations in place. Thank you.

MR BALYEKU: Madam Speaker, what the minister is failing to explain is: from analogue to digital means the people who own televisions, in terms of network cables like WBS, NTV have to change their equipment from analogue to digital. We who own television sets in our home we will forget about aerials and buy decoders. It is now a cable world, no more aerials hanging outside and no more antennae.

Therefore, what hon. Cecilia Ogwal should be saying is that people should be given more time to acquire that equipment. But for the viewers, those who have decoders can still watch television. What the hon. Waira Majegere was referring to was the price of a decoder. Will the person in the village be able to afford a decoder? That is why the minister is asking for more time to come and explain to us.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I think these matters can only be resolved when we have a debate on it. So, honourable minister, you must bring a statement on Tuesday so that we can discuss, understand and advice the country.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVITISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the supplementary – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister would like to lay Supplementary Schedule II. According to our Constitution and the Public Finance and Management Act, we have already passed the budget for financial year 2015/2016. Before passing that budget the law requires that we should have closed the last financial year.  But now the minister is bringing up another Supplementary Schedule II, which is in conflict with the Constitution, the Budget Act and the Public Finance Management Act. Is it procedurally correct for us to have an illegal document being laid?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Geoffrey Ekanya for that information. However, I would also want to inform this House that the budget we passed will be effective from the 1 July 2015. That means that this House and this country are still operating under the current budget, which is 2014/2015.

Madam speaker, before that time, Government can still conduct business and this is one of them. Therefore, I beg to lay on the Table, for parliamentary consideration, the Supplementary Schedule II for the financial year 2014/15 and statutory revision financial year 2014/15. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let it be examined by our committee and they will advise also on that process of the objection.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of Works, Minister of Finance, Minister of Energy and Minister of ICT.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to amend the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 to harmonise the definition of funds with that contained in the International Convention on the Suppression on the Financing of Terrorism of 1999. 

It is also to amend the definition of the words “Terrorism” and “acts of terrorism” to include the international aspects envisaged by the convention and for related purposes. That is the main objective of this amendment. I beg to move.

3.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, before I present the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, allow me to lay on the Table, the minutes of the committee meetings, which arose from the consideration of the Bill and also a copy of the said report. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, page 1 of that report is the cover page. Page 2 has table of contents – (Interruption)

MR TINKASIMIRE: When I was coming in, I found my colleague presenting - I understand we have started a new session and she is a chairperson of a sessional committee and not a standing committee. The life of these committees expired with the last session. Applause) So, I am wondering, Madam Speaker, in which capacity she is presenting this report and at this stage, which committee is she chairing or actually handling the Bill?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I prorogued this House, I also saved the work of the committees and what they were doing. That is what she is completing. Proceed.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for that wise ruling. Page 3 of the report is a list of acronyms and page 4 has the introduction.

Introduction

Madam Speaker, the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2015, was read for the first time in Parliament on 30 April 2015 by the Minister of Internal Affairs and was consequently referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for scrutiny and consideration, in accordance with Article 90(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.

The Bill seeks to amend the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 to meet our international commitment on terrorism financing and criminalise terrorism financing.

Background

In a bid to combat terrorism and money laundering, Government has found it important to mitigate the threats of money laundering and terrorism financing. Uganda is one the founding members of the Eastern and Southern African Anti-Money Laundering Group (ESAALG), which is one of the Financial Action Task Force style regional bodies across the world; a regional body that combats money laundering. FATF is a global standard setting body for anti-money laundering and combating financial terrorism.

For a country to be a member of FSRB, it has to periodically undergo what is termed as mutual evaluation of its standing in relation to its anti-money laundering and combating of terrorism effort. Suffice to note that all the 16 ESAAMLG member countries have completed the first round of mutual evaluation on compliance with FATF standards in anti-money laundering and combating financing of terrorism. FSRB is in the process of conducting a second round of mutual evaluation for its members based on the new FATF’s recommendations of 2012.

The ESAAMLG top organ directed that countries maintain the same order of mutual evaluation as in the first round. Uganda was the first country to be evaluated in 2008 and, therefore, is the first to be evaluated in the second round. One of the deficiencies Uganda had in the first round was the absence of the offence of terrorism and terrorism financing in its laws. The Bill is therefore intended to address that gap.

Objectives of the Bill

The objectives of the Bill are:
    1. To amend the Anti-terrorism Act, 2002 to harmonise the definition of funds with that contained in the International Convention on the Suppression of Financing of Terrorism 1999.
    2.  To amend the definition of terrorism and acts of terrorism to include the international aspects envisaged by the convention for related purposes.
    3. To meet the requirements of the financial action task force that countries not only criminalized terrorism, but terrorism financing as well.
    4. To comply with the United Nations Convention on Terrorism Financing, which Uganda signed on 13 November 2001 and ratified on 6 November 2003.
    5. To define the word “fund” to be at per with the UN Convention. In the current Act the word “fund” is not defined. The amendment is meant to cure that omission.
    6. To cure an omission in the current Act by giving the Minister of Internal Affairs powers to issue requirements for better carrying out provision of the Act and give it full effect. And
    7. To provide for the expeditious freezing, seizure and forfeiture of assets and property suspected to be linked to terrorism activities.

Methodology

The committee used the following methodology in the process of scrutinising the Bill:
    1. Meetings with the following stakeholders: the Financial Intelligence Authority, Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Internal Security Organisation.
    2. The committee reviewed the following documents: the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill 2015; Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002; the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda; the Hansard and United Nations Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism Financing.
    3. We held public hearings. And
    4. We went on a benchmarking trip to Ghana.

Issues raised by different stakeholders on the Bill:

    i) The Financial Intelligence Authority:

In his presentation the Interim Executive Director informed the committee that the fear has been working with other stakeholders to strengthen and improve Ugandan’s counter terrorism framework to conform to the financial action task force.

The Executive Director noted that the objective of the Bill is amend the anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 to harmonise the definition of the word “funds” with that contained in the International Convention on the Suppression of Financing of Terrorism 1999; to amend the definition of terrorism and acts of terrorism to include the international aspects envisaged by the convention and for related purposes.

He further stressed that most of the provisions of the Bill comply with International Convention on the Suppression of Financing of Terrorism and FATF recommendation No. 5 of addressing terrorism financing and financing of proliferation.

He highlighted the fact that Uganda is under immerse pressure from the Eastern and Southern African Anti-money Laundering Group and the FATF to ensure that the Bill is passed into law within the timeframe set for Uganda.

(ii) Bank of Uganda:

In its presentation, Bank of Uganda informed the committee that it has been part of the technical committee that drafted the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2015 and as such was in position to contribute to its debate. 

It informed the committee that the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 does not address Financial Action Task Force recommendations on terrorism and terrorism financing and, therefore, falls short of the required international standards in this regard.

Furthermore, it noted that the Bill seeks to update and enhance the provisions of Uganda’s Anti-terrorism laws to harmonise it with the requisite international standards while improving Uganda’s counter-terrorism legislative framework and regime in order to enable Uganda respond effectively to terrorism threats and dangers.

The bank fully agrees with the object of the Bill, which is to amend Anti-terrorism Act, 2002 to harmonise the definition of the word “funds” with that contained in the International Convention on Suppression of Financing of Terrorism, 1999; and to amend the definition of terrorism and acts of terrorism, to include the international aspects envisaged by the Convention and for related purposes. 

It informed the committee that Uganda is required to expedite the passing of the proposed amendment to the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 since criminalisation of terrorism financing seizing and freezing of terrorists’ assets are key criteria used by the FATF and ICRG to determine insufficient progress by Uganda.

Most of the provisions contained in the Bill comply with provisions of the International Convention of the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and FATF Recommendation No. 5 addressing terrorism financing and financing of proliferation.

The bank urged Parliament to expeditiously consider the Bill and pass it into law, given the impending threat of the FATF to enforce detrimental action against Uganda, if the Bill is not passed into law. The Bank further highlighted that Uganda is under pressure from the FATF and ESAAMLG to ensure the Bill is passed into law within the timeframe set for Uganda.

iii) 	Ministry of Finance:

This ministry informed the committee that financial institutions operate on the basic tenets of public confident and integrity. In the short term, a financial institution that is seen condoning money laundering and terrorism activities will lose public confidence of their depositors and in the long run its abilities to perform its important economic intermediation process will be affected as well.

The ministry further informed the committee that with the negative impact of money laundering and terrorism financing in mind, Government has a strong incentive to ensure that Uganda’s AML/CFT regime is effective. 

The ministry noted that financial institutions being some of the most important partners in combating money laundering and terrorism financing risks, they play an important role of deterring and detecting money laundering and terrorism financing activities.

The ministry concluded by informing the committee that it has received a letter from the International Monetary Fund reminding them of the 21 June 2015 deadline to have Uganda’s terrorism laws amended in line with the FATF recommendations. The IMF threatened to review its dealing with Uganda if our laws are not amended by that date.

The public

Across section of the public raised the following issues on the Bill: 
    a) Seizure and forfeiture:
The public argued that freezing of assets should only happen after conviction.

    b) The role of the Financial Intelligence Authority:
The public want property seized after a thorough judicial process.

Observations/recommendations:

Madam Speaker, having analysed and scrutinized the Bill, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:
    1. The committee observed that since the enactment of the Anti-Terrorism Act of 2002, terrorism has changed character and form thus requiring a review of the current laws.

    2. Because terrorism has changed character and form, there is need to widen the definition of the phrase, “acts of terrorism” in the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 with that of the International Convention on the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and in compliance with FATF recommendations. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the definition of the phrase “acts of Terrorism” be expanded since it is intended to establish terrorism offences as predicate offences of money laundering.

    3. The committee observed that the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 does not address the issues emerging in the global financial framework, which are aimed at combating terrorism. 

The Bill seeks to incorporate these issues, which FATF has recommended on terrorism and terrorism financing because the ATA was falling short of these issues.  

Furthermore, it noted that the Bill seeks to update and enhance the provisions of Uganda’s anti-terrorism laws to harmonise it with the requisite international standards while improving Uganda’s counter terrorism legislative framework and regime in order to enable Uganda respond effectively to terrorism threats and dangers.

4. 	The committee observed that the Bill intends to give courts and the Inspector-General of Police the mandate of seizing funds or property where the court is satisfied that the funds or property is reasonably linked or intended for terrorism activities. 

The committee recommends that the immediate order for the seizure of such property should be mandated to the Director of Public Prosecutions who will however be required to obtain a court order within 48 hours.

5. 	The committee observed that any property forfeited to the state should be vested in the Government of the Republic of Uganda.

The committee therefore recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to amendments.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report that attached to this report is a minority report. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Can we receive the minority report?

4.03
MR MOHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I had given this responsibility to hon. Hassan Fungaroo only to realise that he is also Muslim like me and is on low energy too. So I have to go through this unenviable duty at this hour to present this minority report. Unlike the other times, I will be slow today.

I will jump the introduction because what is written in there is what the chairperson has represented and the justification which is our point No. 2 has also been already articulated by the chairperson. 

I will now go to the point of dissent. I must note that I commend the committee for handling all aspects up to 99 per cent regarding this Bill and we are in total agreement. However, it is only in about two aspects where we raised serious concerns and I will beg the minister to agree, later on with the broader recommendations of the committee, in order to fasten this process.

I am also dully informed that this is an international requirement and we are time bound to act in such a manner. We are willing to play our part to ensure we handle that today so that the Ministry for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Uganda as a country do not suffer the consequences thereof.

Much as that is the case, there are two aspects which we think are critical to Ugandans if passed into law.

As regards to supressing terrorism financing, we agree entirely that we need to comply with the international set standards and our law falls short of them. 

However, some proposed amendments that are non-international and do not relate to the International Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism Financing, 1999 have been included with the aim to prejudice the rights and freedoms of citizens contrary to established constitutional order.

We note in 3.2 that, in the Anti-Terrorism Act that we have, we do not have a clear definition of the term “terrorism.” Terrorism in the Act we have is defined by offences; that if we commit offences under Clause 7 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, the offence amounts to terrorism. 

Therefore, the Bill in its object proposes to amend and provide for definition of “terrorism” but nothing is stated as a definition in relation to the International Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism Financing.

We, therefore, propose the following definition to the word “Terrorism.” We want to amend and provide a definition to terrorism because in our current law, terrorism is defined by the offences and no effort was made in that law, to ensure that terrorism is defined - and our definition to harmonise with international definition. So our position comes because our law falls short of the international definition of the word “terrorism.” 

We therefore propose the following meaning and definition to the word “terrorism.” “Terrorism” means the use or threat of action where -
    a) (i) 	the action falls within sub paragraph B. People will have to refer later on to paragraph B of the mother Act;
	ii) 	the use or threat is designed to influence the government or intimidate the public or section of the public; and
	iii) 	the use or threat is made for the purpose of advancing a political, religious or an ideological cause. 

b) Action falls within the sub paragraph (I) if - 
i) 	it involves serious violence against a person;
ii) 	it involves extensive destruction to property - we did this over night because we only had one night to write a minority report and so they wrote “destructive”;
iii) 	endangers a person’s life other than that of a person committing the action;
iv) 	creates a serious risk to the health or safety of the public or a section of the public; and
    iv) is designed seriously to interfere with or seriously disrupt an electronic system.
c)	 The use or threats of action falling within sub paragraph b) which involves the use of firearms or explosives is terrorism whether or not sub paragraph a) (i) and (ii) is satisfied.
d) 	In paragraphs a, b and c, action includes -
i) 	actions outside Uganda; 
ii) 	reference to any person or to a property is a reference to any person or property where wherever situated;
iii) 	reference to the public includes reference to the public of a country other than that of Uganda;
(iv) 	“The Government” means the Government of Uganda or of a part of Uganda or a country other than Uganda. 

The above definition is all-inclusive and addresses the objectives of the Bill especially with regard to international aspects envisaged by the convention for related purposes.

Madam Speaker, we cannot have a law where terrorism is not defined. It is defined by a matter of offence. We have looked at legislations in Kenya, Tanzania, Ghana, United States of America and the UK where terrorism is clearly defined not by offences and yet the framers of the law omitted that.  

We would like to take this opportunity to define the term “terrorism” in the terms that I have explained. 

Causing serious damage to property being termed as a definition of terrorism – we are not opposed to the fact that extensive destruction of property violently and intentionally would amount to terrorism. However, we are opposed to stating that causing serious damage to property amounts to an offence under this Anti-Terrorism Bill, 2015.

Madam Speaker, imagine a spontaneous demonstration that leads to serious damage to property due to the failure of Government to observe and respect the rule of law. We all remember the famous riots against the giveaway of Mabira forest, which occurred because the President wanted to give away Mabira forest against the established constitutional order and existing laws of the land in regard to the preservation of forests.

If we pass this law today and tomorrow the President decides to give away Mabira forest and out of anger people riot and serious damage to property occurs, then thousands of innocent Ugandans will rot in jail under this Act yet Article 38 on the civic rights and activities in the Constitution of Uganda provides that;
    1) “Every Ugandan citizen has the right to participate in the affairs of government, individually or through his or her representatives in accordance with the law.
    2) Every Ugandan has a right to participate in peaceful activities to influence policies of government through civic organisations.”

Many Ugandans are law abiding; on numerous occasions they have taken to exercise their constitutional right to peacefully engage in activities to influence policies of Government through civic organisation only to meet with the brutality of the security forces.

We are passing a law against the fundamental human rights and freedoms as provided for in the Constitution. If causing serious damage to property out of anger caused by leaders who abuse the established constitutional order amounts to terrorism then what would be the offence of the leader who uses the Constitution and promotes state terror?

We oppose this offence and it should be dropped because section 7(a) of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 covers extensive destruction and explains the actions that would lead to extensive destruction. 

However, how else can a terrorist cause extensive destruction to property without doing the acts as provided for in sub-section 2 of the Anti-Terrorism Act?

Madam Speaker, in sub-section (2) of the 2002 law, we defined extensive destruction to property as an act of terrorism and causing a major economic loss. We do not find any reason whatsoever to now bring a stand-alone offence and therein the means and the intention are well defined on what you have to do, say to detonate a building. This would qualify it to be a terrorist action. 

Here, you are lumping it omnibus as causing serious destruction to property. Tomorrow, you - not me because I can get out of it – or one of you may wish to exercise his right; you never know where tomorrow places you. This is to all of you because you know how ambitious you are; one day you may want to be President and you may fall victim like my other good friend.

Therefore, I am hesitant; I do not want to pass a law where tomorrow any good Ugandan will easily be victimised that they caused serious damage to property and that is tantamount to a terrorist offence. Yes, you will go through the judicial process and win the case but how about the severe conditions even on bail that it will attract if you are arrested for that offence?

I have ever been on the verge of being accused of a terrorist act and I know how this hurts. We were just involved in the “walk to work”; I was opposed to the life presidency. The framers of the law had wanted to put a terrorist offence on me. Therefore, I am very careful when I see any effort to impose this as a terrorist offence and I beg to differ with the opinion of the committee.

My last point is criminalising any acts prejudicial to national security or public safety. We would not like to make a law where any act prejudicial to national security and public safety is tantamount to an offence and you could be charged on terrorism. This is very subjective given our narrow definition of terrorism by offences. If we had a definition of offence of terrorism as in Ghana or as in Tanzania clearly articulated, maybe this would pass. However, if you have the current law and this kind of section of the law, tomorrow any of you would be judged to engage in action prejudicial to national security and public safety and you will be charged under terrorism. The process that you will go to court and be found innocent is another matter but you can be placed under it. We find it a threat to many innocent Ugandans and I would beg this Parliament to drop those two sections.

With regard to the rest, there is a small matter where my honourable colleague, Kaps Fungaroo, has a passionate case and I beg to give him an opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you have a minority report and it is your report from all of you. Present it for all of you.  

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The issue of the Inspector General of Police was settled by the committee. We agreed at committee level that there is a committee report and I agree with the amendments we made at a committee stage. I will only beg the state to adopt what was agreed. 

The three big issues we have is that we define terrorism, we delete the provision on serious damage to property and also do away with this issue of prejudicial to national security and public safety because those are ambiguous. 

Madam Speaker, these are not requirements under the international taskforce on terrorism financing; they were imported in - I do not know for what reasons because I have a whole convention. Those issues are not there; those are locally manufactured to achieve objectives that I do not know of, but which I think are local in nature. The local issues in here, when we are meeting international obligations, really distort a noble cause and I would beg the minister and Cabinet to consider humbly those other two provisions. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Let us first hear from the minister before we move on. I am the Speaker, please sit down.

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to express deep appreciation for the report by the chairman of the committee as well as the minority report from the shadow minister, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi.

The gratifying thing about both reports is that they all agree that it is very necessary that Uganda makes these amendments to the Anti-Terrorism Act in fulfilment of our obligations under the conventions to which we are parties. I think this is an important step we should all be applauded about.

From the presentations, it seems to me that there are a few areas and if we could build consensus around them, we could be out of this House very quickly. I hope I can help to facilitate this process.

The main committee report expanded the definition of terrorism. The minority report says no, we should define very specifically what terrorism is. Now with respect to specific definitions, terrorism is very fluid; today it is this shape, tomorrow it is another shape and another day it is hydra headed. How can you give a definite definition to terrorism? That is why internationally, terrorism is described by the act. This is the practice in Sub-Saharan Africa and in Ghana. In fact there is no universal definition of terrorism. Therefore, on that I am not likely to concede. Let us move by the practice in the region in Sub-Saharan Africa and elsewhere where terrorism is described by acts and I would like to support the expanded version of the committee.

Secondly, coming back to the minority report, the two areas of objections - before I go to the minority report, I have an issue with the aspects dealing with confiscation, freezing of assets of terrorist finances. We have had consultations on that and I was advised that the best person to assist me on that would be the Attorney-General who can really clarify and see if we can build consensus on that. Therefore, in a short while with your permission, Madam Speaker, I will request the Attorney-General to clarify on the issue of dealing with confiscation and freezing of assets.

On the issue of serious damage to property and any act prejudicial to public safety and national security, these are areas which are already listed in the main Act, which was passed in 2002 under section 7 (2)(a). The reason they are listed in this is for emphasis but there is no big deal. If you do serious malicious damage, the Penal Code will catch up with you. We can leave it at that - (Interjections) - no, I am conceding to that but there are other laws which can take care of that. 

Similarly with any act prejudicial to public safety but on definition of terrorism, I appeal to the House that we stick to definition by acts of terrorism. I request that the Attorney-General helps us on the issue of the powers of the IGP vis-à-vis the proposal by the committee on the DPP to perform that function. Once we agree on that, then I think we can have consensus very quickly on the rest since both groups accepted these things. I request that the Attorney-General clarifies on this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the main report, the minority report and the clarification from the minister including areas of convergence. I do not know whether there those who want to make some comments on that before we listen to the Attorney-General. Are there Members who what to do so?

4.26
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill is closely related to the Anti-Money Laundering Act, which this House passed in 2013. When you look at what the Bill is seeking on the powers of the IGP to seize property - 

THE SPEAKER: Which clause is that?

MR MUSASIZI: This is clause 4 and it is seeking to insert a new clause on 17 (a) and (b). The Anti-Money Laundering Act established a Financial Intelligence Authority whose functions include reporting on cases of this nature. Among the stakeholders to which the Financial Intelligence Authority reports is the Police, headed by the IGP. I wonder why we should give the IGP this mandate to look for this information instead of being provided by other agencies and then he does a follow up for whichever purpose he will want to achieve.

Madam Speaker, at an appropriate stage, I will be seeking to move an amendment in this regard. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable member, are you suggesting that the Inspector General of Police is stopped from doing anything which is being done by the other authority? That he must sit and wait and if they do not bring information, he does not do anything? Suppose in the course of his investigation he comes upon certain information, must he now wait for the other body to say this is it? Is that what you are proposing?

4.29
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is about clause 1(b) which talks about inserting immediately after the definition of security officer the following terms: “financial services” where “financial services” becomes a terrorist promoting activity.  If any organisation like a financial institution such as a bank, a microfinance institution, MTN mobile money services, money transfer organisations is included in this Bill we are making into law, it implies that a company will be punished for the crime of a terrorist who received money through the services of this money transfer agency. This money transfer agency is a business entity that does work without connection to your intention of why you are sending the money for.

Even good people who want to go for Hijjah in Mecca send their money sometimes through Dahabshiil for example. If you criminalise these organisations, you are going to close the avenues through which poor people who are located in rural areas receive money from their grandchildren in the cities. To me, the offence should be based on the terrorists and not the company or the channel. Do not break the avenues through which money is transmitted from one place to another.

It is good to have good laws. Uganda and Kenya are countries of the East African Community. The Kenyan government passed into law a similar Bill like ours but I would like to inform you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that the courts of law of Kenya have nullified this law because of human rights concerns and violations. Therefore, it is good to make good laws to fight against terrorism but the laws must not infringe on individual rights of Ugandans and businessmen and women who are helping us in running our economy. We should protect the Hawalas, the microfinance institutions and banks. Do not close them in your act of fighting terrorism. Thank you.

4.32
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. This law is very necessary but the problem we have is that the implementers of the law are in panic. As I speak, taxis ploughing Tororo, Mbale and Malaba are being searched for anything like posters and T-shirts which are linked to hon. Amama Mbabazi. They are saying this is a terrorism act. This is the problem we have in this country -(Interjections)– yes, boda-boda people and taxi drivers who have any stickers are being arrested. Do you see the intention? 

Hon. Amama Mbabazi has been the Prime Minister of Uganda and Secretary-General of NRM and now anything linked to him is smelly. It is shameful and creates suspicion why Government now wants to hurry with such laws at such a time when other people are already campaigning. The NRM youth in my constituency are being denied opportunity to put on T-shirts bearing Amama Mbabazi’s name yet they have nothing to wear. On the other hand, they are being told to put on the ones of President Museveni. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the provision in this law as per your communication is Uganda’s failure to comply to international obligations such as tracing, freezing terrorist’s estates, ensuring effective recording, establishing a fully operational and effective functioning finance intelligence, which we have done and ensuring adequate suspicion transaction reporting requirements.

In this Parliament, we do appropriation. However, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development this financial year laid a report on tax expenditure, which was not approved by this House. I really would like us to include that as involvement in anti-money laundering and terrorism because we do appropriation. If the government goes ahead to spend money which has not been appropriated, we should consider the minister to have been involved in anti-money laundering and therefore financing terrorism. What did you use the money for? 

Let us expand the definition to catch the Secretary to the Treasury and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who are involved in spending money which we have not appropriated. Let us have fair and equal ground to the game. We did not pass taxes on steel and tubes and dairy corporations but the tax expenditure report you brought here shows that you spent money. Under whose authority did you spend the money? Did you use it to finance terrorism? Therefore, these are the questions we have. 

The issue of involving police; they are involved in investigation and freezing assets and that is double jeopardy. You are a celebrated lawyer, Madam Speaker. I move around the world and hear about your name. Therefore, you should not preside over a House where –(Member timed out.)

4.35
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me thank the committee for the hard work they usually do for this august House. In processing this Bill, we should not lose focus on the object of the Bill. Like it is contained in the minority report, the sole object of this Bill is to provide for the definition of key issues. 

If I may refer you to the object of the Bill and read verbatim, it is “To amend the Anti-terrorism Act, 2002, harmonise the definition of “fund” with that contained in the international convention on the suppression of financing of terrorism 1999; to amend the definition of “terrorism” and “act of terrorism” to include the international aspect envisaged by the convention and for related purposes.”

I am equally surprised that other than definition of “funds” that is reflected here, the rest do not come out at all. I would like to suggest, like it is proposed in the minority report, that the definitions of the words “terrorism” and “act of terrorism” need to be defined. Lack of proper definition of these issues will lead to ambiguity. 

Madam Speaker, once we proceed the way the minister is proposing, we are going to leave a grey area in the law that we are going to make. This may lead us into a complete state of quagmire in future. We know what we want and because of that, we should be able to define what we want. It is only then that the object of this Bill will be met. I thank you.

4.38
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. First and foremost, there are new technologies coming on board almost on a daily basis, which are being exploited by the terrorists. Terrorism can even be done on remote control. In other words, it is very difficult today to define terrorism and I think the framers of this law were clever to use the word “act” rather than having the definition of terrorism. It is because a few years ago, nobody could think somebody can use a remote control gadget and kill thousands of people but now it can be done.

Secondly, on the issue of protecting the banks and etcetera, you can imagine a situation where a Somali pirate from Somalia sends billions of money through Stanbic Bank in Kampala here. Once that money lands in this country, all of us will be on fire. Therefore, the onus should be on the banks first and foremost to investigate and find out the reason and the source of this money. All these banks, for example, the Morgan Bank in USA was fined billions of dollars because they did not inform the state’s security on the transfer of money –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I have just heard the minister, while elaborating and emphasising his point cite an example of a Somali sending money here through Stanbic Bank and that that would be an act of terrorism. Is the minister in order to declare a whole society of Somalis terrorists by his submission? Are Somalis terrorists just because of their nationality or it is individuals in Somalia who get engaged in acts of terrorism? Should we maintain the word coming from a minister of this Government on our Hansard that the Somalis are terrorists?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it in dispute that some Somalis are terrorists? He did not say the whole country; he said a Somali. He is in order.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. Actually, I said the pirates from Somalia. I think I was very clear. In my mind I did not mean all the Somalis wherever they are but the pirates from Somalia. Therefore, the banks also should have the minimal responsibility of detecting and informing the security officials about the huge sums of money being transferred through these bank accounts –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, we have a financial intelligence system in this country. There is software in the banking system and if any amount of money is put on any account, even if it is for the Speaker of Parliament, there is an alarm that is set off automatically and the Bank of Uganda will know that a huge amount of money is on that account. What happens next is not the bank’s responsibility. It is the responsibility of the financial intelligence authority and Bank of Uganda to inform them that there is a red alert there. 

As we speak, there is a case at the police of $1.5 million of a South Sudanese that got lost here in a bank in Uganda. When the police was sent there to investigate, they got part of the money and even disappeared with the money. Some of them have been arrested while others have been suspended. Therefore, why do we want to blame the bank for failures of a government institution including the police in Uganda? 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, honourable minister. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I agree that there are some electronic systems which have been placed in banks to do that but how efficient are they? We have even got some money with the collusion of the banks themselves jamming the gadgets from transmitting the message to Bank of Uganda. Why shouldn’t that bank bear that responsibility of removing that money going into the public for terrorism? We should not exonerate them completely. Where the bank is found guilty of committing the crime, they should answer for it. I thank you. 

4.44
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the members of the committee for labouring to come up with this report. I have two issues with this report:

In agreement, partially with my colleague who presented the minority report, I have issues with the definition of terrorism and terror acts. A member that I cannot recollect, earlier on the Floor mentioned that he does not find a problem where an offence is not clearly defined. By generalising the offence of terrorism without having particulars broken down, prosecution will find a problem convicting terrorists. 

I do not think that the objective of aligning a suspect of terrorism before a court is to massage them. The objective will be to obtain a conviction. If we generalise these acts, the Attorney-General is well aware that he will find a problem with Article 28(3)(b) in securing a conviction. I would rather that at the appropriate time, the fact that the committee subconsciously or consciously forgot to work on one of its objectives of the amendment Bill in redefining terrorism and terror acts, we work on very clear elaborate definitions of terrorism. This is in order for us to facilitate a proper way and mechanism of working or convicting terrorists. 

Madam Speaker, you realise that we are invoking international conventions. Eventually, prosecution shall take use of municipal laws. The way you secure a conviction using municipal laws is very clear. If you are ambiguous and the offence is shrouded in ambiguity, I am afraid you cannot secure a conviction. Therefore, having a very clear definition without ambiguity is very important.

 One would even wonder why we would have counter arguments about this particular Bill. The reason is that there is a saying that this Amendment Bill has eyes and ears and that is very unfortunate. We all know that a good law should not have eyes. There are sections of the public that have a view that perhaps this particular amendment is looking at them and is listening to them. We need to comfort the general public that we are legislating for posterity and not targeting short term gain.  I am very sure that the job we are doing is the job that will facilitate the next Government to do its job and this Government may not necessarily be the current Government. I would therefore like to invite both sides of the House to realise that we need to be very calm while legislating on this particular Act. 

Finally, the anti –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we give the Floor to hon. Oboth, I just want, for the record, to say that I chaired the Appointments Committee when we were vetting the members of the Financial Intelligence Authority, about three months ago. The need for this law was raised in the Appointments Committee by the people who had been nominated. I want that to be clear that it is not simply being designed. 

4.48
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We should not make laws that have eyes and ears. We also know that there is no legislation that is made in vacuum. We need to strike a balance to believe and ask ourselves; do we have terrorists? Is terrorism a threat? If the answers to those questions are in the affirmative, then the law we are making actually has eyes and ears. Let us focus on the terrorists and fighting terrorism, which is not bad though. 

It is standard procedure that if you cannot define an offence by use of ordinary words, you can define the offence by acts of that offence. This is not necessarily something new and the justification by the committee is wonderful. This is an involving crime that none of us - I have checked online the ordinary and international meaning and there is no agreement. If we can know for now what entails terrorism; what is the harm? Where is the ambiguity? Where is the lacuna in any way? I believe if we cannot define an offence by use of ordinary meaning, we can define it by using acts or description or by detailing what entails terrorism. There is no harm in that; there is no politicking about terrorism.

Madam Speaker, I have the resistance. This morning I prayed the Lord’s Prayer that I do not need to be led into temptation to misunderstand this very noble cause – (Interjections) - are you not the one who denied me? (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, hon. Fungaroo was on record and this should be stated clearly about the decision made on the 15th February this year, where about 7 to 8 clauses of security and anti-terrorism - (Member timed out.)

4.52
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The law is good but I would like this honourable House to debate this law with caution. In the 1960s, there was a law called “Detention without trial”, which was brought by the government then. In this, there were areas which were declared a state of emergency and some people in this House at the time passed it. By 1966 to 1971, five Cabinet ministers were in Luzira under the same law they had passed in this House - the detention without trial law – (Interjections) – if you do not know them, it was Emmanuel Lumu, Balaki Kirya, Mathias Ngobi, Grace Ibingira and George Magezi. Those were the ministers.

Recently, we were here in the Eighth Parliament and we passed the Communications Act. The very man who was the then Leader of Government Business is the one worried that people are listening in to his telephone conversations.

Recently, we passed the Public Order Management Act –(Interjections)- no it is my colleague, Amama Mbabazi; we were together here, he was the one advocating for that law. We were together with my colleague here, hon. Dr Rugunda the Prime Minister, hon. Kiyonga and hon. Matia Kasaija in Kenya. We used to send money to our people here when we were in exile. We would send some money here to maintain our families. If we now pass this law and we give the IGP - (Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, it is true that I was in exile during our struggle. I would send money to cater for my family until they joined me in exile. I did not send money here for terrorism purposes. Is the honourable colleague and a friend of mine, Mathias Nsubuga, in order to insinuate that I sent money for terrorism? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sending money for family maintenance is different from sending money for other activities.

MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO: Madam Speaker, I said family but if you give the powers to the IGP, he can say that this money is for terrorism. It is very bad to forget so easily. Once we pass this law and we give the powers to the IGP, how can the he distinguish between the money for the family and that for terrorism, if you are against Government?  

Therefore, I would like this House – I am a member of the Committee on Finance. We gave money to the Finance Intelligence Authority; a lot of money to do this kind of job. Why don’t we allow the authority or the DPP to do this other than giving powers to the IGP?

4.57
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Madam Speaker, legislation against terrorism and its importance cannot be over emphasised. We all know the dangers apparent and otherwise of terrorism. The earlier we make an important specific law against it, the better.

However, I would like to appeal to colleagues to be very cautious that under a very cardinal role on the very important Bill, we could also make a very fundamental mistake by passing a particular clause or clauses or sections of the Bill that may indeed be used to target individuals, if not politicians. When you say that the IGP becomes the investigator, the prosecutor, the judge and actually even initially the complainant, we actually fail to remind ourselves of the essence why these other institutions were established in our legal framework as a country.

I, therefore, pray that whereas we know the urgency of some of these matters, we do not want to rush into making a very fundamental mistake that any of us in the near future will come to think and say that we indeed made a mistake.

Colleagues, my prayer is that on this particular matter as the committee indeed proposes, let us move and support the amendment that empowers the DPP to go to court, as opposed to giving all the powers summarised into the individual hands of one person called the Inspector General of Police, who can choose to pursue any direction at a mere phone call of the powers that may be - (Member timed out.)

5.00
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 1995, Ugandans agreed on the grand norm - the foundation for all legislation to come and that was reduced into a document - the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995. It has since been amended.

This Constitution is a very beautiful document. In Article 79, it stipulates the function of Parliament. If you may permit me to read verbatim, Article 79 (1), reads: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.”

The cardinal function of this august House is making laws to protect the peace and order of Uganda respectively. The first one is peace and the second is order. Today, we convene to perform this constitutional function; to pass a law to fight terrorism and there is no more noble cause than that. It has been stated here over and over again that terrorism is an evolving offense. What the Government has come to do today is to ask you for a non-lethal instrument to fight this crime and when your Government asks you for a non-lethal instrument, it is asking you for a good deed.

As citizens of Uganda, we owe it to the people we represent and to ourselves to help them and empower them with this none lethal instrument. There may be issues with a few proposals in the law but it is still within our mandate to examine the issues we have with the non-lethal instruments – (Interruption) 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, for your indulgence, hon. Fox Odoi. In line with the Constitution, the information I would like to give you is actually on the same Article 79(3) that Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote democratic governance of Uganda. Therefore, while legislating and aware of our obligation to legislate for peace and development, we must also be aware that it must promote democracy, rule of law and human rights as part of our duty. That is the information I would like to give you.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: I thank you, hon. Mpuuga, for that wonderful information and it is not in conflict with what I am saying. My interpretation of Article of 79(3) is that terrorism can never promote democracy. If we are promoting democratic governance as required by the Constitution, we must do so to the exclusion of terrorism - (Member timed out.)

5.04
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Madam Speaker and the honourable House, I think we must all agree that terrorism is a global challenge that requires all persons to participate in curbing the vice. When you read the proposals of the Bill, you will discover that we want to actually endanger ourselves like the proposal of the powers which they are giving to the IGP to be the one to detect, freeze and seize; I find those are too much powers that he may not sufficiently handle.

Whereas I agree that he should participate, I think the provision which we gave under the Anti- Money Laundering Act which creates at least every bank to have a financial intelligence officer - I remember seeing in the newspapers that a transaction above Shs 20 million shall be at least investigated to find out the source –(Interjections)- I am talking of Ugandan money; I do not trade in dollars –(Laughter)

Therefore, under that circumstance, if we go ahead and allow the IGP to be solely responsible and leave out this technical person, we will be endangering ourselves and we may even get a weak and inefficient IGP. If we just say we are entrusting our lives to an IGP, then that is very deadly. The other question will be why he should be the person to complain and proceed to investigate, do the judgment –(Member timed out.)

5.07
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the committee report and I thank the government for coming up with this Bill bearing in mind what we have gone through with the terrorist acts. My point of contention is one; it is sub-clause (n) on page 5 of the Anti-Terrorism Amendment Bill. It talks of causing serious damage to property. I feel that this one needs some more flesh. It is too much of a skeleton and it looks like we are leaving it to the Judge or whoever will be presiding over the case to decide whether it is an act of terrorism or may be vandalism or hooliganism.

Unless we define what this serious damage is to property, we are endangering members of society who will just be acting through hooliganism or something like that. Therefore, I beg that the committee or whoever is concerned put some more flesh - serious damage using what? Is it lethal or explosives? Otherwise leaving it as it is makes it ambiguous and may not guide a good decision by the Judge. Thank you.

5.09
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify on the definition of financing terrorism because under the Anti- Money Laundering Act and the Financial Intelligence Authority, they are supposed to investigate suspicious transactions especially if there is some bigger amount of money that has been sent through the bank. They are supposed to investigate whether the money is from a drug dealer, an ivory dealer, gold dealer or whether it is meant to finance terrorism. If this can be defined, then this issue of taking financing terrorism separately would be a problem that you may not find a definition for or find which money is meant for financing terrorism.

Every transaction which is suspicious is supposed to first of all be investigated to know whether it is going to finance terrorism by an organisation which supports terrorism, then we can take a decision on that to deal with it since terrorists are not summarily dealt with. They have to go through investigation and the court process. If that is done, then I think we can proceed.

Secondly, we need to separate between the terms “terrorism” and “terrorist act” and a situation where citizens are expressing their civil rights through civil disobedience. I believe this is where the contention is coming from because people would think using this law, even citizens who are demonstrating for their rights would be charged under the terrorism or anti-terrorism law and even the money which somebody has received for some other programme would be used as this.

This is the only point where I would like the minister to be very clear. Otherwise terrorism is becoming sophisticated and complicated and we cannot wait. We need to have a law. Therefore, the minister must come very clear so that once we take a decision here, we know that this law is going to deal with a specific problem but not having it such that it can be used at discretion.

Right now, people have begun hiding money in their houses because when you make transactions of Shs 20 million every day, you are being checked and people are now in fear. These are some of the challenges that we may have with this law –(Interruption)
 
MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much. The information I would like to give is that we may be thinking that the laws we are passing will impact on the wrong doers, yet the innocent ones will end up suffering. Recently, a pensioner received Shs 60 million on his account comprising of his pension and gratuity. Religiously, the bank seized that money and asked for documents for proof. The pensioner did prove, to the satisfaction of the bank, that it was his gratuity and pension. The police wrote to the bank to freeze this account and the bank had no choice but to freeze it.

The pensioner is suffering and in the process, the economic crime desk under the police is asking for 20 per cent of that money -[HON. MEMBERS: “Shame”]- that he forfeits 20 per cent if his account is to be opened.

This information is there. If the police or the Minister of Internal Affairs wants it to help this innocent pensioner, it is available.

MR AYOO: Thank you, honourable member. Madam Speaker, we need to deal with this situation because we are going to make laws in this Parliament. However, the people outside there who are going to implement them will look for loopholes and use them for their own interest and make life difficult for the citizens. That is why the minister needs to come out very clearly on this because if that is not cleared, then it is going to be very difficult for us. Thank you.

5.14
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is no doubt that we have terrorists in the whole world. We have terrorists in Uganda and we should make laws to make it difficult for them. I only think that this law as it is cannot stop terrorists financing in our country, given the international trade. Nevertheless, we are doing something that can inconvenience them. 

When we make laws, we should make them for everybody. We should not make laws because we want to target certain individuals or groups. As it has been said earlier, such laws eventually end up catching up with the maker. 

When I look at this amendment, I get worried that maybe our colleagues are trying to target political financing on our side because it can be used. However, it can also be used against anybody on political financing. Some time back during a by-election in Entebbe, a candidate had his account frozen a few weeks to the election and they unfroze it after the election. Luckily enough, he won. If he had lost, maybe it would have been on account of freezing that account. Therefore, we should not make a law which some small policeman or official somewhere in Kanungu or Bugiri will use to inconvenience a political opponent and freeze accounts. We should be very careful about that. 

The law is also targeting content of social media; this law is trying to criminalise content on social media. Of recent, I have been reading in the media about the Head of State complaining about Whatsapp and some criminal things which are attributed to some other individuals. It is possible that if we pass this law, Government can begin using it against certain individuals. 

Recently, they arrested someone called Shaka; I do not know his other name in the name of another person who operates on the social media under the name of Tom Voltaire Okwalinga. If we are not careful and pass this as it is, Government is going to use this law to arrest people because you have written something in the social media against the first family or against Wafula or anybody else.

We should be very careful and we need the minister to clarify on this particular one - content on social media. What is it that will become criminal? I would understand if we are trying to fidget with gadgets to cause trouble but content in the media should not be made criminal. (Interjections) – Yes, anybody can interpret what is criminal about content. 

For example what was on Whatsapp about the Bakiga and the Bahima; we read about that, we heard about it but it could be claimed to be terrorism. It could just be abuse of the media but it is not terrorism. However, somebody can interpret that to be terrorism and you will be arrested and charged under this law.

Madam Speaker, I think we have to be very careful when making this law. Let us make this law for Uganda, for the future, for everybody to clean out terrorism but not to target people politically. Thank you, very much.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, making a law for everybody - you cannot be in this House and mislead the whole world. The law is not meant for everybody, it is for a few. The moment the law is for everybody, nobody will obey it. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, would you like to speak now or will you speak at committee stage? 

5.19
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. I would like to join my colleagues who have emphasised the importance of this law. Like death, terrorism comes to us all; it does not look at you colour, your political affiliation or tribe.

I would like to first of all agree with the submission of hon. Oboth Oboth that under criminal principles, we define offences by specific acts and that actually is very fundamental because the criminal responsibility and the issues of human rights are bound. Offence must be specific, must be known. For instance, if you are providing for offence of murder, you first state a person who, with malice aforethought, does this and this.

Specifically defining the offence by the act, you cannot define an offence in generic terms and that is why I would like to thank hon. Oboth Oboth for his submission, to which I agree.

Secondly, there was an issue in clause 9(a)(i) where there was a proposal to substitute for the word “person”  with the words “an individual terrorist”. My take on that is, in legal terms, “person” includes both an individual and a juridical person. Therefore, it is the ideal word to use. Section 2(uu) of the Interpretation Act provides that “person” includes any company or association or board of persons corporate or incorporate.

Secondly, it means that companies such as financial institutions and other juridical bodies will not fall under the ambit of the offence and certainly, that could not have been the intention of the amendment.

Lastly, the use of the word “terrorist” in conjunction with ‘individual’ is not correct because a person only becomes a terrorist after conviction. Before then, the best the person could be termed as is a suspected terrorist. This is based on the principle enshrined in Article 28(3)(a) of our Constitution. 

However, before I take leave of that, there has been an argument of how these corporate bodies become responsible criminally. Normally, an entity is punished by identifying the criminal mind in that company. Usually, the controlling authority or minds are the directors and certain influential employees or staff. In some jurisdictions like the United Kingdom, companies have been found to have committed offences such as money laundering, especially in commercial crimes.

Now I turn to the most complicated one. I normally tell you that my understanding of a good law is that a good law should be blind. If you legislate looking at individuals then you are likely to fall into a very big problem. Our institutions must work together in order to achieve the cores values of society. If you say, no it should be the Director of Public Prosecution (DPP) and not the Inspector General of Police (IGP) - The IGP must be looked at as an institution.

As an institution, the role of the Police in maintaining peace and order is well known to us and it is enshrined in Article 212 of our Constitution. Now let me give – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Permit the Attorney-general to speak.

MR RUHINDI: This is why I am saying that all these institutions must work together in the achievement of our core values of society. This is my proposal, just listen to me.

In that particular provision, which is contentious, my proposal is that the Inspector General of Police may cause. This is because certainly it is not him to freeze. By the way, freezing or seizing, in the context of terrorism activities, is more or less like you lodge a caveat. Do not transact on that property; it is just forbidding transactions on either funds or property. 

Now let – (Interjection) - Listen to my proposal: 
1. 	The Inspector General of Police may cause the freezing or seizing of funds or property where the Inspector General of Police is satisfied that the funds are or the property is reasonably linked or intended for terrorism activities.
2. 	Where the Inspector General of Police causes the freezing or seizing of funds or property under sub section 1, which I have just read, the Inspector General of Police shall immediately inform the Director of Public Prosecutions, in any case, not later than 48 hours after the freezing or seizing.
3. 	After receipt of information under sub section 2, the DPP shall apply to court for an order freezing or seizing such funds or property and the court shall make the determination not later than one month.

Why I am putting it this way is because terrorism activities are very fast. By the time you wait, property is fleeced from the country. Therefore, when there is this provision, it will ensure that you freeze, no transaction should take place within 48 hours and the IGP informs the DPP. The DPP moves to court to get a formal order, which order should be obtained in a month. I think that way, we should be enjoining all these institutions in the performance of the activities under our Constitution. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, during the presentation of the reports, we were told that there is unanimity of about 99 per cent. The minister has conceded to one of the areas, the Attorney-General has also made some proposals and we have also had some discussion. I would like to propose that any other agreements will come in, in the Committee Stage. Therefore, I would like to put the question that the Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

5.30
MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, you gave us a very good concluding statement that the minister has conceded to some of the proposals given and the Attorney-General has also given us a statement, which has calmed the nerves of Members.

Madam Chairperson, I believe that this is a very important legislation, which will help all of us. Personally, I have made it public that on matters of security, I have no compromise. It is important for all of us to agree that this must be done in the interest of this country. 

Since there is a general spirit to make concessions, Madam Chairperson, I am pleading with you to allow Members to reach a consensus and look closer at the proposals given by the team that composed the minority report and some of the views brought on the Floor of Parliament so that we are not seen to be fighting against a security matter.

I think we should all agree so that we reach a consensus, come here and we make a good law. This being a matter of security, if this approach is not adopted, I may be forced to raise the issue of quorum because all of us must be here to pass matters that affect our security. 

We should be given time to negotiate and agree but short of that, let all of us be here so that the government side can use its massive majority to pass the law. For us we want a good law and not one, which is forced on people because of the majority. We want a good law, which affects all of us.

Madam Speaker, I am pleading to you that time be given for us to reach a consensus or you allow the Government Chief Whip to mobilise the voting machine and we can move ahead.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think you are abusing your position in this House. You are speculating. We have not gone to Committee Stage and we have not disagreed on anything. Why are you pre-empting our work? Your Member said he agrees with 99 per cent of the report. Why don’t we agree with the 99 and then discuss the one per cent? I am disappointed with you, hon. Ogwal. 

Clause 1

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Considering the level we have reached, most probably we are going to take a vote on certain matters. Would it not be procedurally right if, at this stage, we ascertain the issue of quorum? Thank you, Madam Chairperson and I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am going to roll call. Let us bring the register. Whoever has signed must be present. Those who signed and are not here will face sanctions. My work is to ascertain and I am ascertaining by roll call.
    1. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal - present 
    2. Hon. Frederick Mbagadhi Nkayi - absent
    3. Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju - absent 
    4. Hon. Roland Mugume - present
    5. Hon. Otengo - absent
    6. Hon. Innocent Oula - present
    7. Hon. David Bahati - present
    8. Hon. Tonny Ayoo - present
    9. Hon. Nyombi Thembo - absent 
    10. Hon. Vincent Ssempijja - absent
    11. Hon. Dr Mutono Patrick- absent
    12. Hon. Fr Simon Lokodo - present
    13. Hon. Godfrey Lubega - present
    14. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga - present
    15. Hon. Waira Kyewalabye Majegere- absent
    16. Hon. Kaps Fungaroo - present
    17. Hon. Achile Manoah - present
    18. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire - present
    19. Hon. Kenneth Lubogo - absent
    20. Hon. Grace Freedom Kwiyucwiny – present
    21. Hon. Reagan Okumu - absent
    22. Hon. Phyllis Chemutai - absent
    23. Hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar - absent
    24. Hon. Isabirye Iddi - absent
    25. Hon. Ronah Ninsiima - present
    26. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga - present
    27. Hon. Gen. Jeje Odong - present
    28. Hon. Betty Nambooze - present
    29. Hon. Andrew Allen - absent 
    30. Hon. Gabriel Ajedra Aridru - present
    31. Hon. Franca Judith Akello - present 
    32. Hon. Amelia Kyambadde – present
    33. Hon. Tete Chelangat – absent
    34. Hon. Mbaguta Sezi – absent
    35. Hon. Gilbert Olanya - present
    36. Hon. Joshua Anywarach- present
    37. Hon. Robert Migadde – absent 
    38. Hon. Olivia Kabaale – present
    39. Hon. Sempala Mbuga – present
    40. Hon. Mathias Nsubuga - present
    41. Hon. Agnes Nabirye – present
    42. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi – present
    43. Hon. Paul Mwiru – present
    44. Hon. Jennifer Mujungu – present
    45. Hon. Andrew Baryayanga – absent
    46. Hon. Dr James Mutende – present  
    47. Hon. Lubega Sseggona – present
    48. Hon. Ruth Akello – present
    49. Hon. John Bosco Mubito – present
    50. Hon. Stephen Kangwagye – present
    51. Hon. Oketayot Lowila – absent 
    52. Hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi – present
    53. Hon. Henry Musasizi – present
    54. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi – present 
    55. Hon. Michael Mawanda – present
    56. Hon. Idah Nantaba – present
    57. Hon. Capt. Susan Lakot – present
    58. Hon. Lt Col Sarah Mpabwa – present
    59. Hon. Jacob Opolot – present
    60. Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo – present
    61. Hon. Rose Mutonyi – present 
    62. Hon. Robert Kafeero – present
    63. Hon. Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu – present
    64. Hon. Moses Grace Balyeku – absent
    65. Hon. Mary Karooro Okurut – absent 
    66. Hon. Nakato Kyabangi – present
    67. Hon. Matia Kasaija – present
    68. Hon. Joseph Matte – absent
    69. Hon. Fred Omach – present 
    70. Hon. Susan Amero – absent
    71. Hon. Benny Namugwanya – present
    72. Hon. Mohammed Nsereko – absent 
    73. Hon. Rev. Peter Bakaluba – present 
    74. Hon. Jacob Oboth – present
    75. Hon. Prof Tarsis Kabwegyere – present 
    76. Hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya – present 
    77. Hon. Aston Kajara – present
    78. Hon. Jacquiline Amongin – present 
    79. Hon. Dr Sam Okuonzi – present
    80. Hon. Dr Maria Mutagamba – present 
    81. Hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa – present 
    82. Hon. Caroline Okao – present
    83. Hon. Peter Lokeris – present
    84. Hon. Rosemary Najjemba – present
    85. Hon. Peter Ogwang – present 
    86. Hon. David Wakikona – present 
    87. Hon. Fred Ebil – absent
    88. Hon. Flavia Nabugere – present
    89. Hon. Jalia Bintu – present 
    90. Hon. John Byabagambi – present 
    91. Hon. Maj (Rtd) Jessica Rose Alupo – present
    92. Hon. Sam Otada – present
    93. Hon. Maxwell Akora – absent  
    94. Hon. Nulu Byamukama – present 
    95. Hon. Suleiman Madada – present 
    96. Hon. Saleh Kamba – absent 
    97. Hon. Simon Mulongo - present 
    98. Hon. Florence Mutyabule – present
    99. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo – absent
    100. Hon. Xavier Kyooma – absent
    101. Hon. Samuel Ssemugaba – present 
    102. Hon. Michael Kafabusa – present 
    103. Hon. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi – present
    104. Hon. Kenneth Kiyingi – present
    105. Hon. Denis Hamson Obua - present 
    106. Hon. Stephen Mayende - present 
    107. Hon. Wafula Oguttu - present
    108. Hon. Grace Byarugaba - absent
    109. Hon. Nekesa Oundo - present
    110. Hon. David Ochwa - present
    111. Hon. James Baba - present
    112. Hon. Medard Bitekyerezo - present
    113. Hon. Sulaiman Balyejjusa - absent
    114. Hon. Sarah Ochieng - present
    115. Hon. Safia Nalule - absent
    116. Hon. Ssewungu - absent
    117. Hon. Anthony Okello - present
    118. Hon. Jovah Kamateka - present
    119. Hon. Anne Auru -absent
    120. Hon. Hellen Kahunde - present
    121. Hon. Lyndah Timbigamba - present
    122. Hon. Wilson Mukasa - present
    123. Hon. Yorokamu Katwiremu - present
    124. Hon. Chrispus Kiyonga - present 
    125. Hon. Daudi Migereko - present
    126. Hon. Fredrick Ruhindi - present
    127. Hon. Rukia Nakadama - present 
    128. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara - absent 
    129. Hon. Syda Bbumba - absent
    130. Hon. Evelyn Kaabule - present
    131. Hon. Tress Buchanayandi - present
    132. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko - present 
    133. Hon. Oleru Huda - present
    134. Hon. Ochola Stephen - absent
    135. Hon. Khainza Justine - present
    136. Hon. Mulimba John - absent
    137. Hon. Lt Gen. Charles Angina - present 
    138. Hon. Eddy Wagahungu - present
    139. Hon. Kasule Robert Sebunya - present
    140. Hon. Biraaro Ephraim - present 
    141. Hon. Amuriat Oboi - present
    142. Hon. Mulindwa Patrick - present
    143. Hon. Dombo Emmanuel - present 
    144. Hon. Babirye Veronica - present

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, mention your names such that we record them.
    1. Hon. Baryayanga Andrew Aja - present  
    2. Hon. Anite Evelyn - present 
    3. Hon. Lowila CD Otekayot - present   
    4. Hon. Kakooza James - present  
    5. Hon. Okot Ogong - present 
    6. Hon. Rwamirama Bright - present 
    7. Hon. Rebecca Amuge Otengo - present 
    8. Hon. Mbaghadi Fred Nkayi - present  
    9. Hon. Vincent Bagiire - present  
    10. Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda - present

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have 118 Members present in the House. 
Hon. Busingye Okurut - present

We now have 119 Members. We shall suspend the proceedings for five minutes and ring the bell.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I seek guidance. You thanked the Muslims and wished them a happy Ramadhan. However, the five minutes you have given for mobilisation or consultations will enter into the time for the breaking of the fast. If you find that the Muslims are not here and quorum has dropped because of that, please consider that we ought to be out of here. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, let us resume the House and then suspend for a few minutes.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question  that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled the – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, it is true that we sat in the committee but never considered the Bill. Is the minister therefore in order to mislead this House that we sat and considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill”? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I had called the first clause so we had commenced consideration.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and because of no quorum, we have resumed back to this House. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will suspend the House for five minutes. The Clerk should ring the bell and Members, do not go away please. (Laughter) If the Muslims stay, we shall be able to work very quickly.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, this is the first day of fasting. It is the most critical and hardest day as the body is still adjusting. In the first week, we always go for special meals because the body is still adjusting lest you get instant ulcers. Moreover, there are no special meals around Parliament. Obviously, we have been here under extreme constraints to do our constitutional duty but we would now have been heading to our homes to have a decent meal. That is so cardinal and critical to us. I would beg that Parliament convenes tomorrow at 10 o’clock and we consider this.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, some of us drove from our constituencies specifically to handle this Bill and we said we are going to handle it today. Tomorrow we have serious commitments in our constituencies.

Madam Speaker, I am begging you and this honourable House to call our colleagues who are hiding somewhere or who have not come to come and we do something this evening so that tomorrow, we can go to our constituencies. For us to come back here tomorrow may be difficult.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will suspend the House for five minutes. Ring the bell and members, collect y our colleagues to come. House is suspended for five minutes. 

(The House was suspended at 6.07 p.m.)

(On resumption at 6.17 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we took a roll call this evening. I would like to know whether there are Members who were not present during the roll call but have arrived since then. Go to the microphone if you are recording your presence.

    1. Mr Arinaitwe Rwakajara -	present
    2. Mr Xavier Kyooma - present
    3. Dr Michael Bayigga - present
    4. Mr Waira Majegere - present
    5. Ms Everline Tete - present
    6. Ms Phyllis Chemutai - present 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to our register, we have more than 125 members.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, under Rule 23(4) of our rules, if, on the resumption of the proceedings after the expiry of fifteen minutes - and mark the words - the number of Members present is still less than the required quorum for voting, the Speaker shall proceed with other business or suspend the sitting or adjourn the House without question put and in case of a committee, the Chairperson shall adjourn the committee.

Madam Speaker, first we suspended for five minutes. Secondly, you have a duty to first ascertain and inform the House. You do not start from where you stopped. You count again and ascertain because when we moved out, some people did not come back. If they all came back, you have a duty to first ascertain. I can cite examples –(Interjections)– I am moving on a procedural point – (Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, you are not only the Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda but also a very senior legislator of this House. You are the custodian of our Rules of Procedure. Is it therefore in order for hon. Sseggona to not only insinuate but to directly question your credibility to interpret our rules and therefore try to tell you how to rule and guide the House? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. Honourable members, I permitted the Members who were not here during the vote to introduce themselves. That is what I was doing. Do not stampede me, hon. Sseggona.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, first I apologise if my tone went overboard but I have no regret for raising a point of procedure for you to rule on and then somebody comes to ask whether I am in order. Is it not in order for a Member to ask whether -

THE SPEAKER: There was nothing to rule about. I had invited the Members who were absent during the roll call to introduce themselves and that is what they did. That is what they were doing; reporting that they are back. Your tone was directing me and you cannot direct me. You were not here during the presentation of the report. What guidance do you want?

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, that is the very reason I want to be guided since I have come into the process and I want to participate. I am coming from Kamuli –(Laughter)– at the Century Hotel and you know what is happening there.

Madam Speaker, solemnly I would like to be guided because hon. Sseggona, his tone notwithstanding, was raising something, which needed your guidance on matters of quorum. Notwithstanding the fact that, in terms of the numbers mentioned of those who are now present, some have gone and not come back, isn’t it the procedure that in ascertaining quorum, Members of Parliament are counted again so that we know the real number when a vote is going to be taken? Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know why you are jumping ahead of the gun. I had just asked those who were not present to identify themselves. That is where I had gone and they did, including you. Therefore, can the Clerk ascertain the numbers? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we are ascertaining, can I invite the Attorney-General or the Minister for Internal Affairs to report on the consultations? 

6.30
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, the consultations were still going on. However, I will use my judicious mind and being informed by the consultations we have made, there is a feeling from the Opposition that we should be seen to be united on this matter. No one should be seen to be fighting an issue, which touches on our security. I wish to commend everyone for taking that particular position. 

Secondly, there is an agreement regarding the principle on this provision I moved that indeed, it is critical that when evidence is identified, certain funds have been collected or certain properties are in place to facilitate terrorism activities, it is important that an immediate decision be taken. In my view, that is also a fundamental move. 

The issue has been, who should then take the decision or cause the freezing or seizing? That is where there was a bit of disagreement. Since we have also put in place institutions to do certain work, across the board there seems to be a clear compromise that the authority, which we put in place under the Financial Intelligence Authority should do this kind of work, among other functions. Since the relevant agencies also sit on that particular body, we do not have any problem in having that body perform this function, for as long as it is immediate. 

Finally, there is now a general understanding that we do not have to go into areas of definition of terrorism. Terrorism activities can best be defined and described by the acts themselves. That is the report, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Doesn’t that satisfy you, hon. Ogwal?

6.33
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, there would not be a better person than the Attorney-General to put in legal language the conversation that we have been having. We feel that since this Act actually creates the authority, this authority should be strengthened, capacitated and empowered to carry out all the investigations and all matters to do with terrorism acts associated with money transfers or things like that. The DPP can then take over from there.  

I think this is where we have agreed and we feel that once we agree on that, we could probably drop the idea of going into detailed definitions of what terrorism is. This is because we would then know that the authority would be competent enough to know what constitutes terrorism. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Leader of Opposition has spoken.

6.35
MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, first, I would like to commend my senior colleagues for the harmony they are coming up with. Ordinarily, as you rightly said, save for your magnanimity of allowing me to speak, once my seniors have concluded, it can only be your unlimited powers that allow me to access the microphone. 

That said, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, all I am going to say must be viewed in the spirit of enhancing the harmony that has been generated and not in contradiction at all. 

I think a lot of emphasis has been placed on money but we are making a law that we are not going to come back and amend in one day. As I read the clause, it is not limited to money but includes property. We are legislating for individuals to enforce. 

I want to give two examples and the first is that we passed the Public Order Management Act in this House and it was in good faith. One day, a person went to attend a function and the Police, in restraining - And I will mention the name of the hon. Amama Mbabazi. In restraining him, the Police said the organisers of the function had informed them of the function and they had cleared it but they were never informed of hon. Mbabazi’s presence.

Two, they never informed us of who the guest of honour was going to be. We are now passing a law and agreeing in good faith, based on the assumption that we are only talking about money. How about a person who survives on rent derived from a building, and we have included in this clause the word “property”? 

Number three, my colleagues - 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, I think the debate ended and we were at committee stage. If you want, you can raise those matters at committee stage again. We had concluded the debate and you were absent by that time.

MR SSEGGONA: I am obliged, Madam Speaker. However, since you permitted me to exercise the freedom -

THE SPEAKER: We will get back to you at committee stage.

MR SSEGGONA: I am obliged.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I fundamentally take heart with the position the Attorney-General has come up with. He has consulted, I think with the Chief Whip, and with that we would have been obliged to obey. However, let us be very careful as we come up with a compromise. 

Yes, in the spirit of moving forward - I have some other information from the substantive minister that a substantive law on terrorism is in the offing. He acknowledged the deficit when he was interacting with the committee that this law we presently have - the anti-terrorism law - is in itself inadequate. We were only moving forward because of an international requirement otherwise, they would have brought a fundamental amendment to the law, and it is in the offing. So, we can delay that debate on the definition up until then.

However, there is the question of who orders this. I agree with you that both in this statement and in the statement of the committee, the question of seizure is not contested. We all agree that in fighting terrorism as it works at a super speed, there should be somebody to take that instant decision. To that extent, there is total agreement. The question is: who takes it? The committee grappled with this matter - from the Governor Bank of Uganda, to the Director of Intelligence Unit under the financial intelligence organ and we also went through the merits of having the DPP or the IGP taking it.

We were also aware of what we have not told this Parliament, that the framers of this law availed us another law before by accident, which we adopted as a working document. In here, they had recommended the DPP. We only moved with the DPP because earlier on, that was the agreement. I am a sober member of society and there are some arguments I cannot bring here. However, I am aware of how the IGP came to be but I do not want to go into that debate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have moved from that. The Attorney-General has made a proposal which I would like you to consider.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The proposal we would want to consider and move forward, because this is a matter that is so critical to the country, is that they agree that we move with the DPP.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, I think let us not speculate; let us go to committee stage and go to that clause and discuss it.

6.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Fighting terrorism is a bipartisan issue. All of us love our country, all of us can die and all of us must fight terrorism.

Our point of disagreement is for anybody to use fighting terrorism to fight political wars internally; that is our point of departure. We have not raised only one issue about the police and the like, but we have raised several issues here this afternoon where we do not agree.

There has not been any negotiation with my permission which I know about. So I would not want this House to take it that we have negotiated with the Attorney-General and agreed; we have not. I was waiting in my office for when we can call the meeting and we go for negotiations. If that has been done somewhere else, I am sorry, it has not been done with us.

What would be important is for us to move this law in a manner that does not cause acrimony among us and have people going to court. We should not arm-twist the Speaker to marshal everybody to make a law without quorum or even without following the law; no, it is not right. We should move properly because we all love this country.

The issue of quorum remains. We shall still have to establish whether when we are voting we have quorum in the House. It is not quorum in the book; it is still quorum and it remains.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. For the second time, I have heard the Leader of the Opposition saying that we are legislating to address political wars or conflicts.

I would like him to substantiate because I have read through the amendment Bill and I do not see where political conflicts are addressed. All of us seem to agree that we are legislating to address terrorism which is a challenge to all of us. Is he in order to start insinuating political conflicts without substantiating where he derives that assertion in the Bill?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition can you substantiate your fears?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, we passed the Public Order Management Act here. In that law, we had a fight over the powers of the Police, in clause 8(2). In that law, you and I have to notify the Police when we are to hold a meeting. As it operates today, we have to get permission from the Police.

If in the law we are formulating today, we give the Police the powers we were talking of, they will still use them as they are using the Public Management Act, without following the law or the Constitution. That is our contention.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really would like to appeal to all of us. We are here to perform a responsibility on behalf of 35 million people. We have a duty to make this country secure. It is only this House, you people who are seated here, who have the capacity to do that.

I would like you to understand the need to create security in this country. Why don’t we agree on the areas we agree on and disagree on those where we do not agree? However, if you want to prevent us from moving at all – Let us go to committee stage. We have cleared the areas we have agreed upon. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi said that he agrees with 99 per cent; there is only one per cent that he does not agree with. Let us deal with the 99 per cent and then deal with the one per cent later.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, in the same spirit, it is my suggestion as a way forward that we negotiate first because if we go into fighting, it will not help us. Let us negotiate further. We need that law. We all need the law. We need the protection. How we get there is the only thing that we need to negotiate. We have made better laws; we have made bigger laws in this House before.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, unfortunately, you were not here when the reports were being presented. Both the main and the minority report are in agreement 99 per cent. That is the word hon. Muwanga Kivumbi used. The disagreement is only one per cent. So, I am saying that let us deal with the 99 per cent where they agree and we can handle the one per cent disagreement later. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, if we are to make any progress, we have to take several steps forward. We had made a lot of progress before we adjourned by identifying consensus areas where we had agreed upon including the minority report. There was also concession and modification by the Attorney–General on the other side. I thought by now, we would not be doing nearly a ping pong game. 

If we are going to create an impression in this Parliament for the future readers of this Hansard that there are negotiations which we deny our people who elect us, that we always do side-line negotiations which are not in the record – (Interjection)-  Madam Speaker, would you protect me from the terrorists -

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, allow the member to speaker.

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, hon. Jacob Oboth is my friend but he has said something and if it goes to the Hansard - He has said, “Madam Speaker, protect me from these terrorists” - (Interjection) - That is what he said! Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think I heard that.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, we are finding difficulties in defining what terrorism is - (Laughter) - but there are volunteers in this House. If we are supposed to hold each other with decorum, at least parliamentary decorum, we should allow the debate. I challenge those who were saying there is something to negotiate to lay it here and we debate it. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We had covered some ground and I will request members that we move forward.  The Chief Whip of the Opposition did concede that they had a chat with the Attorney–General and the Attorney–General competently put in legal language what they chatted about. Unfortunately, when the Leader of the Opposition came up, he disowned everything and hon. Sseggona is saying we should go and negotiate. Negotiate what? 

I would like, Madam Speaker, as you guided, that we go to the committee stage and where there is any disagreement, we sort it out at the committee stage. If there is need for any consultations – I do not want to call them negotiations because it is like you are diluting the whole process - at that point, we could adjourn and they go and consult and we come back. 

However, as of now, there is a lot that we have agreed on and I propose we cover that and later we can move on to the rest. I am sure that the Leader of the Opposition will agree and meet with the Attorney–General and all of us as we legislate for our country. I beg that we proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, any negotiations must be settled on the Floor of this House.  There is no other place to negotiate. I would like to appeal to you, honourable members, that we go to the committee stage and we agree where we agree and disagree on what we disagree on. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think it is important to put it on record, and I want to make this statement for historical purposes, -(Laughter) - that on matters of security I do not want compromise. That is clear, and I would be surprised if that side claps and not this side. On matters of security we must reach a consensus. We should not be seen to be making laws to target some people. I made this very clear and open.

When I went out to meet hon. Bahati and others, hon. Bahati called the Attorney–General. My plea to them was that we accept the committee position on the DPP rather than the IGP. We agreed to accept the committee position on the DPP and not the IGP. 

Never at any one time did I say I am speaking on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition; I did not! I am a mature person and not only that, I am very intelligent and very sensitive. (Laughter) I cannot use the title of the Leader of the Opposition when he is here and he has not given me authority to speak on his behalf. I spoke as the whip of the Opposition and I spoke as a senior citizen of this country. I acted on the consultation I made with the Shadow Minster of Internal Affairs who said that the position of the committee on the DPP is a matter he would concede to and that is the one I carried for negotiations. 

I do not want anybody to get out of this place and say that I said the Opposition was disorganised or they were quarrelling. However, in case anybody in this House thought that I was taking the powers of the Leader of the Opposition, I want to say I do not want it and I will never want it and I did not use the title of the LOP. I stood in my capacity as the whip of the Opposition; I stood in my capacity as a person. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I am not making a speech; I am saying I am one of those who started negotiating with Ugandans from the Constituent Assembly. I was in the Sixth Parliament, Seventh Parliament and Eighth Parliament. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, protect me from this mob -

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MS OGWAL: So, if I contradicted my shadow Minister of Internal Affairs who advised me to concede on the committee report on the DPP, it will be important for my shadow minister to put this matter on record because I want to step out of this world pure. God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the concessions can only be recorded when we reach the Floor. So, we must go to committee stage and have them formally presented and voted on at the committee stage. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chair. For the short time I have been in this House, it has actually happened that when a matter of this nature is raised, when we get back we have to ascertain quorum. It is as if the consensus which is being talked about has now amended our rules. My understanding of the rules is that once a matter is raised, before we proceed to take any position on that matter, quorum is ascertained and if there is quorum we proceed to consider the matter as raised.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we ascertained quorum and that is why I suspended and that phase ended. Clause 1, I put the question-

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, allow me draw your attention to clause 1 (a) under the definition of “funds” and particularly the fifth line of that definition which states, “but not limited to…” 

Madam Chairperson, this statement is discretional. The words “but not limited to” sound very discretional. Who will have the mandate to increase or add onto the list; is it the court or any other person? This needs to come out very clearly.


It is also important to note that it is the mandate of Parliament to legislate. Therefore, discretional responsibilities cannot be left to other persons. Unless the honourable minister can state to the contrary, I wish to propose that the definition be amended by deleting the words, “but not limited to”, to remove the uncertainty. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, it is very difficult under financial management to include all the financial instruments used in a piece of legislation. Many lawyers in here know the rule of ejusdem generis - things of like nature, financial instruments, you cannot tabulate all of them into this legislation. To me, this “but not limited to” is an important expression in this particular provision that you cannot do away with.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chair, we have reached the voting stage again; our rules require that especially on a matter like this one, we have quorum –(Interjections)– Madam Chairperson, please protect me from hon. Frank Kagyigyi Tumwebaze. 

We would like to implore you that before we begin voting, you again ascertain whether we have quorum in the House. If there is no quorum, we implore that you postpone this debate to either tomorrow morning or Tuesday.

Government has stampeded us on such an important amendment; we do not have time, we have not read it. I left Lira this morning at 10.00 am and I arrived and came to the House. This is not a good way of working. There is no quorum in the House and we cannot continue voting on any clause of this amendment Bill.

Clause 2

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, clause 2 - amendment of section 7 of the principle Act. We propose to amend clause 2(b) of the Bill that seeks to amend section 7(2) of the principle Act by:

    i) Under (b) (ii) deleting the words, “or indirect involvement” appearing between “direct” and “or complicity”. Justification: it is not clear as to what amounts to indirect involvement in committing of the mentioned acts. Complicity is sufficient to cater for aiding and abetting.

ii) 	Under (b) (iii) deleting the words, “or indirect” immediately after the word “direct”. Justification: it is not clear as to what amounts to indirect involvement in committing of the mentioned acts. Complicity is sufficient to cater for aiding and abetting.

iii) 	Under (b) (v) deleting the words “or indirect” immediately after “direct”. Justification: it is not clear as to what amounts to indirect involvement in committing of the mentioned acts. Complicity is sufficient to cater for aiding and abetting.

iv) 	Under (b) (vii) substituting the words “hostile acts” with the words “armed conflict”. Justification: to conform to Article 2 (1) (b) of the International Convention for the Suppression of Financing of Terrorism which provides for a situation of armed conflict.

v) Deleting the entire paragraph (l) and renumbering accordingly. The justification is that it is impliedly provided for under section 7 (2) (b) of the parent Act.
vi) 	Deleting paragraph (g) of section 7 (2) of the parent Act. Justification: to avoid duplication of provisions since the content is elaborated under paragraph (p) in the amendment Bill.

THE CAHIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MS NAMUGWANYA: Clause 3 - insertion of new section 9A. We propose to amend 9A by: 
i) 	Under sub clause (1) substituting the words “a person” with the words “an individual terrorist”. Justification: an individual terrorist is provided for under the legal regime of terrorism unlike a person who is not clearly defined in terrorism legislation.

ii) 	Under sub clause (4) by deleting the word, “thousand” between “hundred” and “currency”. Justification: to provide for a realistic and corresponding fine to the 20 years of imprisonment.

Madam Chairperson, in the debate which preceded this, the Attorney-General clarified on the issue of a person vis-à-vis an individual terrorist. As a committee, we propose that we conform to the original proposal in the Bill, where we have “person” and we do not include “individual terrorist”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that we retain the original proposal in the Bill?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Yes, Madam Chairperson - according to the explanation by the Attorney-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS NAMUGWANYA: Clause 4 - insertion of new section 17A. The committee proposes to amend clause 4 of the Bill by: 

i) Substituting the entire 17A with the following:

(1) The court may, on the application of the Director of Public Prosecutions, order the freezing or seizing of funds or property where the court is satisfied that the funds are, or the property is, reasonably linked or intended for terrorism activities.”

Madam Chairperson, I beg that we leave out that sub clause (2) and we go to the one on page 12 because that is duplication. 

“(2) Subject to subsection (1) above, the Director of Public Prosecutions may, without a court order, direct in writing for the freezing or seizing of funds or property, however such a directive should last for not more than 48 hours within which period, the Director of Public Prosecutions shall apply for an order confirming the directive or seizure.


(3) The court may on the application of the aggrieved party, revoke an order made where it is satisfied that the funds are, or the property is, not linked or intended for terrorism activities, in which case if it is under-
(a) 	subsection (1) above, the revocation may be made at any time but not later than 60 working days.
(b) 	subsection (2) above, the revocation may be made at any time but not later than 30 days.” 

Justification: to align Uganda with the financial taskforce’s recommendations of February 2012 that mandates state parties to freeze funds and confiscate terrorists’ assets.

Madam Chairperson, according to Article 123 of the Constitution, the DPP is mandated to direct police to investigate any information of criminal nature as well as to institute criminal proceeding in any court. This is hence an indicator that as investigations are taking place, the DPP may get a court order to freeze funds or seize property of a suspected individual terrorist or terrorist organisation. For purposes of time to protect innocent parties whose funds may have been frozen or property seized without reasonable cause, the time limit mandates court to dispose of such proceedings therein within the given statutory period.

We propose to amend clause 4 of the Bill which seeks to insert 17B by substituting the existing provision with the following: 
“(4) Property forfeited to the State vest in Government.” Justification: since the property is forfeited to the state, it should have the responsibility of selling or disposing it off. 

Madam Chairperson, I consulted some members of the committee on this. As a committee we do not have a problem with the agreed position between the Attorney-General and the Opposition Chief Whip - if we are to substitute this with the ED Financial Intelligence Authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is this not the area where the Attorney-General had made some proposals?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the position I moved was to improve on this. This focuses on, when there is evidence that some funds are being collected for purposes of terrorism activities or some property is being used for terrorism activities what immediate action should be taken. 

So, this is an improvement and it is intended to substitute 17A and it should read, “The Financial Intelligence Authority may cause the freezing or seizing of funds or property where it is satisfied that the funds are, or the property is, reasonably linked or intended for terrorism activities.” 

Clause 2 – “Where the Financial Intelligence Authority causes the freezing or seizing of funds or property under subsection (1), the Financial Intelligence Authority shall immediately inform the Director of Public Prosecutions, in any case not later than 48 hours after the freezing or seizing.” 

Clause 3 – “After receipt of information under subsection (2) the Director of Public Prosecutions shall apply to court for an order freezing or seizing such funds or property and the court shall make a determination expeditiously.”

Madam Chairperson, I had at first wanted to propose a period of say one month but I thought that we should not run into problems with the Judiciary, particularly given its powers under Article 126 of the Constitution. So, if we used and make a determination expeditiously, we shall be in good range of our Constitution. I beg to move.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. To safeguard abuse of power by this Executive Director whom we are giving a lot of power, the test of reasonableness - whether subjective or objective test here - are we going to provide some way of sanctions to avoid such a person who might be occupying that position not to abuse? This is where if somebody does not like one Simon Mulongo and sees some transaction, they may stop that. – (Interjection) - Not you; I am just saying. Are we going to provide a way out within our legal system?

Secondly, are we also providing for the aggrieved party to move court just in case the DPP is not moving within the prescribed timeframe, just to make sure that we have a balanced system? What if the DPP is not taking action, and these people are mostly business oriented, what safety measures are you putting in place to ensure that there is justice even for the aggrieved, especially since you are not tagging a timeframe to the court to dispose of this matter?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. If I understood the Attorney-General correctly, I think the values he has added in his amendment are the following: You will have a police force doing investigations. The results of these investigations will be fed to the Financial Intelligence Authority. The Executive Director of the Financial Intelligence Authority will look at the evidence and when he or she is satisfied that the funds are linked to a terrorist activity, he or she will then make an order for seizure.

Therefore, the control first is that you have a police force doing its professional work; two, you have the Executive Director of the Financial Intelligence Authority – (Interjection) – No, that is what is stated. The hon. Oboth thinks that that is a presumption but that is what the Attorney-General stated. So, two, the Executive Director has to satisfy himself that there is a probable cause for the seizure. Three, you move to the other stage of the DPP and it is time bond - within 48 hours he must go to the fourth stage, which is the court. I think the proposal of the Attorney-General is a wonderful one.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I think I will agree with the learned Attorney-General for two reasons. One, if we bring in the aspect of the Financial Intelligence Authority Board, that is not far from our sister country, Kenya. Kenya has the equivalent of Counter Financing of Terrorism Inter-Ministerial Committee. 

My other point would be that if we are looking at funds on any account of a financial institution, we must be explicitly clear. What seems to be positive here is that 7A (1) is seemingly looking at funds on any account of a financial institution. We must now go explicitly to look at funds not on the account of any financial institution and property that may not be within the control of any financial institution that can be taken hold of. That is where we have to go a little more carefully especially in providing for the seizure of property, as hon. Sseggona said. Then you have property that is suspected to benefit from terrorism or is financing terrorism and yet earnings from it meet basic requirements like medical, mortgage and insurance among others. 

My submission is that let us look at funds that can be frozen on the account of financial institutions and then we come to property that can be seized and we provide for how that property from its earnings can still take care of the beneficiaries who are benefiting from such property. Let us also not forget about our Anti-Money Laundering Act, especially sections 68 and 69, in case there is wrongful seizure of property. First of all if there is seizure, there must be a provision for records. For any property taken over, there should be a clear record and we provide for that, and then the possibility of having it back - under what conditions can someone rightfully claim the property? I thank you.

MR OTADA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to draw the attention of the House - If we want to look at this holistically, we should address our mind to rights that have been conferred from Article 20 to Article 42 of the Constitution. We should be careful when we are dealing with matters that touch on peoples’ rights - rights that have been conferred upon them by the Constitution, for which Article 43 gives us limitations on the rights which are non-derogable.

I am saying this because since this is an aspect that touches on money and property, we have to be alive to the fact that economic rights and the right to property are fundamental rights. In the wisdom of the drafters of the Constitution, there are certain rights which they made impossible for anyone to take away under the limitations.

I think we have moved very well. I say this with hindsight – constitutional law has gone a little further to define the fact that the right to property or economic rights amount to the right to a livelihood which further amounts to a right to life. That is how deep this debate is. 

I am persuaded by what hon. Oboth said, and hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo puts it very well - the stages which we have put into place to create checks and balances on how these powers may not be abused, save for the 30 and 60 days. To me we should find consensus on how to narrow this down so that if the DPP is not moving very fast, the aggrieved party can find an order to get back what belongs to him as of right, if at all he can prove that in due process of court. If we could have a meeting of minds on that, I would be very glad.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the observations made by hon. Oboth are important and suffice to say that they are well catered for. The right to judicial review, the power to challenge any administrative decision is well entrenched in our Constitution under Article 42. Any aggrieved party always has a right to apply for judicial review. We did not write it in this particular Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the Attorney-General’s proposal takes care of the concerns raised by members during the debate, that we created a Financial Intelligence Authority and now we are giving the power to somebody different. I think the Attorney-General has solved it; the Police investigates and informs the authority and the chain starts there. That was the concern of the members.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed by the Attorney-General?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.


The Second Schedule

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chair, the committee looked at the second schedule of the parent Act and we propose to amend the second schedule that spells out the list of terrorist organisations recognised under section 10 of the parent Act by inserting four terrorist organisations. We would like to add Boko Haram as No.5, Al-Shabaab as No.6, Islamic Maghreb as No.7, and the Allied Democratic Forces as No.8. The justification is: to cater for the new emerging terrorist organisations. 

Madam Chairperson, when you look at the parent law, it has the Lord’s Resistance Army, the Lord’s Resistance Movement, Allied Democratic Forces and Al-Qaeda. 

MR OTADA: Madam Chairperson, my concern is just what the chairperson has said - that endeavour of trying to list the terrorist organisations as and when they seem to arise. Since we want to move in tandem with international conventions, why don’t we leave that open so that the groups that are declared as international terrorists by that international outfit automatically become recognised in our law as terrorist organisations. My justification is that one group arises today and another tomorrow and we may not catch up with their proliferation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you rising on the same issue?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, I think that it is an international norm for countries to usually list groups of terrorists. If you take an example of the US, the powers are with the President and he declares by Executive Order to amend the list to add other terrorist groups. 

Here in Uganda, we are doing better because it is within the Act. I agree with the committee chairperson that those terrorist groups should be listed within the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is the schedule causing problems? Okay, hon. Muhwezi.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: I would like to cater for his concerns. We could add at the end of the listed terrorist organisations, “and any other organisations declared by the state”.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: By the State or internationally?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Maybe we could say by law, so that it is open.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do concur with hon. Jim Muhwezi. However, the Allied Democratic Forces is already included in the mother Act and I do not think that we should lift it here.

MR MULONGO: I just wish to avail information. The parent law, Part IV, Section 10 subsection (2) says, “The minister may, by statutory instrument, made with the approval of the Cabinet, amend the Second Schedule.” In other words, the list is there but it can be adjusted by the minister from time to time.

MR HAMSON OBUA: Madam Chair, I support the listing of the terrorist groups. However, we seem to be restricting ourselves to those declared internationally. I would like to support the idea mooted by hon. Jim Muhwezi because on 5th July within Uganda, several tribal gunmen armed with spears and guns attacked three districts, Ntoroko, Bundibugyo and Kasese. I think internally, we declared them terrorists. So why don’t we give that leverage to the state to declare any internal group and those declared internationally.

DR KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: I thank you very much. I am looking at section 10 of the parent Act and first of all, it is under Part IV and it is about terrorist organisations. Subsection (2) says, “The minister may, by statutory instrument, made with the approval of the Cabinet, amend the Second Schedule.” The Second Schedule is the list of terrorist organisations. 

I now seek guidance from you on whether the amending of this schedule has not come here irregularly, because it says, “The minister may, by statutory instrument, made with the approval of the Cabinet, amend the Second Schedule.” That instrument has to be laid before Parliament. So, I do not know whether we need to go into amending this schedule because the power is already given to the minister. I thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But where the minister has not done the needful, are we precluded from assisting him? Honourable members, I put the question that the Second Schedule be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I would like you to help me look at clause 3 (2) before I recommit because I trust your interpretation. I would like to seek your indulgence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: To recommit?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes. I would like to recommit but before I do that, I would like to seek your indulgence. I request for your guidance on clause 3(2), which says, “A person commits an offence under this section regardless of whether the funds are actually used to commit an offence or not, and regardless of whether the funds are linked to a specific act of terrorism or not.”  

I would to recommit that section because I am finding it ambiguous. Secondly, anybody who has money on an account, whether it is linked to terrorism or not, can have their money confiscated. It is dangerous for the country and the economy to leave this clause as it is. We are not safe with it. It should either be redrafted or something.

I seek your indulgence to recommit it because it is not drafted properly. It is a standalone clause and could have been linked to (1) so that it flows. It is not good for people transacting business.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is your problem? Which part of the clause?  

MR KAKOOZA: The problem is that whether funds are linked to a specific act of terrorism or not –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which clause are you reading?

MR KAKOOZA: Clause 3, 9A on terrorism financing. Subsection (1) is okay but subsection (2) is where I have a problem.

MR RUHINDI: For as long as hon. James Kakooza agrees with 9A (1), I do not know what reason he would have to doubt 9A (2). Section 9A (1) says, “A person who willingly collects or provides funds directly or indirectly by any means with the intention that such funds will be used or in the knowledge that such funds will be used, in full or in part, by a person or a terrorist organisation to carry out a terrorist act commits an offence.”

Now if you say that you agree with that, then you should agree with (2) because it says, “A person commits an offence under this section regardless of whether the funds are actually used…” In other words, the offence is to collect, solicit either directly or indirectly for a purpose. So, whether you do fulfil your objective or not, you have committed an offence.   

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed clauses 1,2,3,4,5,6, the second schedule and the title with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

7.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I would like to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass –(Interruption) 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, under 17A(2) says that where funds or property are reasonably linked or intended for terrorism activities and funds are not held in any account in a financial institution, the Inspector General of Police - which I believe is now the FIA board - shall seize the funds or property. 

My point here is if this property is also providing sustenance for a family which is suspected to be involved in terrorism but they are still innocent until proven guilty then we could take the Kenyan way. In case of mistaken identity, in case of relevant and significant change of facts or circumstances and in case of death, dissolution or liquidation of the person suspected of terrorism that property is still allowed to provide for living of these young people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Attorney-General’s proposal caters for the right to be heard. After there has been an application for seizure, the DPP reports within 48 hours and you are entitled to go there and say, “This money is for my food, it is not related to terrorism”. That is what the Attorney-General said.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, there I expressly agree with you. The second point is that this is the DPP making the application but we are talking about an aggrieved party in the spirit of our Anti-Money Laundering Act, which is in section 68 and 69.

Here we are saying that if there is a seizure there should be a record, just like hon. Kabakumba Masiko from Bunyoro was telling us of a scenario where someone’s money is being meddled with and the Police are asking for 20 per cent illegally. Now, if we seize property and we do not provide for a clause saying that such property that has been seized can be detained but a record of it must be kept and it should be well protected, if that property is found to be not of a terrorist, later you may get back less than what you own. That would be terrible. That is why I think we should just import Section 68 of the Anti-Money Laundering Act. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you anticipate a verbal seizure? Can I say I will just freeze your account by word of mouth?

MR ANYWARACH: I think that was the fear when we were making that law. We said it should be expressly stated. I could read it if you allow me.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the third time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: The title is settled. Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the work done this evening. We are fully constituted, meaning we have more than the necessary quorum. The House is adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.42 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 23 June 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

